MONTROSE, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Local Legislation current through Ord. 2025-04, passed 9-8-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
General Provisions
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Rules of interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Official time
   
10.11   Reasonable time
   
10.12   Ordinances repealed
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
   
10.18   Copies of code
   
10.19   Adoption of statutes and rules and supplements by reference
   
10.20   Enforcement
Administrative Enforcement
   
10.35   Purpose and intent
   
10.36   Definitions
   
10.37   Administrative citation procedure
   
10.38   Appeal to City Council
   
10.39   Appeal of City Council decision
 
   
10.99   General penalty and enforcement
   
Appendix A:   Notice of Code Violation
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city, as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“Montrose City Code”, for which designation “code of ordinances”, “codified
ordinances” or “code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter and section
headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to the
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “traffic code”. Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§
10.01”. Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of
state law.
   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances
of this city shall be by the following rules, unless that construction is
plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of
the same ordinance.
      (1)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or”, whenever the context requires.
      (2)   Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions or ordinance
requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as
the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the
act by an authorized agent or deputy.
      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
      (4)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CITY. The City of Montrose, Minnesota. The term CITY, when used in this
code, may also be used to refer to the City Council and its authorized
representatives.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This city code as modified by
amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or sections.
      COUNTY. Wright County, Minnesota.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath and, in those cases, the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED. All terms shall mean a pledge
taken by the person and administered by an individual authorized by state law.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of the city unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as
applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Minnesota.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.10 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within the city for the transaction of all city
business.
§ 10.11 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   (A)   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced.
   (B)   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
§ 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this
indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.17 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred
or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities,
proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or forfeitures
shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In
particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-way,
contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or
vacation of any highway and the election of corporate officers shall remain
valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.18 COPIES OF CODE.
   The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City
Clerk/Treasurer for public inspection. The Clerk-Treasurer shall provide a copy
for sale for a reasonable charge.
§ 10.19 ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES AND SUPPLEMENTS BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this code
of ordinances, all future amendments to any state or federal rules and statutes
adopted by reference in this code or referenced in this code are hereby adopted
by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this
code was adopted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the code to the
contrary.
   (B)   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this code
of ordinances, all future supplements are hereby adopted as if they had been in
existence at the time this code was enacted, unless there is clear intention
expressed in the code to the contrary.
§ 10.20 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any licensed peace officer of the city’s Police Department, or the
County Sheriff, or any Deputy Sheriff shall have the authority to enforce any
provision of this code.
   (B)   As permitted by M.S. § 626.862, as it may be amended from time to
time, the City Clerk/Treasurer shall have the authority to administer and
enforce this code. In addition, under that statutory authority, certain
individuals designated within the code or by the Clerk/Treasurer or City
Council shall have the authority to administer and enforce the provisions
specified. All and any person or persons designated may issue a citation in
lieu of arrest or continued detention to enforce any provision of the code.
   (C)   The City Clerk/Treasurer and any city official or employee designated
by this code who has the responsibility to perform a duty under this code may
with the permission of a licensee of a business or owner of any property or
resident of a dwelling, or other person in control of any premises, inspect or
otherwise enter any property to enforce compliance with this code.
   (D)   Every licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of property
within the city shall permit at reasonable times inspections of or entrance to
the property by the City Clerk/Treasurer or any other authorized city officer
or employee only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the people are being complied with
and to enforce these provisions. Unreasonable refusal to permit the inspection
of or entrance to the property shall be grounds for termination of any and all
permits, licenses or city service to the property. Mailed notice shall be given
to the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of the property,
stating the grounds for the termination, and the licensee, owner, resident or
other person in control of the property shall be given an opportunity to appear
before the City Clerk/Treasurer to object to the termination before it occurs,
subject to appeal of the Clerk/Treasurer’s decision to the City Council at a
regularly scheduled or special meeting.
   (E)   If the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of a
premises objects to the inspection of or entrance to the property, the City
Clerk/Treasurer, peace officer or any employee or official charged with the
duty of enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon a showing that probable
cause exists for the issuance of a valid search warrant from a court of
competent jurisdiction, petition and obtain a search warrant before conducting
the inspection or otherwise entering the property. This warrant shall be only
to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the people are being complied with and to enforce these
provisions only, and no criminal charges shall be made as a result of the
warrant. No warrant shall be issued unless there be probable cause to issue the
warrant. Probable cause occurs if the search is reasonable. Probable cause does
not depend on specific knowledge of the condition of a particular property.
   (F)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of
the city to enter private property in urgent emergency situations where there
is an imminent danger in order to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT
§ 10.35 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The administrative enforcement procedures established within this subchapter
are intended to provide the city with an informal, cost-effective and more
efficient alternative to criminal prosecution or civil litigation for certain
violations of the adopted city code and zoning ordinance. The city retains the
right, at its sole discretion, to also enforce provisions of this code and
zoning ordinance by bringing criminal charges or commencing civil litigation in
any case where the city determines it is appropriate or necessary, but finds
that an administrative process is beneficial to the residents of the city and
further finds that such a process is a legitimate and necessary alternative
method of enforcing code violations. The penalties imposed by this subchapter
may be in addition to any other enforcement mechanism available to the city for
violations of the city code and zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 2020-03, passed 3-9-2020)
§ 10.36 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   CODE COMPLIANCE OFFICER. Any officer of the County Sheriff’s Department, any
employee of the city or any person or company contracted to provide code
enforcement services who has received official authority by the City Council to
enforce this code. There may be more than one person designated as CODE
COMPLIANCE OFFICER at any given time.
   CODE OFFENSE. A violation of any section, subdivision, paragraph or
provision of this code and is subject to a civil penalty determined according
to a schedule adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time and
payable directly to the City Clerk/Treasurer. Each day the violation exists
constitutes a separate CODE OFFENSE.
   HEARING OFFICER. The Hearing Officer shall be a neutral third party that has
no direct connection to city or the person requesting a hearing. The HEARING
OFFICER shall be a land use attorney or have similar qualifications.
   OWNER. An individual, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation,
limited liability company, trust or any other legal entity holding an equitable
or legal ownership interest in land, buildings, structures, dwelling unit(s) or
other property.
   PERSON. A natural person of either sex, a firm, partnership, corporation,
limited liability company, any other association of people and includes the
manager or agent of that person or organization.
(Ord. 2020-03, passed 3-9-2020)
§ 10.37 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION PROCEDURE.
   The City shall administer an administrative citation according to the
following procedure.
   (A)   Notice of violation. Any member of the County Sheriff’s Department and
any other persons employed by the city with authority to enforce this code
shall, upon determining that there has been a violation, notify the violator or
person responsible for the violation, either in person or by mail. The notice
of the violation will set forth the nature and date of the violation, the name
of the official issuing the notice and a timeline to correct the violation if
applicable.
   (B)   Follow-up. If, upon a follow-up inspection by the city, it’s
determined that the violation has not been corrected, the city may issue an
administrative citation.
   (C)   Scheduling penalties. Penalties shall be imposed for a violation of
the scheduled administrative offenses according to a schedule established in
the city’s fee schedule as amended from time to time.
   (D)   Payment of fine. The person responsible for the violation shall,
within seven days of the issuance of the notice, pay the full fine to the City
Administrator or designee. The person may pay the fine in person or by mail and
payment shall be admission of the violation.
   (E)   Unpaid fines. An unpaid fine will constitute a personal obligation of
the person(s) to whom the citation was issued and the city shall have the right
to collect the unpaid fine, together with the city’s costs and reasonable
attorney’s fees, in criminal or civil proceedings.
   (F)   Assessment of fine. Pursuant to M.S. §§ 429.101 and 514.67 and other
applicable law, as they may be amended from time to time, a lien in the amount
of the fine may be assessed against the property where the code offense
occurred and collected in the manner of taxes. Any such assessment shall not
preclude the city from issuing additional citations for a continuing code
offense, nor from making additional assessments for a continuing or new code
offense.
   (G)   Licenses or permits. The city may suspend or revoke a license or
permit or other approval associated with the code offense if the fine is not
timely paid.
(Ord. 2020-03, passed 3-9-2020)
§ 10.38 APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL.
   (A)   Requesting a hearing. Any person contesting a citation issued pursuant
to this subchapter may, within 15 days of the issuance of the citation, request
a hearing before the City Council. Any request for a hearing shall be made in
writing.
   (B)   Hearing Officer. The City Council shall, by resolution from time to
time, appoint a list of persons authorized to act as a Hearing Officer. The
Hearing Officer is authorized to conduct an informal hearing to determine if a
code offense has occurred. The Hearing Officer may be compensated by the city
for such hearings and related findings. The Hearing Officer shall have the
authority to uphold or dismiss the citation or reduce, stay or waive the civil
penalty imposed upon such terms and conditions as the Hearing Officer shall
determine. The Hearing Officer’s decision shall be made in writing on a form
provided by the city for such purpose. A copy of the Hearing Officer’s decision
shall be served by United States first class mail upon the person requesting
the hearing. The Hearing Officer’s decision is final, except for appeal of the
Hearing Officer’s decision in limited cases to the City Council, as set forth
herein.
   (C)   Conduct of hearing. At the hearing, the parties will have the
opportunity to present testimony, documents and exhibits and question
witnesses. The Hearing Officer shall tape record the proceedings and receive
testimony and exhibits. Strict rules of evidence will not apply. The Hearing
Officer must receive and give weight to evidence, including hearsay evidence,
that possesses probative value commonly accepted by reasonable and prudent
persons in the conduct of their affairs.
   (D)   Appeal of Hearing Officer decision.
      (1)   The Hearing Officer’s decision shall be appealable to the City
Council only for the following matters:
         (a)   An alleged failure to obtain a required permit, license or other
approval from the City Council as required by this code;
         (b)   An alleged violation of a permit, license or other approval, or
the conditions attached to the permit, license or approval, that was issued by
the City Council; or
         (c)   An alleged violation of regulations governing a person or entity
who has received a license issued by the City Council.
      (2)   An appeal to the City Council of the Hearing Officer’s decision
must be made in writing on a form provided by the city for such an appeal and
must be served on the City Clerk/Treasurer by United States first class mail,
postage prepaid, within ten days after the date of the Hearing Officer’s
decision.
      (3)   A timely appeal will be heard by the City Council after a notice of
hearing is served by the city upon the appellant in person or by certified mail
at least ten days in advance of the date of the hearing. The parties to the
hearing will have an opportunity to present oral or written arguments regarding
the Hearing Officer’s decision.
      (4)   The City Council shall consider the record, the Hearing Officer’s
decision and any additional arguments before making a determination. The City
Council is not bound by the Hearing Officer’s decision, but may adopt all or
part of the Hearing Officer’s decision. The City Council’s decision may be
voted upon and given at the hearing or may be given in writing within 15 days
of the hearing.
      (5)   The failure of the appellant to appear in front of the City Council
or participate in the appeal constitutes a waiver of the violator’s right of
appeal and an admission of the violation. The Council may waive the result upon
good cause shown. The determination of a showing of good cause shown shall be
made solely at the discretion of the City Council, but does not include
forgetfulness and intentional delay.
(Ord. 2020-03, passed 3-9-2020)
§ 10.39 APPEAL OF CITY COUNCIL DECISION.
   The City Council’s decision shall be appealable as provided for in state
law.
(Ord. 2020-03, passed 3-9-2020)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   In the event of a violation of this code, the city may institute any
action or proceedings available, including but not limited to: any civil action
available, including, but not limited to: requesting injunctive relief to
prevent, restrain, correct or abate violations; administrative enforcement; and
criminal action.
   (B)   Each right or remedy accruing to the city under this code is separate
and distinct and may, in the city’s discretion, be exercised independently or
simultaneously with any other right or remedy.
   (C)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during
which a violation occurs or continues.
   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation who is found to have violated a
provision of this code may be fined under §§
10.35 through
10.39 of this chapter.
   (E)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code may be charged with a misdemeanor in criminal court. The city and
prosecuting attorney have the discretion to add the costs of prosecution to the
penalty.
   (F)   (1)   In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may
recover costs, disbursements, expenses, losses or damages the city incurs
through the violation of this code or by enforcing this code, including, but
not limited to, court reporter’s fees, filing fees, attorney fees, expert
witness fees, consultant fees and administrative costs against the person found
to have violated this code or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued
hereunder.
      (2)   Any costs, disbursements, expenses, losses or damages the city is
entitled to collect, including but not limited to: court reporter’s fees,
filing fees, attorney fees, expert witness fees, consultant fees and
administrative costs, may be assessed to property in the city or the state
under any applicable law.
   (G)   Any person who knowingly makes false statements, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed
or required to be maintained pursuant to this code or who falsifies, tampers
with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required
under this code shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 10.20) (Ord. 2020-03, passed 3-9-2020)
APPENDIX A: NOTICE OF CODE VIOLATION
 
 
To: (Name and address of person who is alleged to have violated the code)
From: (Name and title of city official giving the notice)
Re: Alleged violation of Section of the City Code, relating to (give title of section)
Date: (Date of notice)
 
 
I hereby allege that on (date of violation) you violated § ________ of the city code relating to
_____________________________________________________________.
 
The City Council has by resolution established an administrative penalty in the amount of $         for this violation.
 
Payment of this administrative penalty is voluntary, but if you do not pay it the city may initiate criminal proceedings for this
alleged violation.
 
Payment is due within 14 days of the date of this notice. Before the due date, you may request an additional 14-day extension of the
time to pay the administrative penalty.
 
As an alternative to the payment of this administrative penalty, if the situation that gave rise to this alleged violation is
corrected by                         (establish date), then the payment of the administrative penalty will be waived.
 
Even if the administrative penalty is paid, the city reserves the right to institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to
restrain, correct or abate the violation.
 
Before the due date, you may request to appear before the City Council to contest the request for payment of the penalty. After a
hearing before the Council, the Council may determine to withdraw the request for payment or to renew the request for payment.
Because the payment of the administrative penalty is voluntary, there shall be no appeal from the decision of the Council.
 
If you pay the administrative penalty, the city will not initiate criminal proceedings for this alleged violation. However, the
Council, or any city official designated by it, may institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or
abate the violation.
 
Payment of the administrative penalty may be made by check, cash or money order to the City Clerk/Treasurer.
 
Signed:                                                               
   (Name and Title of Person Giving Notice)
 
 
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GOVERNMENT; ETHICS
      
31.   CITY COUNCIL
      
32.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS
      
33.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
      
34.   GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES
CHAPTER 30: GOVERNMENT; ETHICS
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Form of government
Ethics in Government
   
30.15   Purpose and intent
   
30.16   Standards of conduct
   
30.17   Complaint; hearing
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The city shall operate under the Statutory City Optional Plan A Type of
Government, under M.S. § 412.581, as it may be amended from time to time, with
the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer being appointed by the City Council for
indefinite terms.
(Prior Code, § 20.01)
ETHICS IN GOVERNMENT
§ 30.15 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The City Council determines that a code of conduct for its members, as well
as the members of the various boards and commissions of the city and full-time
staff and volunteers of the city, is essential for the efficient administration
of the public affairs of the city. By eliminating conflicts of interest and
providing standards for conduct in city matters, the City Council hopes to
promote the faith and confidence of the citizens of the city in their
government and to encourage its citizens to serve on the council and city
commissions.
(Prior Code, § 26.01)
§ 30.16 STANDARDS OF CONDUCT.
   (A)   No member of the City Council, or a member of a board or commission
established by the city, or full-time or part-time staff employed by the city,
or a volunteer acting on behalf or for the benefit of the city, may knowingly:
      (1)   Violate the state’s Open Meeting Law, as codified at M.S. Chapter
13D, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (2)   Participate in a matter that affects the person’s financial
interests or those of a business with which the person is associated, unless
the effect on the person or business is no greater than on other members of the
same business classification, profession or occupation. The City Council hereby
professes a preference for local businesses if at all possible, within state
law guidelines for conflicts of interest, including M.S. §§ 471.87 through
471.89, as they may be amended from time to time;
      (3)   Use the person’s public position to secure special privileges or
exemptions for the person or for others associated or dependent upon the
person;
      (4)   Use the person’s public position to solicit personal gifts or
favors, subject to the exceptions contained in the state’s Gift Law, M.S. §
471.895, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (5)   Use the person’s public position for personal gain, whether
financial or otherwise;
      (6)   Except as specifically permitted pursuant to the state’s Gift Law,
M.S. § 471.895, as it may be amended from time to time, accept or receive any
gift of substance, whether in the form of money, services, loans, travel,
entertainment, hospitality, promises or in any other form, under circumstances
in which the public could reasonably perceive that the person could be
reasonably expected to be influenced through the person’s performance of
official action or otherwise, or be intended as a reward for the person’s
official action;
      (7)   Disclose to the public, or use for the person’s or another
associated or dependent person’s personal gain, financially or otherwise,
information that was gained by reason of the person’s public position, if the
information was not public data or was discussed at a closed session of the
City Council;
      (8)   Disclose information that was received, discussed or decided in
conference with the city’s legal counsel that is protected by the attorney-
client privilege, unless a majority of the City Council has authorized the
disclosure;
      (9)   Represent private interests before the City Council or any city
committee, board, commission or agency; and
      (10)   Act detrimentally against the best interests of the city and the
members of the community pursuant to any official or informal action or
correspondence.
   (B)   Except as prohibited by the provisions of M.S. § 471.87, as it may be
amended from time to time (as such section relates to personal financial
interests in official city contracts), there is no violation of this section
for a matter that comes before the City Council, or a city-established board or
commission, if the member of the City Council, board or commission publicly
discloses the circumstances that would violate these standards and refrains
from participating in the discussion and vote on the matter. Nothing herein
shall be construed to prohibit a contract with a member of the City Council
under the circumstances described under M.S. § 471.88, as it may be amended
from time to time, if proper statutory procedures are followed.
(Prior Code, § 26.02)
§ 30.17 COMPLAINT; HEARING.
   (A)   Any person may file a written complaint with the City Administrator or
any member of the City Council alleging a violation of the standards of conduct
in §
30.16 of this chapter. The complaint must contain specific supporting facts for
the allegation and must contain the name and address of the complainant. The
complainant’s contact information will be subject to the state’s Data Practices
Act, found at M.S. Chapter 13, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   The complaint will first be distributed to and heard by the city’s
Personnel Committee. The Personnel Committee may, in its reasonable discretion,
take testimony from the complainant, the alleged wrongdoer and any other
persons of interest. The Personnel Committee may then determine, in its
reasonable discretion, whether the complaint has merit. If the complaint is
without merit, it shall be dismissed by the Personnel Committee, and no further
action shall be taken by the city.
   (C)   If the complaint has merit under the criteria of this section, the
complaint shall be passed on to the City Council. The City Council shall hold a
hearing on the complaint only if:
      (1)   Upon the advice of the City Attorney, the factual allegations of
the complaint state a sufficient claim of a violation of these standards to
rise to the level of a legally recognized conflict of interest or a violation
of the standards of conduct recited herein; and
      (2)   The complaint has been lodged in good faith and not for
impermissible purposes such as delay, harassment or personal retribution.
   (D)   The City Council’s determination of whether the complaint requires a
hearing must be made within 45 days after the complaint has been heard by the
Personnel Committee. If the City Council determines there is an adequate
justification for holding a hearing based on the criteria described in this
section, the hearing must be held within 30 days after the determination. At
the hearing, the person accused of a violation of the standards of conduct of
this chapter must have the opportunity to be heard. If, after the hearing, the
City Council finds that a violation of these standards of conduct or of state
law has occurred or does exist, as the case may be, the City Council may
censure the person, refer the matter for criminal prosecution, request the
person not to participate in a certain decision, remove the person from an
advisory board or commission established by the City Council or take other
disciplinary action against the person. Under no circumstances may a City
Council member be removed from office, except as allowed by state law.
   (E)   If a complaint is filed against a member of the Personnel Committee or
the City Council, that person is not prohibited from voting on the merit of the
complaint, either at the Personnel Committee or City Council level.
(Prior Code, § 26.03)
CHAPTER 31: CITY COUNCIL
Section
   
31.01   Meetings
   
31.02   Student liaison
   
31.03   Mayor; duties
   
31.04   Minutes
   
31.05   Agenda
   
31.06   Quorum and voting
   
31.07   Ordinances, resolutions and motions
   
31.08   Compensation
   
31.09   Administrative spending
§ 31.01 MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings.
      (1)   Regular meetings of the Council shall be held on the second Monday
of each calendar month at 7:00 p.m. Any regular meeting falling upon a holiday
shall be held on the following business day, at the same time and place. All
meetings, including special and adjourned meetings, shall be held in the
Community Center unless otherwise directed by the Council.
      (2)   If any Council meeting is directed by Council to be held in a
location other than the Community Center, the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer
shall post a notice in City Hall and at least two other locations at least 72
hours prior to the meeting stating the time, location and purpose of the
meeting.
   (B)   Special meetings.
      (1)   Special meetings may be called by the Mayor or by any two members
of the City Council upon at least 72 hours’ notice to each member of the City
Council. Each member shall be notified either by sending him, her or them an
email or attempting to contact him, her or them by phone.
      (2)   Any special meeting attended by all Council members shall be a
valid meeting for the transaction of any business that may come before the
meeting. The Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall post notice of a special
meeting at least 72 hours before the meeting. The appearance at any special
meeting by the Mayor or Council member shall constitute a waiver by that person
of any deficiency in the notice.
   (C)   First yearly meeting. At the first regular Council meeting in January
of each year, the Council shall:
      (1)   Designate the depository of the city funds;
      (2)   Designate the official newspaper;
      (3)   Choose an Acting Mayor from the Council who shall perform the
duties of the Mayor during the disability or absence of the Mayor from the city
or, in case of vacancy in the office of Mayor, until a successor has been
appointed and qualifies; and
      (4)   Appoint officers and employees and the members of boards,
commissions and committees as may be necessary.
   (D)   Open meetings. All Council meetings, including special and adjourned
meetings, shall be open to the public, except as may be otherwise provided by
law.
   (E)   Parliamentary. All Council meetings shall follow the most current
version of “Robert’s Rules of Order”.
(Prior Code, § 21.01) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 1-12-2015)
§ 31.02 STUDENT LIAISON.
   (A)   The City Council may appoint a student liaison to provide input for
the City Council. The student will receive notice and be allowed to speak like
any other member of the City Council, but will not have a vote. The student
does not have to meet the age requirement for the City Council.
   (B)   If the City Council decides to appoint a student liaison, the student
liaison will serve at the pleasure of the City Council for as long as the City
Council chooses. The student liaison may be removed or replaced at any time for
any reason.
(Prior Code, § 21.02)
§ 31.03 MAYOR; DUTIES.
   (A)   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Council. In the absence
of the Mayor, the Acting Mayor shall preside.
   (B)   The Presiding Officer shall preserve order, enforce the rules of
procedure herein prescribed and determine without debate, subject to the final
decision of the Council on appeal, all questions of procedure and order. Except
as otherwise provided by statute or by these rules, the proceedings of the
Council shall be conducted in accordance with “Robert’s Rules of Order
Revised”.
   (C)   Any member may appeal to the Council from a ruling of the Presiding
Officer. If the appeal is seconded, the member may speak once solely on the
question involved and the Presiding Officer may explain the ruling, but no
other Council member shall participate in the discussion. The appeal shall be
sustained if it is approved by a majority of the members present, exclusive of
the Presiding Officer.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided by law or this section, the Presiding
Officer shall not be deprived of any of the privileges of a Council member by
reason of his or her acting as Presiding Officer, including the power to move,
second and debate from the chair.
(Prior Code, § 21.03)
§ 31.04 MINUTES.
   (A)   (1)   Minutes of each Council meeting shall be kept by the
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer or, in his or her absence, by the designate of
the Council.
      (2)   Ordinances, resolutions and claims shall be referenced in the
minutes.
   (B)   (1)   The minutes of each meeting shall be reduced to typewritten form
and shall be signed by the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer and the Mayor. At the
next regular Council meeting, approval of the minutes shall be considered by
the Council. The minutes need not be read aloud, but any Council member may
call for any additions or corrections.
      (2)   If there is no objection to a proposed addition or correction, it
may be made without a vote of the Council.
      (3)   If there is an objection, the Council shall vote upon the addition
or correction. If there are no additions or corrections, the minutes shall
stand approved.
(Prior Code, § 21.04)
§ 31.05 AGENDA.
   (A)   (1)   An agenda of the business and claims for each regular Council
meeting shall be prepared by the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer for the meeting.
      (2)   Any person wishing an item to be placed on the agenda to be
considered by the Council must fill out a request for Council action form and
provide it to the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer setting forth his or her
request, by 12:00 p.m. on the Tuesday prior to the regular Council meeting.
   (B)   By majority vote of the members of the Council in attendance at the
regular scheduled meeting, additional business may be added to the agenda for
consideration at the meeting in session.
(Prior Code, § 21.05)
§ 31.06 QUORUM AND VOTING.
   (A)   At all Council meetings, a majority of the Council members elected
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a smaller number
may adjourn from time to time.
   (B)   (1)   If the vote is not unanimous, the names of those voting against
the questions and those abstaining shall be recorded in the minutes.
      (2)   If any member, being present, does not vote, the minutes shall note
it.
   (C)   A majority vote of all members of the Council shall be necessary for
approval of any ordinance. Except as otherwise provided by statute, a majority
of those voting shall prevail in all other cases.
(Prior Code, § 21.06) (Ord. 2018-02, passed 2-12-2018)
§ 31.07 ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND MOTIONS.
   (A)   Every ordinance and resolution shall be presented in writing. An
ordinance or resolution shall be read in full only at the request of the Mayor
or a member of the Council. All motions shall be stated in full before they are
submitted to a vote by the Presiding Officer. They shall then be recorded by
title in the minutes by the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer.
   (B)   Every ordinance passed by the Council shall be signed by the Mayor and
attested by the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer. Every ordinance shall be
incorporated into the text or appendices of the code with the original passed
version of the ordinance retained in an ordinance book.
   (C)   (1)   Every ordinance repealing a section of the city code shall give
the chapter and section number of the code or ordinance to be repealed.
      (2)   No ordinance or resolution or section thereof shall be amended by
reference to title alone, but an amending ordinance or resolution shall set
forth in full each chapter or section to be amended.
(Prior Code, § 21.07)
§ 31.08 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The monthly salary of the Mayor shall be $250.
   (B)   The monthly salary of each Council member shall be $200.
   (C)   The Mayor and Council members shall also receive $50 for each
committee, conference, workshop, training and inter-agency meeting that they
attend in excess of four hours, pursuant to their assignment, by resolution
adopted by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 21.08) (Ord. 2018-14, passed 10-8-2018)
§ 31.09 ADMINISTRATIVE SPENDING.
   (A)   The City Administrator, City Clerk/Treasurer, Fire Chief and Public
Works Director shall each have the authority to make or let purchases and
contracts when the amount thereof does not exceed $2,000.
   (B)   In the event of an emergency, the City Administrator, City Clerk/
Treasurer, Fire Chief and the Public Works Director shall each have the
authority to expend any funds they deem necessary. After any such funds have
been spent, the City Administrator, City Clerk/Treasurer, Fire Chief and Public
Works Director shall report on the spending to the City Council as soon as
possible.
(Prior Code, § 21.09)
CHAPTER 32: CITY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
   
32.01   Planning Commission
   
32.02   Parks and Recreation Commission
   
32.03   Fire Department
§ 32.01 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Commission and members.
      (1)   A Planning Commission for the city is hereby continued. The
Planning Commission shall consist of members as are appointed by the City
Council.
      (2)   Terms shall be staggered so that no more than one-half of the
members’ terms expire at one time. Both the original and successive appointee
shall hold their respective offices until their successors are appointed and
qualified. Vacancies during the term shall be filled in the same manner as the
original appointments are made for the unexpired portion of the term vacated.
      (3)   Every appointed member shall, before entering upon the discharge or
his or her duties, have taken an oath that he or she will faithfully discharge
the duties of his or her office.
      (4)   To be eligible to be a member of the Planning Commission, a person
must be a resident of the city and an eligible voter in the state.
      (5)   The City Council may appoint a student liaison to be a member of
the Planning Commission. The student will receive notice and be allowed to
speak like any other member of the Planning Commission, but will not have a
vote. The student does not have to meet the age requirement for the Planning
Commission. If the City Council decides to appoint a student liaison, the
student liaison will serve at the pleasure of the City Council for as long as
the City Council chooses. The student liaison may be removed or replaced at any
time for any reason.
   (B)   Meetings and officers.
      (1)   The Commission shall establish regular meeting dates.
      (2)   Special meetings may be called by any two members of the Commission
upon at least 72 hours’ notice to each member of the Commission. Each member
shall be notified either by sending them an email or attempting to contact them
by phone.
      (3)   The Commission shall select the Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and
Secretary from its membership, who shall serve for terms of two years,
beginning January 1. Each position shall be approved by the City Council.
   (C)   Removal of a Commission member.
      (1)   The Planning Commission may recommend to the City Council that a
Commission member or ex officio member be removed from the Commission for
misconduct or neglect of duties. This includes, but is not limited to,
inappropriate conduct at public meetings or conduct not becoming an appointed
official of the city. The Planning Commission’s authority to recommend the
removal does not supersede the City Council’s authority to remove a Commission
member at any time for any reason.
      (2)   The Council may remove any Commission member prior to the end of a
term only by a two-thirds vote of the Council.
      (3)   Any letter of reprimand from administration or Council must have
prior Council approval.
   (D)   Duties. The Commission shall have the duties as assigned in this
section, by statute and any other ordinance code provision of the city.
   (E)   Quorum and minutes.
      (1)   Meetings shall be held as needed, as called by the Zoning
Administrator or as set by the Council. Fifty-one percent shall constitute a
quorum.
      (2)   Minutes of each meeting shall be kept and filed in the office of
the Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer.
   (F)   Compensation. Commission members shall be compensated for each meeting
attended. The salary shall be payable on an annual basis and shall be set by
resolution from time to time. Commission members shall submit written claims
for compensation to the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer annually following the
Commission’s last meeting held in December of each year.
   (G)   Ex officio member. The Mayor shall appoint a Council member to serve
as an ex officio member to the Commission, privileged to speak on any matter,
without a vote, who shall provide a liaison between the Commission and the
Council.
(Prior Code, § 23.01) (Ord. 2013-04, passed 5-13-2013; Ord. 2025-02, passed 4-
14-2025)
§ 32.02 PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION.
   (A)   There is hereby created the Parks and Recreation Commission.
   (B)   (1)   The scope of the activity of the Commission shall consist of
advising the Council and other city advisory commissions regarding matters
relevant to the parks and recreation functions of the city.
      (2)   The general purpose of the Commission is to monitor and reflect the
attitudes and concerns of the citizens of the city relative to the parks system
and recreational programs and to advise the Council of citizen attitudes and
policy matters relevant to the parks and recreation functions in the city.
   (C)   The responsibilities of the Commission shall be to:
      (1)   Develop and recommend to the Council, and upon their adoption,
monitor the execution of a comprehensive plan and park classification system
for the parks and recreation functions in the city and from time to time, make
recommendations for any changes it deems necessary;
      (2)   Annually report to the Council regarding achievements toward
fulfillment of the comprehensive plan and recommended amendments;
      (3)   Frequently visit city parks and keep informed of current recreation
programs in order to continually review and evaluate the parks system
development and recreation programming;
      (4)   Develop and recommend methods to stimulate positive public interest
in parks and recreation functions;
      (5)   Develop and recommend feasible methods of discouraging vandalism
and destruction of park facilities;
      (6)   Develop, recommend and execute feasible methods of financing
recommended park improvements;
      (7)   Serve as a forum for the citizens of the city to voice their
opinions regarding parks and recreation activities and functions;
      (8)   Promote coordination with the school district serving the city,
encouraging the interchangeable use of city and school district facilities and
programs to the best interest of citizens;
      (9)   Encourage dissemination of information to and coordination with
city organizations interested in the park and recreation functions such as
garden clubs, athletic groups, civic organizations and the like;
      (10)   Encourage coordination with the other communities and agencies to
the extent appropriate in matters pertinent to the parks and recreation
functions;
      (11)   Develop and transmit recommended capital improvements annually to
the Council for inclusion in the capital improvements program;
      (12)   Review and make recommendations so the Council can develop
proposals consistent with adopted policies, ordinances, regulations and the
comprehensive plan; and
      (13)   Review and recommend items to be included in the parks and
recreation annual budget.
   (D)   Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the City Council for
staggered terms of three years; except that, any person, appointed to fill a
vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the term to which his or her
predecessor was appointed shall be appointed only for the remainder of the
term. Upon expiration of his or her term of office, the member shall continue
to serve until his or her successor is appointed.
   (E)   The Commission shall consist of up to seven members. All members shall
be residents of the city. All members shall be eligible voters in the state.
   (F)   The City Council may appoint a student liaison to be a member of the
Commission. The student will receive notice and be allowed to speak like any
other member of the Commission, but will not have a vote. The student does not
have to meet the age requirement for the Commission. If the City Council
decides to appoint a student liaison, the student liaison will serve at the
pleasure of the City Council for as long as the City Council chooses. The
student liaison may be removed or replaced at any time for any reason.
   (G)   The Commission shall select a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and
Secretary from its membership, who shall serve for terms of one year, beginning
January 1 of each year. Each position shall be approved by the City Council.
   (H)   The Chair shall assure fulfillment of the following responsibilities
in addition to those otherwise described:
      (1)   Preside over meetings of the Commission;
      (2)   Appear or appoint a representative to appear as necessary before
other city advisory commissions and the Council to present the viewpoint of the
Commission on matters pertaining to parks and recreation functions as they
relate to business under consideration by the Commission or Council;
      (3)   Review all Council, Planning Commission and other advisory
commission minutes and inform the Parks and Recreation Commission of matters
therein relevant to the parks and recreation functions; and
      (4)   Provide the liaison with other governmental and volunteer units in
matters relating to the parks and recreation functions for the purpose of
obtaining and providing timely information.
   (I)   (1)   The Parks and Recreation Commission may recommend to the City
Council that a Commission member of ex officio member be removed from the
Commission for misconduct or neglect of duties. This includes, but is not
limited to, inappropriate conduct at public meetings or conduct becoming an
appointed official of the city. The Park and Recreation Commission’s authority
to recommend the removal does not supersede the City Council’s authority to
remove a Commission member at any time for any reason.
      (2)   The Council may remove any Commission member prior to the end of a
term only by a two-thirds vote of the Council.
      (3)   Any letter of reprimand from administration or Council must have
prior Council approval.
      (4)   Vacancy in the Commission shall be filled by appointment by the
City Council.
      (5)   Each ember shall, before entering upon the disposition of his or
her duties, take an oath that he or she will faithfully perform the duties of
the office.
   (J)   (1)   Commissioners shall be compensated for each meeting attended.
The salary shall be payable on an annual basis and shall be set by resolution
from time to time.
      (2)   Commission members shall submit written claims for compensation to
the Administrator/ Clerk-Treasurer annually for monthly meetings following the
Commission’s last meeting held in December of each year.
   (K)   The Commission shall adopt the rules and procedures not inconsistent
with these provisions as may be necessary for the proper execution and conduct
of business.
   (L)   (1)   The Commission shall hold regular monthly meetings at the City
Hall or another posted location, the meeting time and day to be established by
the Commission at its first meeting in January of each year.
      (2)   Official minutes of each meeting shall be kept by the designated
member and filed in the office of the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer.
   (M)   The Mayor shall appoint a Council member to serve as an ex officio
member to the Commission, privileged to speak on any matter, without a vote,
who shall provide a liaison between the Commission and the Council.
(Prior Code, § 23.02) (Ord. 2013-04, passed 5-13-2013; Ord. 2021-05, passed 10-
11-2021)
§ 32.03 FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   For the proper protection of the lives and property of the city, there
is hereby organized a volunteer fire department to be known as the “Montrose
Fire Department”.
   (B)   The Department shall consist of not less than ten firefighters and not
more than a number equal to 10% of the area served by the Fire Department.
   (C)   (1)   The officers of the Department shall be the Chief and First and
Second Assistant Chief and Training Officer.
      (2)   The Chief shall be appointed annually by the City Council at the
first meeting held in January. The First and Second Assistant Chiefs and the
Training Officer shall be appointed annually by the Chief after the Chief is
appointed.
   (D)   (1)   The Chief or, in his or her absence, the Assistant Chief shall
have supervision over all the apparatus and other equipment, examine the same
as often as necessary and see to it that it is property kept, cared for and
placed.
      (2)   (a)   The Chief shall order drills and practices as often as is
advisable and see to it that all members of the Department understand their
work.
         (b)   He or she shall have full power and absolute control at all
fires.
      (3)   The Chief shall, in January of each year, make a report to the
Council of the calls answered by the Department, within and without the city
limits, stating the approximate loss or damage of each, type, location,
response time and number of personnel responding.
   (E)   As vacancies occur or as it may be deemed necessary, new members may
be appointed by the Council.
   (F)   The Department shall meet at least once a month.
   (G)   All equipment and apparatus acquired by the Department, either by
purchase or contribution, shall become and remain the property of the city.
   (H)   The Department is hereby authorized to answer fire calls outside of
the city limits and when so doing shall be considered as on duty as
firefighters of the city.
   (I)   The members of the Department may form and organize a Volunteer
Firefighters Relief Association, pursuant to state law.
(Prior Code, § 23.03)
CHAPTER 33: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
   
33.01   Policy and purpose
   
33.02   Definitions
   
33.03   Emergency Management Organization; establishment
   
33.04   Director; duties and powers
   
33.05   Local emergencies
   
33.06   Emergency regulations
   
33.07   Governmental function
   
33.08   Participation in labor disputes or politics
   
33.09   Dispatch and city equipment and services; mutual aid
§ 33.01 POLICY AND PURPOSE.
   Because of the existing possibility of the occurrence of disasters of
unprecedented size and destruction resulting from fire, flood, tornado,
blizzard, destructive winds or other natural causes or from sabotage, hostile
action or from hazardous material mishaps of catastrophic measure or other
major incidents, and in order to ensure that preparations of the city will be
adequate to deal with disasters and generally to provide for the common defense
and to protect the public peace, health and safety, and to preserve the lives
and property of the people of the city, it is hereby found and declared to be
necessary:
   (A)   To establish a city emergency management organization responsible for
city planning and preparation for emergency government operations in time of
disasters;
   (B)   To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during emergencies and
disasters;
   (C)   To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between the city and other
political subdivisions with respect to the carrying out of emergency
preparedness functions;
   (D)   To comply with the provisions of the county’s Emergency Operations
Plan, as it may be amended from time to time; and
   (E)   To review and accept its emergency plan as the city’s basic plan for
responses to emergencies, disasters, major incidents, mutual aid and other
projects consistent with this chapter and the county’s Emergency Operations
Plan, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 22.01)
§ 33.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   COUNTY EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PREPAREDNESS PLANNING AND REVIEW COMMITTEE. A
committee made up of the county’s Emergency Management Directors, which
develops, renews and establishes a basic emergency plan and identifies and
coordinates training for member communities and reviews local plans, exercises,
major incidents and disaster responses which are consistent with this chapter.
   DISASTER. A situation which creates an immediate and serious impairment to
the health and safety of any person or situation which has resulted in or is
likely to result in major loss to property, and for which traditional sources
of relief and assistance within the affected area are unable to repair or
prevent the injury or loss.
   EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances which calls for
immediate action to respond or to prevent from developing or occurring.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. The preparation for and the carrying out of all
emergency functions, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage
resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood, tornado and other acts of
nature, or from sabotage, hostile action or from industrial hazardous material
mishaps or other major incidents. These functions include, without limitation,
firefighting services, police services, emergency medical services,
engineering, warning services, communications, radiological and chemical
evacuation, congregate care, emergency transportation, existing or properly
assigned functions of plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility
services and other functions related to civil protection, together with all
other activities necessary or incidental for carrying out the foregoing
functions. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT includes those activities sometimes referred to
as CIVIL DEFENSE or EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS FUNCTIONS.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES. The total personnel resources engaged in city-
level emergency management functions in accordance with this chapter or any
rule or order thereunder. This includes personnel from city departments,
authorized volunteers and private organizations and agencies.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT MUTUAL AID. Any disaster or major incident which
requires the dispatching of city personnel, equipment or other necessary
resources within or without the city limits.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION. The staff element responsible for
coordinating city-level planning and preparation for disaster response. The
ORGANIZATION provides city liaison and coordination with federal, state and
local jurisdictions relative to disaster preparedness activities, major
incidents, mutual aid and other projects consistent with this chapter and
assures implementation of federal, state, county and other program
requirements.
   MAJOR INCIDENT. Any incident which exhausts local resources.
(Prior Code, § 22.02)
§ 33.03 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION; ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   There is hereby created, with the city government, the Emergency
Management Organization which shall be under the supervision and control of the
Emergency Management Director (Director). The Director shall be appointed by
the Mayor; the appointment being brought to the City Council at the next
regular meeting after the appointment for final approval or denial. The
position of Director of Emergency Management shall be reviewed and either re-
affirmed or replaced at the first City Council meeting of January on a yearly
basis.
   (B)   (1)   The Director of Emergency Management may be replaced at other
times on a showing of ineffective leadership or failure to carry out duties, as
defined. This procedure would follow the same criteria as the appointment
process.
      (2)   The Director shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration and operation of the emergency preparedness organization.
(Prior Code, § 22.03)
§ 33.04 DIRECTOR; DUTIES AND POWERS.
   (A)   The Director shall represent the city on any regional or state
conference for emergency management. The Director may develop additional mutual
aid agreements with other political subdivisions of the state for reciprocal
emergency management aid and assistance in an emergency too great to be dealt
with unassisted and shall present the agreements to the city for its action.
The arrangements shall be consistent with the emergency plan.
   (B)   The Director shall make assessments of personnel, businesses and
industries, resources and facilities of the city as deemed necessary to
determine their adequacy for emergency management and to plan for their most
efficient use in time of an emergency, major incident or disaster.
   (C)   The Director shall prepare a comprehensive emergency plan for the
emergency preparedness of the city and shall present the plan to the city for
its approval. When the Council has approved the plan by resolution, it shall be
the duty of all city agencies and all emergency preparedness forces of the
city, to perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved. The
plan may be modified in like manner from time to time. The Director shall
coordinate the basic emergency management activities of the city to the end and
they shall be consistent and fully integrated with the basic emergency plan of
the County Emergency Management, Preparedness Planning and Review Committee and
federal and state governments.
   (D)   In accordance with the emergency plan, the Director shall institute
the training programs, public information programs and conduct practice warning
alerts and emergency exercises as may be necessary to assure prompt and
effective operation of the emergency plan when a disaster, major incident or
mutual aid occurs.
   (E)   (1)   The Director, during an emergency, major incident or mutual aid,
shall utilize the personnel, services, equipment, supplies and facilities of
existing departments and agencies of the city to the maximum extent
practicable. The officers and personnel of all departments and agencies shall
be, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperative with and extend the services
and facilities to the Emergency Management Organization.
      (2)   The head of each department or agency in cooperation with the
Director shall be responsible for the planning and programming of the emergency
activities as will involve the utilization of the facilities of the department
or agency.
   (F)   The Director shall, in cooperation with existing departments and
agencies affected, assist in the organizing, recruiting and training of the
emergency management personnel that may be required on a volunteer basis to
carry out the emergency plans. To the extent that the emergency personnel are
recruited to augment a regular department or agency for emergencies, they shall
be assigned to the departments or agencies and shall be under the
administration and control of the department or agency.
   (G)   The Director shall carry out all orders, rules and regulations issued
by the governing authority with reference to emergency management.
   (H)   The Director shall prepare and submit the reports on emergency
preparedness activities as may be requested by the governing authority.
(Prior Code, § 22.04)
§ 33.05 LOCAL EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   (1)   A local emergency, including a disaster, major incident or
mutual aid response, may be declared by the Mayor or his or her successor or by
the Interim Emergency Council as detailed under this section. It shall not be
continued for a period in excess of three days, except by or with the consent
of the government board of the political subdivision.
      (2)   Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a
local emergency shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed
promptly by the clerk of the local record keeping agency of the subdivision.
   (B)   A declaration of a local emergency shall invoke necessary portions of
the response and recovery aspects of applicable plans including fiscal
expenditures which are consistent with this chapter.
   (C)   No other jurisdictional agency or official may declare a local
emergency unless expressly authorized by the agreement under which the agency
functions.
   (D)   (1)   Purpose. Due to the existing possibility of disasters, it is
found urgent and necessary to ensure the continuity of duly elected and lawful
leadership of the city to provide for the continuity of the government and the
emergency interim succession of key governmental officials by providing a
method for temporary emergency appointments to their offices.
      (2)   Succession to local offices. In the event of a disaster affecting
the vicinity of the city, the Director of Emergency Management shall call a
meeting of the city government by notifying the Mayor, Council and
Administrator to gather at the City Hall. If the Director is unable to call the
meeting, any other member of the city government or the city staff may call the
meeting. In the event that safety or convenience dictate, an alternative place
of meeting may be designated. Those gathered shall proceed as follows.
         (a)   By majority vote of those persons present, regardless of number,
they shall elect a Chairperson to preside and Secretary to keep minutes.
         (b)   They shall review and record the specific facts relating to the
disaster and injuries to persons or damage to property already done or
imminent.
         (c)   They may, based on such facts, declare a state of emergency.
         (d)   By majority vote of those persons present, regardless of number,
they shall fill all positions on an Interim Emergency Council, (including the
office of Mayor) of those persons upon whom notice could not be served or who
are unable to be present.
         (e)   The interim successors shall serve until such time as the duly
elected official is again available and returns to their position, or the state
of emergency has passed and a successor is designated and qualifies as required
by law, whichever shall occur first.
      (3)   Duties of the Interim Emergency Council. The Interim Emergency
Council shall exercise the powers and duties of their offices and appoint other
key government officials to serve during the emergency.
(Prior Code, § 22.05)
§ 33.06 EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Whenever necessary to meet a declared emergency or to prepare for an
emergency for which adequate regulations have not been adopted by the Governor
or the City Council, the Council may, by resolution, promulgate regulations
consistent with the applicable federal or state laws or regulations, respecting
the conduct of persons and the use of property during emergencies, the repair,
maintenance and safeguarding of essential public services, emergency health,
fire and safety regulations, drill or practice periods required for preliminary
training and all other matters which are required to protect safety, health and
welfare in declared emergencies.
   (B)   (1)   Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be in writing,
shall be dated, shall refer to the particular emergency to which it pertains,
if so limited, and shall be filed in the office of the City Administrator/
Clerk-Treasurer, which shall be kept posted and available for public inspection
during business hours.
      (2)   Notice of the existence of the regulation and its availability for
inspection at the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer’s office, shall be
conspicuously posted at the front of the City Hall or at other places in the
affected area, as the Council shall designate in the resolution.
      (3)   By like resolution, the Council may modify or rescind any
regulation.
   (C)   The City Council may rescind any regulation by resolution at any time.
If not sooner rescinded, every regulation shall expire at the end of 30 days
after its effective date or at the end of the emergency to which it relates,
whichever comes first. Any resolution, rule or regulation inconsistent with an
emergency regulation promulgated by the Council, shall be suspended during the
time and to the extent the conflict exists.
   (D)   (1)   During a declared emergency, the Director is, notwithstanding
any statutory or charter provision on the contrary, empowered through its
governing body acting within the corporate limits of the city, to enter into
contracts and incur obligations necessary to the disaster by protecting the
health and safety of persons and property and providing emergency assistance to
the victims of the disaster.
      (2)   The Director may exercise powers in the light of the exigencies of
the disaster without compliance with the time consuming procedures and
formalities prescribed by law pertaining to the performance of public work,
entering rental equipment agreements, purchase of supplies and materials,
limitations upon tax levies, and the appropriation and expenditure of public
funds including, but not limited to publication of resolutions, publication of
call for bids, provisions of personnel laws and rules, provisions relating to
low bids and requirements for budgets. The Director will however, use those
individuals and entities listed in the emergency plan first, if at all
possible.
   (E)   Accurate records of all paid staff and volunteers, including manpower,
hours and movies spent or contracted for, must be kept and forwarded to City
Hall by the Director.
(Prior Code, § 22.06)
§ 33.07 GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTION.
   (A)   All functions thereunder and all other activities relating to
emergency management are declared to be governmental functions.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not affect the right of any
person to receive benefits to which he or she would otherwise be entitled under
this chapter or under the worker’s compensation law, or under any pension law,
nor the right of any person to receive any benefits or compensation under any
act of Congress.
(Prior Code, § 22.07)
§ 33.08 PARTICIPATION IN LABOR DISPUTES OF POLITICS.
   The Emergency Management Organization shall not participate in any form of
political activity nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for
political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a labor dispute. The Director
may express professional opinions on legislative or other legal regulations
consistent with the areas found in the county’s Emergency Operations Plan, as
it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 22.08)
§ 33.09 DISPATCH AND CITY EQUIPMENT AND SERVICES; MUTUAL AID.
   (A)   The city finds it desirable and necessary to authorize the Director to
dispatch city equipment and personnel to local communities who request aid to
combat their emergency, disaster or major incident consistent with this
chapter.
   (B)   The Director shall evaluate the internal needs of the city and
dispatch appropriate available aid. The Director shall immediately recall,
order and terminate the use of any dispatched equipment and personnel when the
need for their use no longer exists or earlier when it appears in the best
interest of the city.
   (C)   The Director shall be fully authorized as an act of the city and all
provisions for compensation of personnel, rental of equipment, liability
insurance coverage, worker’s compensation insurance and all other safeguards
and matters pertaining to the city, its equipment and personnel, shall apply in
each case as if specifically authorized and directed at the time, whether or
not the governing body or authority of the place in which the disaster, major
incident, mutual aid or other occurrence exists, has previously requested and
provided for assistance and the use of equipment and personnel under a mutual
protection agreement or other type protection agreement with the city.
(Prior Code, § 22.09)
CHAPTER 34: GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES
Section
   
34.01   Election procedure; date
   
34.02   Unclaimed property
   
34.03   Escrow deposits
   
34.04   Services, licenses and permit fees
   
34.05   License non-renewal, suspension or revocation
   
34.06   Nuisance abatement
§ 34.01 ELECTION PROCEDURE; DATE.
   (A)   The regular city election shall be held biennially on the first
Tuesday after the first Monday in November in every even-numbered year.
   (B)   Anyone seeking election must meet the requirements in M.S. § 204B.06,
as it may be amended from time to time. Specifically, any person seeking
election must be 21 years of age at the time of assuming office, a resident of
the city and an eligible voter in the state.
(Prior Code, § 24.01)
§ 34.02 UNCLAIMED PROPERTY.
   (A)   Definition. UNCLAIMED PROPERTY is any money or personal property,
except animals and motor vehicles, lawfully coming into the possession of the
city, and remaining unclaimed by the owner.
   (B)   Procedure.
      (1)   The designated law enforcement agency shall make a reasonable and
diligent effort to find the owner of any unclaimed property and restore the
same to him or her.
      (2)   Abandoned motor vehicles shall be disposed of as provided by in §§
90.15 through
90.25 of this code of ordinances related to abandoned vehicles and M.S. Chapter
168B, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (3)   Abandoned animals shall be disposed of as provided by in
Chapter 91 of this code of ordinances related to animals.
   (C)   Found property.
      (1)   A receipt shall be issued to any person who finds lost or abandoned
property or money and deliver it to the custody of the city. The person may
indicate in writing that he or she wishes to assert a claim to the property or
money as a finder.
      (2)   If the finder so indicates, and the property or money remains
unclaimed by the owner for 90 days, the property or money shall be delivered to
the finders.
   (D)   Perishable or dangerous property. Any unclaimed property which is
perishable, or which would lose the greater part of its value by being retained
for 90 days, or which is determined by the designated law enforcement agency to
be dangerous shall be disposed of at the discretion of the designated law
enforcement agency in the manner deemed appropriate by it.
   (E)   Money. Any money which is not claimed by the owner within 90 days or
by a finder pursuant hereto or which was seized from illegal gambling shall be
deposited in the city’s General Fund.
   (F)   Property seized as evidence. Any property seized as evidence shall,
when no longer needed as evidence, be returned to the owner unless otherwise
subject to lawful detention. The property which is otherwise subject to lawful
detention shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of as directed by the court.
   (G)   Disposal.
      (1)   Any unclaimed property for which no other manner of disposal is
provided hereby and which is not claimed by the owner within 90 days may be
appropriated to city use upon approval of the appropriation by the Council.
      (2)   (a)   Any unclaimed property which is not appropriated to city use
shall be sold by the designated law enforcement agency to the highest bidder at
public auction.
         (b)   Notice shall be published for two successive weeks of the time,
place and manner of sale.
         (c)   The notice shall also describe the property to be sold.
      (3)   The proceeds from a sale of unclaimed property shall be deposited
in the city’s General Fund. A record shall be made of the sale price of each
item sold and the sale price shall be paid to the former owner, if claim is
made within six months of the sale and satisfactory proof of ownership is
presented.
      (4)   Any unclaimed property remaining unsold after public auction shall
be disposed of as directed by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 24.02)
§ 34.03 ESCROW DEPOSITS.
   (A)   Intent.
      (1)   Certain licensed and permitted activities carried on in the city
require the assistance of the City Engineer, City Attorney or other city
personnel.
      (2)   As these activities primarily benefit private persons rather than
the city as a whole, it is appropriate that the cost of these services be borne
by those benefitting thereby.
      (3)   This section is intended to provide a method whereby this end will
be furthered.
   (B)   Escrow deposit required.
      (1)   Applications for subdivision approval, rezonings, conditional use
permits, planned unit developments, zoning variances, sewer connection permits,
liquor licenses, building permits and other municipal considerations may
require a cash deposit which shall be placed in an applicant’s escrow account
in an amount sufficient to pay all engineering, legal and planning fees
incurred by the city and other costs as may be made the applicant’s
responsibility, in connection with the application and the supervision,
inspection and investigation of the permitted activity.
      (2)   (a)   The deposit shall be held in the account and shall be
credited to the applicant making the deposit.
         (b)   All engineering, legal and planning fees and other costs as may
be made the applicant’s responsibility incurred in connection with an
application shall be charged to the applicant’s escrow account and credited to
the city.
   (C)   Fee schedule. The Council shall, by ordinance establish fees for
services rendered by the City Attorney, City Engineer and other city personnel.
The fee schedule shall be provided to all persons making applications listed in
this section upon request.
   (D)   Individual fees.
      (1)   Based on the fee schedule adopted pursuant to this section, the
Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer shall determine the amount of the escrow deposit
required after consultation with the City Attorney, City Engineer and other
city personnel whose services may be required. If a dispute arises over a fee
imposed by M.S. § 462.353, as it may be amended from time to time, then if the
person aggrieved by that fee makes an escrow deposit of the fee, the work on a
permit, license or project shall continue and the applicant may then appeal the
amount of the fee to the district court as provided in that statute.
      (2)   All time, services and materials to be billed to an escrow account
shall be itemized.
   (E)   Enforcement.
      (1)   The application listed in this section shall not be accepted or
processed by the city unless signed by all parties with an interest in the
property or project and accompanied by an escrow deposit as provided in this
section.
      (2)   If, at any time, it appears that a deficit will occur in any escrow
account, the Administrator/ Clerk-Treasurer may then require an additional
deposit in the escrow account sufficient to cover the additional expenses.
      (3)   (a)   Failure to make additional deposits, or to pay to the city
money owed for legal, engineering or other services for which the applicant is,
by ordinance, made responsible in connection with an application in this
section shall be grounds for denial or revocation of the permit or license, or
cessation of work on a particular project.
         (b)   The permit or license shall be revoked only after a hearing
preceded by ten days’ written notice.
   (F)   Refund. Any money remaining in an applicant’s escrow account after
payment of all required engineering, legal and other fees shall be returned to
the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 24.03)
§ 34.04 SERVICES, LICENSES AND PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Fees established by resolution.
      (1)   The City Council shall establish the amounts of all fees for all
city services, licenses, permits and penalties by ordinance on an annual or
more frequent basis.
      (2)   A copy of the current fee schedule ordinance may be obtained from
the Administrator/ Clerk-Treasurer upon request.
   (B)   General licensing requirements.
      (1)   All license applications to operate a business shall provide
evidence of compliance with M.S. § 176.182, as it may be amended from time to
time.
      (2)   Failure to provide evidence shall be grounds for denial of a
license and termination of processing of application.
(Prior Code, § 24.04)
§ 34.05 LICENSE NON-RENEWAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   Any license issued under this code, other than animal licenses, may be
non-renewed, suspended or revoked by following the provisions of this section.
   (B)   In addition to the provisions of this section, the non-renewal,
suspension or revocation must follow all provisions of the applicable chapters
or sections of this code.
   (C)   Any license issued under this code may be non-renewed, suspended or
revoked at the discretion of the City Council for any reason the City Council
deems appropriate including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Violation of any applicable federal, state or county law;
      (2)   Violation of any provision of this code;
      (3)   Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statements on the application
form;
      (4)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made to the city
during the course of the licensed activity;
      (5)   Conviction of any offense for which granting of a license could
have been denied;
      (6)   The licensed business is being conducted in a manner as to maintain
a nuisance under this code or other applicable law;
      (7)   The licensed business is no longer being operated or carried on;
and
      (8)   The loss of the qualifications necessary to receive or maintain the
license under this code.
   (D)   The non-renewal, suspension or revocation of any license issued to
multiple persons shall serve as a non-renewal, suspension or revocation of each
authorized person’s licenses.
   (E)   Any suspension or revocation of a liquor licenses must follow the
procedures contained in M.S. § 340A.415, as it may be amended from time to
time.
   (F)   Any non-renewal, suspension or revocation of any license, other than a
liquor license, under this code shall follow the following procedures.
      (1)   Notice.
         (a)   Prior to non-renewal, suspension or revocation of any license,
other than a liquor license, under this code, the city shall provide the
license holder with written notice. The notice shall include the time and place
of the hearing, a statement of the charges or alleged violations, facts
supporting the charges or violations and the applicant’s right to be
represented by Council.
         (b)   The notice shall be delivered in person or by mail to the
permanent residential address listed on the license application or, if no
residential address is listed, to the business address provided on the license.
      (2)   Hearing.
         (a)   A public hearing shall be held before the City Council on the
issue of non-renewal, suspension or revocation. The City Council may, at its
sole discretion, delegate the hearing to the state’s Office of Administrative
Hearings and may then rely on the findings of the Administrative Law Judge in
deciding whether to revoke, suspended or not renew a license.
         (b)   The city must present evidence supporting the charges or
violations. The licensee shall have an opportunity to be heard and to refute
the charges, including the right to present evidence and witnesses and to
cross-examine any witnesses presented by the city.
      (3)   Findings. Within 30 days, the city shall notify the licensee of its
decision and of the licensee’s right to appeal that decision in court.
   (G)   If, in the discretion of the City Council, imminent harm to the health
or safety of the public may occur because of the actions of a person acting
under a license issued under this code, the City Council may immediately
suspend the person’s license and provide notice of the right to hold a
subsequent public hearing as prescribed in this section.
   (H)   Any person whose license is non-renewed, suspended or revoked under
this section shall have the right to appeal that decision in court within 60
days of receipt of the city’s findings.
(Prior Code, § 10.21)
§ 34.06 NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Administrative citation. The city may abate a nuisance after a
property owner has received an administrative citation in accordance with §
10.37 of this code of ordinances. The purpose of the abatement procedure is to
protect the public health, safety or welfare of the city, its residents and
property owners.
   (B)   Abatement.
      (1)   Any nuisance, as identified in this code, by state statute or in
any other law may be abated through §§
10.35 through
10.38 of this code of ordinances and/or through criminal procedures with the
offense charged as a misdemeanor.
      (2)   The city reserves the right in its sole discretion to use any other
method of enforcement including those methods listed in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
      (3)   The city reserves the right if, in the sole discretion of the city,
an emergency exists, to use the following procedures: emergency procedure;
summary enforcement. In cases of emergency, where delay in abatement will
permit a continuing nuisance to unreasonably endanger public health safety or
welfare, the City Council may order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance
without first issuing an administrative citation under §
10.37 of this code of ordinances. To proceed with summary enforcement, the
officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists or is being maintained on
premises in the city and that delay in abatement of the nuisance will
unreasonably endanger public health, safety or welfare. The officer shall
notify in writing the occupant or owner of the premises of the nature of the
nuisance and of the city’s intention to seek summary enforcement and the time
and place of the City Council meeting to consider the question of summary
enforcement. The City Council shall determine whether or not the condition
identified in the notice to the owner or occupant is a nuisance, whether public
health, safety or welfare will be unreasonably endangered by delay in abatement
and may order that the nuisance be immediately terminated or abated. If the
nuisance is not immediately terminated or abated, the City Council may order
summary enforcement and abate the nuisance.
      (4)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the city, without notice or
other process, from immediately abating any condition which poses an imminent
and serious hazard to human life or safety.
   (C)   Recovery of costs. The city may recover any costs expended in abating
a nuisance as outlined in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 10.22) (Ord. 2020-03, passed 3-9-2020)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GENERAL UTILITY PROVISIONS
      
51.   SOLID WASTE
      
52.   WATER
      
53.   SEWERS
CHAPTER 50: GENERAL UTILITY PROVISIONS
Section
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Contractual contents
   
50.03   Application, connection and sale of service
   
50.04   Fixing rates and charges for utilities
   
50.05   Trunk charges
   
50.06   Water rates
   
50.07   Billing, payment and delinquency
   
50.08   Discontinued service
   
50.09   Meter readings
   
50.10   Right of entry
   
50.11   Unlawful acts
   
50.12   Service outside and inside city
   
50.13   Connection/tapping prohibited; delinquent
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this public works title, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   COMPANY, GRANTEE and FRANCHISEE. Any public utility system to which a
franchise has been granted by the city.
   CONSUMER and CUSTOMER. Any user of a utility.
   HOOK-UP. The original connection to the utility for that property.
   MUNICIPAL UTILITY. Any city-owned utility system, including, but not by way
of limitation, water and sewerage.
   SERVICE. Providing a particular utility to a customer or consumer.
   UTILITY. All utility services, whether the same be public city-owned
facilities or furnished by public utility companies.
(Prior Code, § 30.01) (Ord. 2021-02, passed 7-12-2021)
§ 50.02 CONTRACTUAL CONTENTS.
   (A)   Provisions of this public works title relating to municipal utilities
shall constitute portions of the contract between the city and all consumers of
municipal utility services. Every consumer shall be deemed to assent to the
same.
   (B)   All contracts between franchisees and consumers of utility services
other than municipal shall be in strict accord with the provisions of this
public works title.
(Prior Code, § 30.02)
§ 50.03 APPLICATION, CONNECTION AND SALE OF SERVICE.
   Application for municipal utility services shall be made upon forms supplied
by the city and strictly in accordance therewith. No connection shall be made
until consent has been received from the city to make the same. All municipal
utilities shall be sold and delivered to consumers under the then applicable
rate applied to the amount of the utilities taken as metered or ascertained in
connection with the rates.
(Prior Code, § 30.03)
§ 50.04 FIXING RATES AND CHARGES FOR UTILITIES.
   (A)   All rates and charges for municipal utilities, including, but not by
way of limitation, rates for service, permit fees, deposit, hook-up, meter
testing fees, disconnection fees, reconnection fees and penalty fees for
delinquency, shall be fixed, determined and amended by the City Council and
adopted by resolution.
   (B)   The resolution, containing the effective date thereof, shall be kept
on file and open to inspection in the office of the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer and shall be uniformly enforced.
   (C)   For the purpose of fixing the rates and charges, the Council may
categorize and classify under the various types of service; provided that, the
categorization and classification shall be included in the resolution
authorized by this section.
   (D)   Properties that contain no buildings or impervious surface as
determined by the Public Works Director will not be charged utility charges by
the city, including water, sewer and storm sewer. Any property owner that
believes his, her or their property qualifies for this exemption may submit a
written request to the Public Works Director to have utility charges halted. As
soon as the property is built upon or has impervious surface added, the
property will no longer be exempt and will begin receiving utility bills.
(Prior Code, § 30.04)
§ 50.05 TRUNK CHARGES.
   (A)   Trunk sanitary sewer and water main fees. As a condition of
subdivision plat approval, subdividers shall pay both a trunk sanitary sewer
fee and a trunk water main fee to the city to fund the sanitary sewer and water
main improvements required by the proposed development. The city shall
establish the trunk fees by resolution based on the subdivision’s acreage and
shall periodically update the fees to account for changes in costs and
revenues. The city shall incorporate these trunk fees into a development
agreement with the subdivider.
   (B)   Storm Sewer District. The city established a Storm Sewer Tax
Improvement District pursuant to M.S. Chapter 444, as it may be amended from
time to time. The District encompasses the entire geographical area of the
city. The city shall from time to time establish the Storm Sewer District fees
by resolution. As a condition of subdivision plat approval, subdividers may be
required to pay additional storm sewer fees to fund the storm sewer
improvements required by the proposed development.
(Prior Code, § 30.05)
§ 50.06 WATER RATES.
   (A)   Water rates will be periodically established by an ordinance adopted
by the City Council.
   (B)   Base rates or minimum charges shall be imposed to all utility
customers as defined in M.S. § 444.075, as it may be amended from time to time.
With the exception being second water meters used for residential irrigation
purposes.
   (C)   The city is required to comply with and adopt the state-mandated water
conservation rate structure as defined in M.S. § 103G.291, as it may be amended
from time to time.
      (1)   In addition to the standard base rate, the INCREASING BLOCK or TIER
RATE is defined as: the cost per unit of water increases as water use increases
within specified “blocks” or “tiers” in volume. The following block or tier
rate is as follows for the city residential users. Current standard base rate,
plus:
 
Tier 1 0 to 5,999 gallons is at the current per 1,000 gallon water rate
Tier 2 6,000 to 11,999 gallons is a 10% rate increase from Tier 1 rate
Tier 3 12,000 gallons and above is a 10% rate increase from Tier 2 rate
 
   (D)   With properties that have more than one water meter, the monthly water
meter totals will be added together for a total monthly water usage figure. The
tier rate structure will use this monthly total figure to calculate the total
monthly usage charge.
   (E)   Total water use in a multiple-family dwelling, which has only one
water meter for the entire dwelling, may exceed that of a single-family
dwelling. The state statue does not require individual water meters for each
residential unit within a multiple-family dwelling; however, the required
conservation rate at which the multiple-family dwellings water use is billed
must consider the number of residential units within that multiple-family
dwelling, and take into account that each residential unit is an individual
user. The number of residential units for these multiple-family dwellings shall
be updated annually.
   (F)   Seasonal residents who have their utility services disconnected will
still be charged the base rate or minimum charges.
(Prior Code, § 30.06) (Ord. 2015-01, passed 1-12-2015)
§ 50.07 BILLING, PAYMENT AND DELINQUENCY.
   (A)   (1)   Payment for all municipal utility service and charges shall be
the primary responsibility of the owner of the premises served. If a tenant
fails to pay any charge, the owner of the property is responsible for all
charges.
      (2)   The city may collect the same in a civil action or, in the
alternative and at the option of the city, as otherwise provided in this
section.
   (B)   All municipal utilities shall be billed monthly and a utility billing
statement or statements shall be mailed to each consumer each month.
   (C)   All utility accounts shall be delinquent if not paid by the twentieth
day of the month following the billing statement date. If the twentieth of the
month falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the time shall be extended
to the close of business on the next succeeding day on which normal business is
normally transacted.
   (D)   After a utility account is determined delinquent a penalty fee shall
be calculated on all delinquent accounts as determined by City Council
resolution, and the penalty fee shall be added to, and become part of, the
delinquent utility account. A past due notice may not be generated or mailed
when the past due balance is less than $25; however, the late penalty will
apply.
   (E)   (1)   On the twenty-fourth day of the month, a late fee penalty will
be applied to all utility accounts that are past due. In addition, a
delinquency notice will be generated and mailed stating that the utility
service will be disconnected on the fifth day of the following month if the
utility bill is not paid.
      (2)   If the twenty-fourth day falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal
holiday, the late fee penalty and delinquency notice will be generated on the
next regular business day.
      (3)   If the fifth day of the following month falls on a Saturday, Sunday
or legal holiday, the utility services will be disconnected on the next regular
business day.
   (F)   In the event that utility services are not needed for the entire
service period, pro-rating of utility services will accurately reflect the
usage of the services.
   (G)   If service is disconnected due to non-payment, service shall not be
restored at that location until a disconnection/reconnection charge has been
paid for each utility reconnected in addition to amounts owed for service and
administration.
   (H)   The list of unpaid utility charges plus interest shall be delivered to
the City Council for adoption in October of each year. Upon approval thereof,
the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall certify to the County Auditor the
amount due, and the County Auditor shall, thereupon, enter the amount as part
of the tax levy on the premises to be collected during the ensuing year as
authorized under M.S. § 444.075, as it may be amended from time to time. This
action may be optional or subsequent to taking legal action to collect
delinquent accounts.
   (I)   The city provides payment plans for payment of arrears pursuant to
M.S. § 216B.098, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time. The city does
not provide budget billing plans because the city is exempt from the
requirement in M.S. § 216B.098, as it may be amended from time to time, as the
city has fewer than 3,000 customers.
(Prior Code, § 30.07) (Ord. 2013-03, passed 5-13-2013)
§ 50.08 DISCONTINUED SERVICE.
   (A)   Any person desiring to discontinue the use of city utilities, or
desiring a change in their application as to change of premises or otherwise
shall notify the Utility Billing office to that effect, must give notice
thereof at the Utility Billing office at least five days previous to the
change. The person desiring the change shall schedule to have the service at
the curb stop box shut off by authorized city personnel. No unauthorized person
shall shut off the water service. Where the city water has been turned off, it
will be turned on only when:
      (1)   A reconnection fee is paid; and
      (2)   All unpaid fees, usage charges and late payment penalties are paid.
   (B)   All municipal utilities may be shut off or discontinued any time
whenever it is found that:
      (1)   The owner or occupant of the premises served, or any person working
on any connection with the municipal utility systems, has violated any
requirement of the city code related to utilities;
      (2)   Any charge for a municipal utility service, or any other financial
obligation imposed on the present owner or occupant of the premises served, is
unpaid after due notice;
      (3)   There is fraud or misrepresentation by the owner or occupant in
connection with any application for service or delivery or charges;
      (4)   An emergency condition exists as determined by the Emergency Board
with a potential to threaten public drinking water supply;
      (5)   A duly authorized employee of the city has been refused entry to
private property if the Public Works Director has determined that the entry is
necessary; or
      (6)   A temporary shut off is required by the city to complete
maintenance, repairs or replacement of the city’s utility infrastructure.
   (C)   Any time a municipal utility is disconnected, unless the situation is
deemed an emergency by the Public Works Director, the city shall provide notice
of the impending disconnection. The notice shall detail why the utility is
being disconnected, when it will be disconnected, how the property owner can
assure the utility will not be disconnected, that the property owner has the
right to challenge the disconnection and charges and who to contact to make
such a challenge.
   (D)   As provided for in M.S. § 216B.097, the Cold Weather Rule, as it may
be amended from time to time, no service of a residential customer shall be
disconnected if the disconnection affects the primary heat source for the
residential unit when the disconnection would occur during the period between
October 15 and April 15, the customer has declared inability to pay on forms
provided by the city, the household income of the customer is at or below 50%
of the state median income level as documented by the city, and the customer’s
account is current for the billing period immediately prior to October 15 or
the customer has entered into payment schedule and is reasonably current with
payments on the schedule. The city shall, between September 1 and October 15,
of each year, notify all residential customers a summary of the rights and
responsibilities of these provisions.
(Prior Code, § 30.08) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.09 METER READINGS.
   Beginning on the fifteenth of each month, the city’s Public Works Department
shall read all water meters either by remote radio read or by manual read in
accordance with each particular route. An exception will be determined by the
Public Works Director on the manual read routes during the winter months due to
deep snow cover making it impossible for a city employee to obtain meter
readings safely. When this condition exists, the Utility Billing Clerk will
take the past 12 months usage to determine an average and estimate the water
usage for that particular month.
(Prior Code, § 30.09)
§ 50.10 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   The city shall not enter a customer’s premises if: the customer has
not consented; or the city has not obtained a court order authorizing entry; or
an emergency situation involving imminent danger to life or property does not
reasonably appear to exist.
   (B)   (1)   For monthly exterior manual water meter reading purposes,
consent is implied by acceptance of utility services to enter private property
to obtain the monthly meter reading.
      (2)   Consent has to be granted by property owner before the authorized
meter reader can obtain any interior manual water meter readings.
   (C)   The city shall notify the jurisdictional law enforcement agency before
entering the customer’s premises without the customer’s consent unless it would
be unreasonable under the facts and circumstances to do so.
(Prior Code, § 30.10)
§ 50.11 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly break,
injure, mar, deface, disturb or in any way interfere with any building,
attachment, machinery apparatus, equipment, fixture or appurtenance of any
municipal utility or municipal utility system or commit any act tending to
obstruct or impair the use of any municipal utility.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to make any connection with, opening
into or alter in any way any municipal utility system without first having
applied for and received written permission to do so from the city.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to turn on or connect a utility when the
same has been turned off or disconnected by the city for non-payment of a bill,
or for any other reason, without first having obtained a permit to do so from
the city.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any person to jumper or by any means or device
fully or partially circumvent a municipal utility meter, or to knowingly use or
consume unmetered utilities or use the services of any utility system, the use
of which the proper billing authorities have no knowledge.
   (E)   Any unmetered water service on the city distribution system is
prohibited. Violators shall be subject to immediate disconnection of service
and imposition of penalty.
(Prior Code, § 30.11) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.12 SERVICE OUTSIDE AND INSIDE CITY.
   (A)   No municipal utility service to premises outside the city shall be
provided, except such as are being served on the effective date of this
section.
   (B)   Upon annexation into the city, the affected properties have one year
to connect to city utilities once they become available. In instances where
only city water is available to the property owner, the property owner may hook
up to city water at that time, or delay utility connections until both city
water and sewer services become available.
   (C)   All properties within the city for which sewer and water are available
must connect to those services within one year of both services becoming
available. All properties within the city that has both sewer and water
available shall be charged a sewer access charge, a water access charge,
monthly base rates and, if applicable, a monthly charge for sewer service
without water service.
   (D)   (1)   In the event an owner shall fail to connect to a public sewer or
water when required by this code, the city may undertake to have the connection
made and shall charge the cost thereof against the property and the charge
shall be a lien against the property.
      (2)   The charge, when made, shall bear interest at the rate of 1.5% over
the prime interest rate per annum and shall be certified to the Auditor of the
county in which the land is situated and shall be collected and remitted to the
city in the same manner as assessments for local improvements. The rights of
the city under this division (D) shall be in addition to any other remedial or
enforcement provisions of this public works title.
(Prior Code, § 30.12)
§ 50.13 CONNECTION/TAPPING PROHIBITED; DELINQUENT.
   (A)   No permit shall be granted to tap or connect with sewer or water mains
when any assessment or connection charge for the sewer or water main against
the property to be connected is in default or delinquent.
   (B)   If the assessment or connection charges are payable in installments,
no permit shall be granted unless all installments then due and payable have
been paid.
(Prior Code, § 30.13)
CHAPTER 51: SOLID WASTE
Section
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   Collection
   
51.03   Organized collection for residential waste
   
51.04   Yard waste
   
51.05   Recycling
   
51.06   Waste disposal facilities
   
51.07   Liability and indemnification
   
51.08   Charges to owner or occupant
   
51.09   Service charge
   
51.10   Assessment against property for non-payment
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      AGENCY. The State Pollution Control Agency.
      BIOSOLIDS. Any solid, semi-solid or liquid waste generated from a
municipal, commercial or industrial waste water treatment plant, water supply
treatment plant or air contaminant treatment facility or any other waste having
similar characteristics and effects.
      CITY. The City of Montrose.
      COLLECTOR. Any person who performs the act of waste collection.
      COUNCIL. The City Council of Montrose.
      COUNTY. Wright County.
      FLOODPLAIN. Any land that is subject to a 1% or greater chance of
flooding in any given year from any source as defined and determined by FEMA.
      GARBAGE. Discarded material resulting from the handling, processing,
storage, preparation, serving and consumption of food and any other putrescible
waste.
      LANDSPREADING. The placement of waste or waste byproducts on, or
incorporation of them into, the soil surface.
      LEACHATE. Liquid that has percolated through solid waste and has
extracted, dissolved or suspended materials from it.
      OPERATOR. The person or persons responsible for the operation of any
facility.
      OWNER. The person or persons who own a facility or any part of a
facility.
      PERSON. Any natural person, municipality, municipal corporation, county
or any other governmental or political subdivision or public agency, any public
or private corporation, any partnership, firm, association or other
organization, any receiver, trustee, assignee, agent or other legal
representative of any of the foregoing, or any other legal entity.
      REFUSE. Putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes, including garbage,
rubbish, ashes, incinerator ash, incinerator residue, street cleanings and
market and industrial solid wastes and municipal treatment wastes which do not
contain free moisture.
      RELEASE. Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying,
discharging, injection, escaping, leaching, dumping or disposing into the
environment which occurred at a point in time or which continues to occur.
      RUBBISH. Non-putrescible solid wastes, including ashes, consisting of
both combustible and non-combustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery or litter of any kind.
      SOURCE SEPARATION. The segregation by the generator of recyclable and
reusable materials and yard waste from mixed municipal solid waste for
collection in a separate waste stream.
      WETLAND. A surface water feature classified as a wetland by the state’s
Department of Natural Resources Wetlands Inventory of the county or by a
technical evaluation panel under the laws of the Wetland Conservation Act,
being M.S. §§ 103A.201 et seq.
      YARD WASTE. Garden wastes, leaves, lawn cuttings, weeds and prunings.
      YARD WASTE COMPOSTING FACILITY. A facility accepting yard waste
originating on other property and processing that waste to produce a useable
end product.
   (B)   Other terms shall have the meaning given them in M.S. Chapter 115A.03,
as it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 31.01)
§ 51.02 COLLECTION.
   (A)   Responsibility for collection.
      (1)   Residential mixed municipal solid waste.
         (a)   The city shall provide for collection and disposal of all
residential mixed municipal solid waste.
         (b)   All residences within the corporate limits of the city shall be
required to utilize the collection service provided by the city, except the
residences that at the time of the adoption of this code are within the
corporate limits of the city, but are not using the city’s collection service.
      (2)   Commercial. Commercial establishments and multi-resident buildings,
including, but not limited to, apartments and condominiums, offices,
manufacturing facilities, industrial facilities and retail sales establishments
shall be responsible for the satisfactory and prompt collection of all waste
accumulated at a business establishment, industry or premises and its
transportation to an appropriate waste disposal facility.
   (B)   Generators.
      (1)   Waste storage. Owners and occupants of any premises, business
establishment or industry shall be responsible for storing the generated waste
in a satisfactory manner that prevents threats to community health, safety and
welfare. Storage of waste by any collector is prohibited within the limits of
the city.
      (2)   Garbage containers. Garbage shall be placed in a durable, rust-
resistant, non-absorbent, water-tight, rodent-proof cleanable container with a
close-fitting, fly-tight cover.
      (3)   Refuse containers. Refuse must be stored in a durable, water-proof
container. Where refuse and garbage are stored together, the container must
meet the requirements for a garbage container.
      (4)   Container size and type. Container types shall be approved by the
city for the purpose intended and shall meet the above standards.
      (5)   Container maintenance. All storage containers shall be maintained
to prevent creation of a nuisance or any menace to public health.
      (6)   Exceptions. Any objects or materials too large or otherwise
unsuitable for storage containers shall be stored for collection in a pollution
and nuisance free manner.
   (C)   Collectors.
      (1)   Residential. The collection of mixed municipal solid waste from
residences in the city shall be by general city contract.
      (2)   Commercial. Solid waste collection from commercial enterprises and
multi-unit residential premises shall utilize free contracting between the
generator and a collector, except as regulated by this chapter. The collector
shall be subject to the requirements for containers, vehicles, liability for
releases and all other conditions placed on contracted collectors by this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 31.02)
§ 51.03 ORGANIZED COLLECTION FOR RESIDENTIAL WASTE.
   (A)   The city shall provide, by contract, for the collection of all mixed
municipal solid waste from all residential generators within the corporate
limits of the city. The contract for the collection shall be maintained by the
city and altered when the city, in its sole discretion and subject to
applicable state statutes and rules, deems a change or modification in the
contract is appropriate to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
community. The contract shall include a clause, approved in form by the City
Attorney, defending, indemnifying and holding the city harmless from all
liability and damages relating to any intentional or negligent act of the
collector.
   (B)   The Council shall set the maximum fee that can be charged for
collection. All collection fees shall be based on the volume of waste generated
and collected.
   (C)   Recyclable material shall be exempt from the organization of solid
waste collection upon a showing by a generator or collector that the materials
are or will be separated from mixed municipal solid waste by the generator,
separately collected and delivered for reuse in their original form or for use
in a manufacturing process.
   (D)   Any non-contracted collector operating within the city and collecting
residential mixed municipal solid waste shall be liable for any damage or
threat to community health, safety and welfare and be subject to this chapter
and the terms of the city collection contract just as if that collector was a
contracted collector.
   (E)   Collectors of waste shall utilize vehicles and containers that are
covered, leak-proof, durable, of easily cleanable construction and suitable for
the type of waste being collected. The vehicles and containers shall be cleaned
to prevent nuisances, pollution and insect breeding and shall be maintained in
good repair and serviceable condition.
   (F)   Material released from a collectors vehicle or container shall be
picked up immediately and the area properly cleaned. If the material is
hazardous in nature, the collector must immediately notify the City and comply
with all other applicable statutes, rules and regulations.
   (G)   Mixed municipal solid waste, source separated recyclable material and
yard waste are the only materials authorized for regular collection. Waste,
oil, lead acid batteries, any part of those batteries or new or used tires are
prohibited as part of the mixed municipal solid waste stream.
   (H)   Ownership of waste shall transfer from the generator to the collector
upon collection. At no time shall ownership of any waste reside in the city. If
the city comes into possession of any waste by responding to a release,
ownership shall continue to rest in the person owning the waste when released.
(Prior Code, § 31.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.04 YARD WASTE.
   (A)   All persons who are owners, lessees or occupants of any building,
commercial or residential, within the city that generates yard waste shall
separate that yard waste from all solid waste. Commingling of yard waste and
mixed municipal solid waste is prohibited.
   (B)   Yard waste that is source separated shall be bagged or bundled and set
out for disposal in accordance with policies established by resolution of the
Council. Yard waste shall not be allowed to accumulate in excessive amounts
representing a hazard to public health.
   (C)   Yard waste generated in the city shall not be disposed of in any
landfill.
   (D)   Self-composting of yard waste in a backyard composting facility or by
leaving lawn clippings in place is encouraged as an efficient, safe and cost
effective method of disposal for this waste.
(Prior Code, § 31.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.05 RECYCLING.
   (A)   Recycling shall be provided as part of the city’s regularly contracted
solid waste services. The city may enter into any contract it deems, in its
sole discretion and subject to applicable state statues and rules, appropriate
for establishing and maintaining a recycling program in the city. The city
shall charge for the provided recycling service regardless of whether a person
chooses to use the provided service or not.
   (B)   The contracted recycler is deemed the owner of the recyclables upon
collection. In the event a drop-off location is established, ownership of
recyclables shall transfer from the generator to the contracted recycler at the
time of drop off.
   (C)   Each shall submit a quarterly report to the city in the form and
containing the information requested by the city administrative staff.
   (D)   (1)   The Council has determined that, at a minimum, the following
recyclable materials are targeted for present or future recycling through the
city recycling program:
         (a)   Paper;
         (b)   Cans, including aluminum and other metal;
         (c)   Glass; and/or
         (d)   Plastic.
      (2)   Containers shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
The style, type and construction material for any containers may be designated
by the city.
   (E)   (1)   The collection, removal and disposal of recyclable material
shall be by city contract with a collector.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person other than the contracted
collector, a city employee acting with authority or any other authorized person
to distribute, collect, remove, disturb or dispose of recyclable materials
after the materials have been placed or deposited for collection.
   (F)   (1)   Source separated recyclable materials shall be delivered for
reuse in their original form or for use in a manufacturing process that does
not cause the destruction of recyclable materials in a manner that precludes
further use.
      (2)   Disposal of source separated recyclable material in any manner
other than as stated above shall operate to void the exemption from mixed
municipal solid waste and bring the material within the full scope of this
chapter.
      (3)   The collector of the material in question shall be liable for all
costs and charges relating to the proper disposal of the material after the
exemption is void.
   (G)   Nothing in this chapter shall abridge the right of any person to give
or sell his, her or their recyclable materials to any recycling program
lawfully operated for profit, non-profit or charitable purposes.
(Prior Code, § 31.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.06 WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITIES.
   (A)   No waste disposal facility of any type or kind shall be located in, on
or within 300 feet of a floodplain or a wetland. This prohibition is not
waiverable and overrides any and all waivers or conditional uses allowed.
   (B)   Location of any waste disposal facility, including, but not limited
to, a yard waste composting facility, a yard waste landspreading facility, a
construction debris disposal facility, a mixed municipal solid waste disposal
facility, an industrial waste disposal facility, a hazardous waste disposal
facility, an infectious waste disposal facility or any waste incineration
facility within the corporate limits of the city is prohibited without a permit
granted in accordance with this chapter.
      (1)   Backyard yard waste composting facilities are exempt from the
facility prohibition to the extent that they do not have any deleterious effect
on the public health, environment, surface water or ground water.
      (2)   Proof of the lack of deleterious effect is the burden of the
generator.
   (C)   It is within the discretion of the Council to grant a permit waiving
the prohibition on waste disposal facilities on a site specific basis. The
permit shall be requested and processed in the manner provided for in this code
for the application for a conditional use. This application for a permit shall
include submission of facts and plans by the proposed operator and owner of the
facility. If allowed by the Council, the facility must, at a minimum, conform
to the rules promulgated by the agency for the type of waste facility allowed.
      (1)   Facts and plans shall contain the following materials, at a
minimum, and any other materials requested by the Council:
         (a)   Name of the site owner;
         (b)   Name of the site operator;
         (c)   Address of a contact person for the facility operation;
         (d)   A telephone number for the contact person;
         (e)   Location of the site;
         (f)   An environmental impact statement or environmental assessment
worksheet as applicable, including, but not limited to, an assessment of the
potential impact on surface and ground water, the potential for litter, the
potential for particulate air pollution, the potential for runoff, the
potential for leachate formation and the potential for excessive or offensive
odors;
         (g)   A description of any processing of the waste;
         (h)   The plan for acceptance and disposal of the waste;
         (i)   The end product of the process and its planned disposition if
the waste is processed;
         (j)   A description of steps to be taken to abate, ameliorate or
negate the potential environmental hazards; and
         (k)   Any preliminary information or indications from the agency or
any other governmental or private organization relative to the potential
hazards or problems with the site.
      (2)   A decision to allow a facility constitutes a conditional use permit
and the Council may attach conditions as are appropriate to protect the public
health, safety and welfare and the environment.
      (3)   As a required condition of granting a permit, any facility allowed
within the city and its owners and operators shall provide a separate contract
indemnifying and holding the city harmless against any and all intentional and
negligent actions of the facility, its owners or operators, any employees or
any agents of the facility.
   (D)   The city may set up, operate and utilize a yard waste composting
facility without a waiver.
(Prior Code, § 31.06) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.07 LIABILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   Compliance with this chapter does not act to shift any liability
legally accruing to the generator, collector or facility owner or operator to
the city.
   (B)   Each generator of waste residing within the city shall take all
reasonable precautions necessary to protect the public from injury and shall
defend, indemnify and save the city harmless from any liability, claims,
damages, costs, judgments, expenses and claims of damages that may arise by
reason of any tort claim for bodily or personal injury, disease, death or
damage to property resulting directly or indirectly from an act or omission of
the generator.
   (C)   Each collector of waste operating within the city shall take all
reasonable precautions necessary to protect the public from injury and shall
defend, indemnify and save the city harmless from any liability, claims,
damages, costs, judgments, expenses and claims for damages that may arise by
reason of any tort claim for bodily or personal injury, disease, death or
damage to property resulting directly or indirectly from an act or omission of
the collector, its agents, employees or independent contractors.
   (D)   Each facility of any type located within the city shall take all
reasonable precautions necessary to protect the public from injury and shall
defend, indemnify and save the city harmless from any liability, claims,
damages, costs, judgments, expenses and claims for damages that may arise by
reason of any tort claim for bodily or personal injury, disease, death or
damage to property resulting directly or indirectly from an act or omission of
the facility owner or operator, his, her or their agents, employees or
independent contractors.
(Prior Code, § 31.07)
§ 51.08 CHARGES TO OWNER OR OCCUPANT.
   All garbage and refuse service accounts must be carried in the name of the
properly owner, regardless of whether or not the property owner is occupying
the residence. In the event that a tenant is occupying the residence, the
tenant may be added to the account and may pay for the service, but in the
event that the tenant does not pay the charges, any outstanding charges will be
the responsibility of the property owner.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 7-12-2021)
§ 51.09 SERVICE CHARGE.
   (A)   The city shall charge each residence served on the basis of service
rendered. The charge shall be determined by the Council, and the bill for the
charges shall be sent to all account holders on a quarterly basis.
   (B)   If the delinquent charges are not paid by the date indicated on the
bill, written notice of the delinquency shall be sent to the account holder. If
the account holder does not pay the delinquent amount within 30 days after the
date of the written notice, a penalty not to exceed 10% may be added to the
delinquent account.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 7-12-2021)
§ 51.10 ASSESSMENT AGAINST PROPERTY FOR NON-PAYMENT.
   For all accounts that remain delinquent, the city will prepare an assessment
roll each year providing for assessment of delinquent amounts against the
respective properties served, pursuant to M.S. § 443.015, as it may be amended
from time to time. After adoption of the assessment roll by the City Council,
the city shall certify to the county the amount due, which shall include
delinquent services charges, late payment penalties and interest, in an amount
not exceeding 6% per annum, as determined by the Council. The assessment
procedure is optional and does not preclude the city from using other legal
remedies to collect delinquent charges.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 7-12-2021)
CHAPTER 52: WATER
Section
   
52.01   Connections
   
52.02   Permit required
   
52.03   Water meters
   
52.04   Ownership
   
52.05   Users’ service pipes
   
52.06   City liability
   
52.07   Service initiation
   
52.08   Emergency board
   
52.09   Fire hydrants
   
52.10   Private wells and water supply systems prohibited
   
52.11   Backflow prevention
   
52.12   Cross-connection control
   
52.13   Lawn watering restrictions
 
   
52.99   Penalty
§ 52.01 CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   The purpose of the water access charge (WAC) is to establish and
impose just and equitable charges for the availability of certain municipal
utility systems, including water works systems, and related facilities, and for
the connections therewith, to pay for the construction, reconstruction, repair,
enlargement, improvement or other obtainment and maintenance, operation and use
of the facilities. The charges are authorized and shall be determined and
imposed in accordance with M.S. §§ 444.075 and 429.021, as they may be amended
from time to time.
   (B)   Water access charges (WAC) shall be levied against a property whenever
a connection is made to the city water system at a rate fixed by the City
Council, as adopted by ordinance, and may be amended from time to time. The
connection fee is charged on a per unit basis and shall be collected at the
time a building permit is applied for.
   (C)   Computation of WAC units:
      (1)   Single-family homes = one unit;
      (2)   Townhomes and duplexes = one unit per dwelling;
      (3)   Multi-family dwellings with potential for laundry facilities
included in each unit = one unit per dwelling;
      (4)   Multi-family dwellings without potential for laundry included in
each unit = 0.80 unit per dwelling;
      (5)   Mobile homes = one unit;
      (6)   Low-income and subsidized housing units = 85% of the calculated
unit (i.e., 0.85 x 0.80 for LI Multi-Family Housing without private laundry
facilities);
      (7)   Other buildings and commercial structures based on usage
equivalents as outlined in the most recent “Standard Criteria”, published by
the Metropolitan Waste Control Commission; and
      (8)   For more detailed information refer to the city’s water and sewer
access policies.
(Prior Code, § 32.01)
§ 52.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall open, make any connection with or opening into, use,
alter or disturb any public water line or appurtenance thereof without first
obtaining a developers agreement, building permit, right of way permit or other
approval from the City Administrator.
   (B)   No person, except a state licensed plumber, or a duly authorized
employee or agent of the city, will be permitted to do any work on service
pipes connected with the water system.
   (C)   Application for water service shall be made on printed forms that are
available at City Hall; they shall state the legal description, the PID, street
and official house numbers of the premises to be supplied and the nature of the
improvement to be done. Application shall be signed by the owner of the
premises or his or her authorized agent or by the occupant or person in
possession thereof. Each applicant, by application, shall subscribe to and be
obliged to be bound by the rules and regulations.
   (D)   The charge for tapping mains and the amount of the permit fee
specified shall be paid at the time the application is submitted and before
service is installed.
      (1)   The plumber requesting the tap shall give notice at least one week
in advance of the tap being made.
      (2)   The plumber must help uncover the main and locate the tap if
requested by the Public Works Director or City Engineer.
      (3)   The tap and service line up to and including the curb stop must be
inspected, and approved by the Public Works Director, or City Engineer prior to
any back filling being done.
   (E)   The written permit must be on display at the site of work at all
times.
   (F)   A water access charge will be levied for each new tap made into the
city water main or each new connection made to an existing water service that
was tapped and installed previously in accordance with the WAC policy included
in this code.
   (G)   The permit fees and water access charge fees for connecting to the
water system is set forth annually by City Council ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 32.02)
§ 52.03 WATER METERS.
   (A)   The city shall exclusively own and control the water meters to be used
in the water system. All water meters shall be installed in accordance with the
following regulations. All water meters shall be purchased by the property
owner and the purchase is non-refundable.
      (1)   Water meters shall be installed by the Public Works Department,
homeowner or a duly licensed plumber.
      (2)   The meter shall be located so the bottom is from 12 to 18 inches
above the finished floor line. The meter shall not be set more than 12 inches,
measured horizontally, from the inside line of the basement wall. Deviation
from these standards may be made only with written permission of the Public
Works Director or City Engineer. An approved yoke or horn shall be provided to
support the meter in proper vertical position.
      (3)   All meter installations shall have a ball valve on the street side
of the meter. In no case shall there be more than 12 inches of pipe exposed
between the point of entrance through the floor and the gate valve. A ball
valve shall also be installed on the house side of the meter. The ball valves
shall meet the following requirements: all valves shall be heavy duty brass,
full port ball valves with handle and FIP threading. Valves shall be
manufactured by A.Y. McDonald or Mueller. All valves shall be equipped with a
stainless steel operating handle. Ball valve thread types can be modified from
FIP to MIP to better accommodate existing fittings or meter setters.
      (4)   The water service connecting with the curb stop shall not be run
within any structure or under any basement floor for a distance of no more than
two feet, measured from the inside foundation wall, before being connected to
the water meter unless otherwise directed by the Public Works Director or City
Engineer.
      (5)   The consumer is prohibited from obstructing the meter so as to
prohibit the reading or repairing of the meter.
      (6)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to tamper with any water meter as
to avoid charges for water.
      (7)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to bypass a meter, or otherwise use
city water without making just compensation thereof, except as may be
specifically authorized in this chapter.
      (8)   Any water meter 20 years old or older may be subject for
replacement, which shall be purchased by the city at the property owner’s
expense, and shall be the maintenance responsibility of the city.
   (B)   If any meters are damaged by freezing, hot water and of the like,
either by carelessness or neglect of the owner or occupant of the premises or
other agents, the owner or occupants must pay for the repair of the damages.
The cost of ordinary maintenance and repairs of all meters owned by the city
shall be borne by the city.
   (C)   When a customer has a complaint that the bill for any past service
period is excessive, the city shall have the meter reread on request. If the
customer remains dissatisfied, they may, on a written request and payment of
the deposit set annually by City Council ordinance, have the meter tested. If
the test shows an error in the city’s favor exceeding 5% of the water consumed,
the deposit shall be refunded, an accurate meter shall be installed and the
bill adjusted accordingly. The adjustment shall not extend back more than one
service period from the date of the written request. In cases when the test
shows an accurate measurement of the water or an error in favor of the
customer, the amount deposited shall be retained by the city to cover expenses
of making the test.
   (D)   A water meter permit fee for connecting to the water system shall be
paid by the user before any water meter is installed.
   (E)   The fee shall be established by ordinance for a five-eighths-inch
meter and remote reader. The fees for larger meters will be set according to
their cost to the city. Fees paid are not refundable.
   (F)   Any unmetered water service on the city distribution system is
prohibited. Violators shall be subject to immediate disconnection of service
and imposition of penalty.
   (G)   A second water meter is allowed for outside irrigation purposes only.
The goal of the second irrigation water meter is to be more accurate in
determining the residential wastewater usage by eliminating outside water usage
that is not contributing to the waste water system.
      (1)   Residential customers shall purchase the second irrigation water
meter from the city to record water use only. The type of meter and the cost of
the meter will be determined annually by the city.
      (2)   Procedure to purchase:
         (a)   Submit a building permit application (forms are available at
City Hall or on the city website) to install a second irrigation water meter;
         (b)   After the city’s Building Inspector reviews and approves the
second irrigation water meter permit application and the second water meter and
associated permit fees are paid, the property owner shall be given the second
irrigation water meter for installation; and
         (c)   Second irrigation water meter model and serial numbers are
recorded to the property owner’s utility account by the utility billing office.
      (3)   Purchase of the second irrigation water meter is not refundable.
      (4)   The property owner shall inform the city’s Building Inspector when
the second irrigation meter has been installed so that the Building Inspector
can inspect the meter to ensure that it has been properly installed and sealed.
      (5)   The second irrigation water meter shall not reflect a base rate
charge or sewer charge.
(Prior Code, § 32.03) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.04 OWNERSHIP.
   (A)   For residential users, the city shall own, operate, and be responsible
for the portion of the service line from the main up to and including the curb
stop or gate valve shut off. The service pipe from the curb stop/gate valve to
the meter and the connections thereto shall be the property of the user.
   (B)   For commercial/industrial users, the city shall own, operate and be
responsible for the portion of the service line from the main to the right-of-
way line. The service pipe from the right-of-way line to the meter and the
connections thereto shall be the property of the user.
(Prior Code, § 32.04)
§ 52.05 USERS’ SERVICE PIPES.
   (A)   The pipe must be protected and maintained by the property owner.
   (B)   The service pipe from the city curb stop to the meter shall be three-
fourths-inch type K copper pipe or Polyethylene (PE) pipe as specified unless
otherwise directed by the Public Works Director or City Engineer to comply with
the Minnesota State Plumbing Codes:
      (1)   Polyethylene (PE) pipe shall be ENDOD ENDOPURE;
      (2)   PE pipe shall conform to Grade PE-3408 or PE-4710 pipe and shall be
rated for 200PSI working pressure, SODR 9;
      (3)   PE pipe shall conform to ASTM D-1248 & D-2737 for Copper Tube Size,
outside diameter controlled;
      (4)   PE water service pipe connections shall be compression type;
      (5)   PE pipe shall be permanently marked at 2 foot intervals indicating
Manufacture, PE material type, Date of manufacture and the like;
      (6)   Type 304 stainless steel pipe inserts/stiffeners shall be furnished
and installed in the end of the PE pipe at all connections; and
      (7)   PE pipe inserts shall meet requirements of AWWA C901 and ASTM 240-
92B.
   (C)   All joints on copper tubing shall be flared or compression-fitted and
kept to a minimum.
   (D)   No joints shall be used for a service up to 100 feet in length, and
then only one joint for each additional 100 feet in length.
   (E)   All service lines including the curb stop connection, and any joints,
must be left uncovered until inspected and approved by the Public Works
Director or City Engineer.
   (F)   The service pipe from the city water main to the curb stop and the
curb stop box and cover at the main and the boulevard are the property of the
city and all persons are forbidden to interfere with them.
   (G)   The service pipe shall be placed not less than eight feet below the
surface in all cases so arranged as to prevent rupture and stoppage by
freezing.
   (H)   In the event the user shall fail to make any necessary repairs to the
service connections or pipe within 24 hours after being notified to do so by
the Public Works Director, the Director shall forthwith disconnect the city
water from the premises.
   (I)   The installation of new service piping including curb stops in or
underneath driveways, unless otherwise directed and approved by the Public
Works Director or the City Engineer is prohibited.
   (J)   The service pipe from the city curb stop to the meter, where the water
enters the building, shall be brought through the floor in a vertical position.
   (K)   Service pipes larger than two inches in diameter shall be ductile
iron.
   (L)   All service pipes which become frozen between the curb stop and the
premises served shall be thawed at the expense of the property owner. Any
frozen pipes from the water main to the curb stop shall be thawed at the
expense of the city. It shall be strictly prohibited to use any type of
electrical device to thaw frozen pipes.
   (M)   All buildings with a fire sprinkler system shall have a separate fire
suppression system service line and domestic water service line. A shut off
valve shall be located on each line no less than five feet away from the
building. The services may be combined into one pipe within five feet of the
building.
(Prior Code, § 32.05) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.06 CITY LIABILITY.
   (A)   The city shall not be liable for any damages resulting from stopping
of the supply or flow of water as the result of breaks in any mains, service
pipes or fixtures, by reason of the breaking of machinery or stoppage for
necessary repair or any other interruption of service.
   (B)   The city will be responsible for service leaks from the main up to and
including the curb stop.
   (C)   (1)   The city shall bear the responsibility and expense to restore
any public road right-of-way (boulevard, sidewalk, curb, gutter and street) to
city specifications when the damage is a result of a problem in the main up to
and including the curb stop.
      (2)   When the damage is a result of a problem in the service line from
the curb stop to the connection to the individual property, the property owner
shall bear the responsibility and expense to restore any public road right-of-
way (boulevard, sidewalk, curb, gutter and street) to city specifications.
   (D)   (1)   In any repair related to a public main, the city will not
replace any private infrastructure and items such as landscaping, trees,
driveway surfacing and the like.
      (2)   Boulevards and utility easement areas will be brought up to grade,
raked out and seeded down with grass seed.
      (2)   Driveway areas will be brought up to grade with Class 5 and it
shall be the property owner’s responsibility to replace any surfacing.
      (3)   The city will restore any private streets to the satisfaction of
the Public Works Director.
(Prior Code, § 32.06)
§ 52.07 SERVICE INITIATION.
   No person shall turn on city water to any premises without having written
authorization from the city and until a meter has been placed on the service
and in a manner that it will register all water consumed and all other parts of
the plumbing and pipe fittings in and about the pipes are in full compliance
with the rules and regulations of this chapter and all other applicable
regulations.
   (A)   No person shall make any connection with any service pipe between the
curb stop and the meter.
   (B)   No person shall make any replacement tap or connect any tap or
connection in any water main without shutting off the water in the old tap or
connection at the connection point in the water main.
   (C)   No water will be turned on until all charges and fees are paid,
including any unpaid usage charges and late payment penalties for the premises.
(Prior Code, § 32.07) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.08 EMERGENCY BOARD.
   Because critical shortages of water may result from time to time and the
shortage may come about suddenly, the following emergency procedures are hereby
established. These procedures must be followed at all times, when the emergency
board, hereinafter established, determines that any emergency exists. The
emergency board shall consist of the Mayor and the Public Works Director.
   (A)   Whenever, in the judgment of the emergency board, the pressure or
quantities of water in any part of the city water system have become or are
about to become inadequate for fire or other needs, the emergency board shall
declare a water emergency and shall impose necessary water use restrictions to
abate the emergency and shall post and publicize the restrictions.
   (B)   Notice of confirmed, modified or the removal of water restrictions
shall be published in the city’s official and legal newspaper, and city website
at the first opportunity, and as such, other times as the emergency board deems
reasonably necessary.
   (C)   The water restrictions shall remain in effect until removed by the
action of the emergency board.
   (D)   If necessary to preserve the public health, safety and welfare and/or
the water supply system during an emergency, the emergency board may terminate
water service to any or all users.
   (E)   If the termination of water service is determined by the emergency
board to last beyond the initial emergency duration, an extension of the
termination shall be recommended from the emergency board for City Council
approval.
(Prior Code, § 32.08)
§ 52.09 FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (A)   General. All fire hydrants erected within and by the city for fire
extinguishing purposes, shall hereby be declared to be public hydrants unless
specified under a separate city-approved agreement. Except for the Director of
Public Works, no person other than members of the Fire Department of the city,
and then only for the uses and purposes of the Department, shall open any
hydrant, or remove, or attempt to remove there from any matter or thing
designated or intended for the protection of the hydrant or in any manner
interfere or intermeddle with any hydrant. The Public Works Director of the
city or its agent may grant any suitable person permission to open any hydrant,
and draw water therefrom, in which event the person shall not open the hydrant
to any greater extent, nor keep the hydrant open any greater length of time,
nor draw water therefrom for any purpose, not in any greater quantity than may
be specified in the permit. No person authorized to open hydrants shall
delegate his or her authority to another, nor let out or permit any person to
take wrenches furnished him or her, nor permit the wrenches to be taken from
any facility of the city, except for purposes strictly connected with the Fire
Department, or as they accompany firefighting equipment at fires.
   (B)   Public hydrants. No hydrants, except public drinking fountains, shall
be placed within the public right-of-way of any street, unless the hydrants are
securely closed and protected against general use.
   (C)   Drinking fountains. No drinking fountains shall be erected for public
use which have openings by which they can be used as a source of domestic water
supply.
   (D)   Private hydrants. If proprietors of lumber yards, manufacturing
establishments, halls, stores, elevators, warehouses, hotels, mobile home parks
or public buildings, who are hooked up to the city water supply, wish to lay
large pipes with hydrants and hose couplings to be used only in case of fire,
they shall be permitted to connect with street mains at their own expense, upon
application to the City Council and under its direction. The city shall have
the right to inspect and flush the hydrants when deemed necessary with all
associated maintenance costs being the responsibility of the hydrant owner.
(Prior Code, § 32.09) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.10 PRIVATE WELLS AND WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. A system owned and operated by a person for
collection and delivery of piped water into commercial, industrial or
residential buildings or structures.
   (B)   No water pipe of the municipal water supply shall be connected with
any pump, well, pipe, tank or any device that is connected with any other
source of water supply and when such are found, the Public Works Director or
City Engineer shall notify the owner or occupant to disconnect the same and, if
not done immediately, the water supply shall be turned off.
   (C)   The city is required to comply with the state-mandated wellhead
protection program. The city must protect the aquifer from contamination from
private as well as public sources within its jurisdiction. The city must also
protect the public water system from contaminating cross-connections made from
private wells. These connections are very hard to regulate. For that reason,
the city prohibits private water wells or any private water supply system where
city water is available. Any property that contains a private water well or
private water supply system must discontinue use of the well or system and
connect to city water within one year of city water becoming available.
   (D)   A licensed well contractor must properly seal any existing private
well at the owner’s expense that is within city limits.
   (E)   The City Council may allow the use of an existing private well if the
following conditions exist:
      (1)   The well is located on property within the Urban Reserve Zoning
District; and
      (2)   The well is being utilized for agricultural purposes only.
(Prior Code, § 32.10) (Ord. 2013-07, passed 10-14-2013) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.11 BACKFLOW PREVENTION.
   (A)   Approved devices or assemblies for the protection of the potable water
supply must be installed at any plumbing fixture or equipment where backflow or
back-siphonage may occur and where a minimum air gap cannot be provided between
the water outlet to the fixture or equipment and its flood level rim.
   (B)   Any devise or assembly for the prevention of backflow or back-
siphonage installed shall have first been certified by a recognized testing
laboratory and have a certification number clearly visible on the devise. AWWA,
ASSE and USC are the certified labs recognized by the City Public Works
Director, City Engineer and City Inspectors.
   (C)   The installation of reduced pressure backflow preventers shall be
permitted only when a periodic testing and inspection program conducted by
qualified, accredited personnel will be provided by an agency acceptable to the
Public Works Director or the City Engineer. Inspection intervals shall not
exceed one year, and overhaul intervals shall not exceed five years. The Public
Works Director or the City Engineer may require more frequent testing if deemed
necessary to assure protection of the potable water. Backflow preventers shall
be inspected frequently after initial installation to assure that they have
been properly installed and that debris resulting from piping installation has
not interfered with the functioning of the assembly.
(Prior Code, § 32.11)
§ 52.12 CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL.
   (A)   Cross-connection between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
safety are prohibited, except when and where, as approved by the Public Works
Director or City Engineer having jurisdiction, suitable protective devises such
as air breaks, break tanks, RPZs or equal, are installed, tested and maintained
to ensure proper operation on a continuing basis.
   (B)   All industrial and commercial customers must have their facilities
inspected and audited by a qualified accredited person from any agency approved
by the Public Works Director or the City Engineer. The inspection is to
determine whether all applicable plumbing fixtures and/or processes that
require backflow and cross connection control devices have the appropriate
control devices installed and that they are installed properly and that all
appropriate maintenance has been performed to date. The audit will show a
listing of all such devices, make and model, serial number and ASSE, AWWA or
USC number. The accredited person and/or agency shall submit a signed certified
report to the city’s Public Works Department and the facility that the person
and/or agency is doing the work for. These records will be kept for a period of
seven years. A new inspection of the entire facility is required whenever a
substantial modification to the existing facility is done. A new audit is
required whenever control devices are replaced or added. The Public Works
Director or the City Engineer may require more frequent inspections or audits
if deemed necessary to assure protection of the potable water system.
(Prior Code, § 32.12) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.13 LAWN WATERING RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The Public Works Director shall be given the authority to implement
emergency lawn watering restrictions to restrict water use during such periods.
The Public Works Director shall notify utility users of a watering ban by
publishing notice in the city’s legal newspaper, city website and/or local
television station or radio station.
      (1)   Stage 1 (Mild). A request for voluntary reduction measures will be
implemented when city wells operate for more than 20 hours per day for three
consecutive days or as deemed necessary by the Public Works Director.
      (2)   Stage 2 (Moderate). Residents with an odd house number shall water
lawns or wash cars when necessary only on odd numbered calendar days, and those
with even numbered addresses shall water lawns or wash cars only on even
numbered days. Lawns shall not be watered between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m. This mandatory reduction measure will be implemented when city wells
operate for more than 20 hours per day for five consecutive days or as deemed
necessary by the Public Works Director.
      (3)   Stage 3 (Severe). In extreme cases, the Public Works Director shall
have the authority to issue a total watering ban until the time the situation
ceases to exist. This mandatory ban will be implemented when the city wells
operate for more than 20 hours per day for seven consecutive days or as deemed
necessary by the Public Works Director.
      (4)   Critical water deficiency, under M.S. § 103G.291, as it may be
amended from time to time. As authorized by executive order from the Governor
and as provided in the above stages.
   (B)   An exception may be granted for recently established lawns. Those
lawns may be watered daily for up to one month after installation, but only
during the hours listed above.
(Prior Code, § 32.13) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   The penalty for violating §
52.13 of this chapter shall be a warning for the first day of violation, a $25
per day fine for the second violation and a $50 per day fine for the third
violation.
(Prior Code, § 32.13)
CHAPTER 53: SEWERS
Section
   
53.01   Purpose and policy
   
53.02   Definitions
   
53.03   Connections
   
53.04   Building sewers and connections
   
53.05   Ownership
   
53.06   City liability
   
53.07   Connections, alterations, main and lateral sewers
   
53.08   Protection from damage
   
53.09   Use of public sewers
   
53.10   Private systems prohibited
   
53.11   Industrial uses and users
   
53.12   Limitations on wastewater strength
   
53.13   Discharge of certain materials prohibited
   
53.14   Accidental discharges
   
53.15   Monitoring
   
53.16   Confidential information
   
53.17   Garage floor drains
   
53.18   Sump pumps
   
53.19   Point of sale certification of sanitary sewer service compliance
§ 53.01 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for discharges of
wastewater to the city’s facilities and enables the city to comply with all
state (Minnesota Pollution Control Agency) and federal (U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency) laws.
   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:
      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city’s
facilities which will interfere with the operation of the facilities or the
treatment or disposal of wastewater; and
      (2)   To provide for the efficient and safe collection, conveyance and
treatment of wastewater from the city.
   (C)   This chapter provides for the regulation of discharges into the city’s
wastewater facilities through enforcement of the general requirements for all
users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, provides for penalty
relief, requires user reporting and provides for the setting of fees necessary
to carry out the program established herein.
   (D)   This chapter shall apply to the city and users of the city’s
facilities.
(Prior Code, § 33.01)
§ 53.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Pub. Law No. 92-500 and the
Clean Water Act, Pub. Law No. 95-217, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq., as
amended.
   BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the inner face of the
building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   CARBONACEOUS BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (CBOD). The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter, in the presence of a
nitrification inhibitor, under standard laboratory procedures in five days at
20°C expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter-mg/
l).
   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the chemical
oxidation of organic matter, expressed in milligrams per liter, as determined
in accordance with standard laboratory procedure as set out in the latest
edition of “Standard Methods of the Examination of Water and Wastewater”.
   COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any use, such as air conditioning,
cooling or refrigeration, or during which the only pollutant added to the water
is heat.
   DIRECTOR. The Public Works Director.
   DOMESTIC WASTE. Wastes from residential users and from the sanitary
conveniences of multiple dwellings, commercial buildings, institutions and
industrial facilities.
   EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
   FACILITIES. The system of trunk and lateral lines, gravity and force mains,
pumps, lift stations, wastewater water treatment facilities and other
appurtenance constructed to collect and convey wastewater from the city.
   FLOW. The quantity of wastewater expressed in gallons or cubic feet per 24
hours.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes resulting from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage of
meat, fish, fowl, fruit, vegetables and condemned food.
   GENERAL PRETREATMENT REGULATIONS. The general pretreatment regulations for
existing and new sources of pollution promulgated by the EPA under § 307(b) and
(c) of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1317 (b) and (c), and found at 40 C.F.R.
part 403.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE. The introduction of pollutants or wastes into the
facilities from any non- domestic source regulated under § 301(b), (c) or (d)
of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1311(b), (c) or (d).
   INDUSTRIAL USER. A source of indirect discharge.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Solid, liquid or gaseous wastes, including cooling water,
resulting from any industrial, manufacturing or business process, or from the
development, recovery or processing of a natural resource.
   INTERFERENCE. A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources inhibits or disrupts the facilities, the city’s
treatment processes or operations or the city’s biosolids processes, use or
disposal and, therefore, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of any
NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage biosolids use or disposal with
statutory provisions and regulations or permits.
   MAY. The act is permissive.
   MPCA. The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. Any permit
or requirements issued by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA)
pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended (33 U.S.C. §§
1251 et seq.); for the purpose of regulating the discharge of wastewater,
industrial wastes or other wastes under the authority of § 402 of the Act,
being 33 U.S.C. § 1342.
   ORDINANCE. The set of rules contained herein and in the city’s Sewer Rate
and Cost Recovery Ordinance.
   OTHER WASTES. Other substances, except wastewater and industrial wastes.
   PERSON. The state or any agency or institution thereof, any municipality,
governmental subdivision, public or private corporation, individual,
partnership or other entity, including, but not limited to, association,
commission or any interstate body, and including any officer or governing or
managing body of any municipality, governmental subdivision or public or
private corporation or other entity.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
   PRETREATMENT. The process of reducing the amount of pollutants, eliminating
pollutants or altering the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a
less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing
the pollutants into the facilities. The reduction, elimination or alteration
may be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes
or other means, except as prohibited by this chapter.
   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Standards for industrial groups (categories)
promulgated by the EPA pursuant to the acts which regulate the quality of
effluent discharge to publicly owned treatment works and must be met by all
users subject to the standards.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. The unit of municipal government and its people responsible
for the operation of the facilities and this chapter.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). The treatment works as defined by §
212 of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1292, which is owned by the municipality (as
defined by § 502(4) of the Act), being 33 U.S.C. § 1362. This includes any
devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation
of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes
sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a POTW
plant. The term also means the municipality as defined in § 502(4) of the Act,
which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from
such a treatment works plant.
   RULES. The waste discharge rules for the city’s disposal system contained
herein.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries wastewater and to which storm, surface
and ground water are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE BIOSOLIDS. Solids and associated liquids in municipal wastewater
which are encountered and concentrated by a municipal wastewater treatment
plant.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater, industrial waste or other
waste liquids.
   SEWER SYSTEM. Pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, force mains and all
other devices and appliances appurtenant thereto, used for collecting or
conducting wastewater.
   SHALL. The act is mandatory.
   SLUG. Any waste discharge which, in concentration of any given constituent
or in quantity of flow, exceeds four times the average 24-hour concentration or
flow during normal operation which may, by itself or in combination with other
wastes, cause an interference within the POTW.
   STATE. The State of Minnesota or its designated agency, the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency (MPCA).
   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. A sewer which carries storm and surface water
and drainage, but excludes wastewater and industrial wastes, other than
unpolluted cooling or process water.
   STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS). The total suspended matter that floats on the surface
of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is
removable by a standard glass fiber filter.
   TOTAL TOXIC ORGANICS. The summation of all values greater than 0.01 mg/l of
toxic organics listed in § 307(A) of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a).
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Clean water uncontaminated by industrial wastes, other
wastes or any substance which renders the water unclean, or noxious, or impure
so as to be actually or potentially harmful or detrimental or injurious to
public health, safety or welfare, to domestic, commercial, industrial or
recreational use, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic
life.
   USER. Any person who discharges, causes or permits the discharge of
wastewater into the facilities.
   WASTE TRANSPORT HAULER. An industrial user who transports industrial or
domestic waste for the purpose of discharge into the city’s POTW.
   WASTEWATER. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions,
together with any ground water, surface water and storm water that may be
present, whether treated or untreated, which is discharged into or permitted to
enter the facilities.
(Prior Code, § 33.02)
§ 53.03 CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   The purpose of the sewer access charge (SAC) is to establish and
impose just and equitable charges for the availability of certain municipal
utility systems, including the city sewer system, and related facilities, and
for the connection therewith, to pay for the construction, reconstruction,
repair, enlargement, improvement or other obtainment and maintenance, operation
and use of the facilities. The charges are authorized and shall be determined
and imposed in accordance with M.S. §§ 444.075 and 429.021, as they may be
amended from time to time.
   (B)   Sewer access charges (SAC) shall be levied against a property whenever
a connection is made to the city sewer system at a rate fixed by the City
Council, as adopted by ordinance, and may be amended from time to time. The
connection fee is charged on a per unit basis and shall be collected at the
time a building permit is applied for.
   (C)   Computation of SAC units:
      (1)   Single-family home = one unit;
      (2)   Townhomes and duplexes = one unit per dwelling;
      (3)   Multi-family dwellings with a potential for laundry facilities
included in each unit = one unit per dwelling;
      (4)   Multi-family dwellings without potential for laundry included in
each unit = 0.80 unit per dwelling;
      (5)   Mobile homes = one unit;
      (6)   Low- income and subsidized housing units = 85% of the calculated
unit (i.e., 0.85 x 0.80 for LI Multi-Family Housing without private laundry
facilities);
      (7)   Other buildings and commercial structures based on usage
equivalents as outlined in the most recent “Standard Criteria”, published by
the Metropolitan Waste Control Commission; and
      (8)   For more detailed information refer to the city’s water and sewer
access policies.
(Prior Code, § 33.03)
§ 53.04 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No person, unless authorized, shall uncover, make any connections
with, or disturb any portion of the facilities, except in accordance with the
applicable provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection
of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify
and hold harmless the city from any loss or damage to the facilities that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
   (C)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, unless a special permit is issued by the city for extenuating
circumstances. Such a permit shall require a written agreement between the
property owners and the city as to the share of the costs of construction and
maintenance that each will contribute.
   (D)   Old building sewers may be used in connections with new buildings only
when they are found, upon examination and testing by the city at the property
owner’s expense, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   (1)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a
building sewer, and the method to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and
regulations.
      (2)   In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of “Water
Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9” and applicable American
Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM) standards shall apply.
   (F)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, the
building drain shall be provided with a lifting device approved by the city and
discharged to the building sewer.
   (G)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or ground
water to a building sewer or building drain that is connected directly or
indirectly to the facilities.
   (H)   The construction of the building sewer and its connection to the
facilities shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing
codes, the sewer specifications included herein or other applicable rules and
regulations and the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
“Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9” and the American
Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM). All such construction shall be made
gas-tight and water-tight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the city before installation.
   (I)   The city shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction and, in any event, the applicant for the connection shall notify
the city when the work is ready for final inspection and no underground
portions shall be covered before the final inspection is completed. The
connection shall be made under the supervision of the city or its
representative.
   (J)   Any new connections to the facilities shall be prohibited unless
sufficient capacity is available in all downstream portions of the facilities
and at the POTW, including, but not limited to, capacity for flow, CBOD and
suspended solids, as determined by the city.
(Prior Code, § 33.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.05 OWNERSHIP.
   The city shall own, operate and be responsible for the public sewer main
lines. The sewer service line including the connection of the sewer service
line to the sewer main line shall be the property of the user.
(Prior Code, § 33.05)
§ 53.06 CITY LIABILITY.
   (A)   The city shall not be liable for any damages resulting from stopping
of the septic system as the result of breaks in any sewer mains, sewer service
pipes or fixtures, by reason of the breaking of machinery or stoppage for
necessary repair or any other interruption of service.
   (B)   The city will be responsible for the mainline sanitary sewer. The city
is not responsible for anything between the sewer main and the connection to
the property, including the service wye on the sewer main.
   (C)   The city shall bear the responsibility and expense to restore any
public road right-of-way (boulevard, sidewalk, curb, gutter and street) to city
specifications when the damage is a result of a problem in the main. When the
damage is a result of a problem in the service line from the connection to the
main to the connection to the individual property, the property owner shall
bear the responsibility and expense to restore any public road right-of-way
(boulevard, sidewalk, curb, gutter and street) to city specifications.
   (D)   In any repair related to a public main, the city will not replace any
private infrastructure and items such as landscaping, trees, driveway surfacing
and the like. Boulevards and utility easement areas will be brought up to
grade, raked out and seeded down with grass seed. Driveway areas will be
brought up to grade with Class 5 and it shall be the property owner’s
responsibility to replace any surfacing. The city will restore any private
streets to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director.
(Prior Code, § 33.06)
§ 53.07 CONNECTIONS, ALTERATIONS, MAIN AND LATERAL SEWERS.
   (A)   No person, unless authorized, shall uncover, make any connections with
or opening into, use, alter or disturb any portion of the facilities without
first obtaining a written permit from the city. The city may charge a
reasonable permit fee to cover the costs of inspections associated with
alterations or connections to the facilities as well as administrative expenses
incurred by the city on account of the alterations and connections.
   (B)   No main or lateral sewer shall be constructed in the city (except
house or building service sewers), except by the city. No such main or lateral
sewer shall be considered to be a part of the facilities unless accepted by the
city.
   (C)   No lift station or check valve shall be installed on any portion of
the facilities (except house or building service sewers), except by the city.
No such lift station or check valve shall be considered to be a part of the
facilities unless accepted by the city.
   (D)   The size, slope, alignment, material of construction, methods to be
used in excavation, placing of pipe, jointing, testing, backfilling and other
work connected with the construction of sewers shall conform to the
requirements of the city.
(Prior Code, § 33.07) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.08 PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.
   No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the facilities.
(Prior Code, § 33.08) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.09 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to discharge into any natural outlet within the
city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any wastewater or other
polluted water.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful within the city to construct or maintain any
privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used
for the disposal of wastewater. Temporary portable toilet facilities may be
permitted by special permit issued by the city for the purpose of providing
toilet services for construction projects or special events or purposes.
   (C)   Construction of any new structures within the city from which
wastewater is or shall be discharged shall not occur without first securing a
connection to the facilities.
   (D)   On commercial or industrial property, when there is going to be any
change in sewer use, including, but not limited to flow, volume, type or
strength, the property owner must notify the city of the change and obtain city
approval before any change can occur.
   (E)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged directly or
indirectly any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, unpolluted cooling or process water to the facilities
unless there is no prudent and feasible alternative and unless as approved by
the city.
   (F)   Storm water and all other unpolluted water shall be discharged to a
storm sewer or other appropriate outlet, subject to existing regulatory
requirements, including the requirement to obtain an NPDES permit by the MPCA,
when necessary.
(Prior Code, § 33.09) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.10 PRIVATE SYSTEMS PROHIBITED.
   All private septic systems and other similar facilities shall be properly
abandoned or removed within one year of both sanitary sewer and water service
becoming available. Where both septic sewer and water service is available,
private septic systems are prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 33.10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.11 INDUSTRIAL USES AND USERS.
   All industrial users are required to meet all state and MPCA regulations and
must submit to the city a copy of the required state and MPCA permits.
(Prior Code, § 33.11) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.12 LIMITATIONS ON WASTEWATER STRENGTH.
   (A)   Federal pretreatment standards. Federal pretreatment standards and
general regulations promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) pursuant to the Act shall be met by all users which are subject to such
standards in any instance where they are more stringent than the limitations in
this chapter unless the Director has applied for, and obtained from the MPCA,
approval to modify the specific limits in the federal pretreatment standards.
In all other respects, industrial users subject to pretreatment standards shall
comply with all provisions of these rules and any permit issued thereunder,
notwithstanding less stringent provisions of the general pretreatment
regulations or any applicable pretreatment standard.
   (B)   State requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharges
shall be met by all users which are subject to such standards in any instance
in which they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or
those in this chapter.
   (C)   City’s right of revision. The city reserves the right to establish by
ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the
facilities if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives of this chapter.
   (D)   Dilution. No user shall increase the use of process water or, in any
way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in any
local or state requirements or federal pretreatment standards.
   (E)   Reports. Reports specified in 40 C.F.R. § 403.12 of the general
pretreatment regulations shall be submitted to the city by affected users.
(Prior Code, § 33.12) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.13 DISCHARGE OF CERTAIN MATERIALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   General. No person shall discharge or cause or allow to be discharged,
directly or indirectly, into the facilities any of the following waste
pollutants containing concentrations in excess of the following maximum
limitations for any operating day:
      (1)   All waste of any type generated from any source outside the
designated sewer service area as provided for in this chapter;
      (2)   All waste generated from septic tank contents, privy vault
contents, sewage holding tanks and the like generated from within the limits of
the designated sewer service area;
      (3)   Any wastes which may directly or indirectly impair the proper
functioning of the city’s POTW;
      (4)   Any wastes the strength or pollutional effects of which are not
effectively altered by ordinary treatment processes, or the presence of which
in the receiving stream would violate state and federal water quality
standards;
      (5)   Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other
substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the
city’s POTW or to the operation of the facilities. Prohibited materials
include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene,
xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates,
perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, sulfides, and any wastes with a
closed-cup flash point of less than 140°F (60°C);
      (6)   Solid or viscous substances that will or may cause obstruction to
the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the city’s
POTW, such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage with particles greater than
one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones,
hair, hides or fleshing, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand,
spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass
clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastic, gas, tar
asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating
oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes;
      (7)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or more than 9.0 or having
any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, or personnel of the city’s POTW;
      (8)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to inhibit or disrupt
any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or
create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment
system. A TOXIC POLLUTANT shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant
identified pursuant to § 307(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act,
being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), as amended;
      (9)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either
singly or by interaction with other wastes are capable of creating a public
nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers
for their maintenance and repair;
      (10)   Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions;
      (11)   Any wastewater which creates conditions at or near the city’s POTW
that violate any statute or any rule, regulation or ordinance of any public
agency or state or federal regulatory body;
      (12)   Any wastewater with CBOD in excess of 260 mg/l and TSS in excess
of 280 mg/l;
      (13)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F (65.6°C),
or causing, individually or in combination with other wastewater, the influent
at the city’s POTW to have a temperature exceeding 104°F (40°C) or having heat
that will inhibit biological activity in the city’s POTW resulting in
interference;
      (14)   Any SLUG LOAD, which shall mean any pollutant, including oxygen
demand pollutants (CBOD and the like), released in a discharge of the volume or
strength as to cause inhibition or disruption in the city’s treatment works;
      (15)   Non-contact cooling water or unpolluted storm or ground water;
      (16)   Concentrations of mineral or animal origin of greater than 50 mg/
l whether or not emulsified;
      (17)   Wastewater containing inert suspended solids, such as, but not
limited to, fuller’s earth, lime slurries and lime residues, or of dissolved
solids, such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate in such
quantities that they would cause disruption with the city’s POTW;
      (18)   Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such a half-life or
concentration that they are in non- compliance with standards issued by the
appropriate authority having control over their use and which will or are
likely to cause damage or hazards to the city’s POTW or the personnel operating
it; and
      (19)   Wastewater containing the following substances in excess of the
limits shown herein:
Pollutants Maximum Allowable Concentration* (mg/l)
Pollutants      Maximum Allowable Concentration* (mg/l)
Arsenic         0.13
Cadmium         0.091
Chromium, total 2.28
Copper          2.76
Cyanide, total  3.11
Lead            0.79
Mercury         0.016
Molybdenum      0.11
Nickel          0.75
Selenium        0.19
Silver          0.56
Zinc            4.23
Notes to Table:
*Based on a 24-hour flow proportional composite sample of a total discharge
from the facilities.
 
   (B)   Fats, oils and grease. Any wastewater containing fats, oils or grease
whether emulsified or not, in excess of 50 mg/l or containing substances that
may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F (0°C) and 150°F
(65.6°C); or as identified in the most current EPA method as listed in 40
C.F.R. § 136.3 shall be pre-treated by the user in accordance with the city’s
Fats, Oils and Grease Management Policy. All operation, maintenance, management
and reporting of the pretreatment operations shall also be in accordance with
the city’s Fats, Oils and Grease Management Policy.
   (C)   Activity. All waste transport hauler activity, dumping and discharge
is prohibited within city limits.
   (D)   Connection to system.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to make or maintain a connection
between eave troughs, rainspouts, footing drains or any other conductor used to
carry natural precipitation or ground water and the sanitary system or any part
thereof.
      (2)   Any property owner in violation of this section and, upon receiving
notice of the violation, shall disconnect the conductor from the facilities.
Any property owner in violation of this section shall be assessed a monthly
surcharge, the amount of which will be established by the Council, for each
month that the conductor is not permanently disconnected. Failure to
permanently disconnect the conductor, or reconnection of a disconnected
conductor, may result in the suspension of facilities.
   (E)   Approval. It is unlawful for any person to construct, alter or extend
any sewer connected or proposed to be connected to the facilities without first
having the plans and specifications therefor approved by the city.
   (F)   Conformance. It is unlawful for any owner, tenant, agent, occupant or
other person having charge of any premises to maintain thereon any drain or
sewer connected with the facilities in a clogged, obstructed, broken or damaged
condition or not in conformance with the existing Plumbing Code.
   (G)   Unhealthful matter. It is unlawful for any person to discharge, or
cause or permit to be discharged, any sewage or unhealthful matter into any
lake, natural ravine or public waters.
   (H)   Storm sewer. It is unlawful to discharge storm water or any other
unpolluted drainage anywhere other than a specifically designed storm sewer or
to a natural outlet approved by the city and other regulatory agencies.
(Prior Code, § 33.13) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.14 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES.
   (A)   Accidental discharges of prohibited waste into the facilities,
directly or through another disposal system, or to any place from which the
waste may enter the facilities, shall be reported to the city by the persons
responsible for the discharge, or by the owner or occupant of the premises
where the discharge occurred, immediately upon obtaining knowledge of the fact
of the discharge. The notification will not relieve users of liability for any
expense, loss or damage to the wastewater disposal system or treatment process,
or for any fines imposed on the city on account thereof under any state or
federal law. The responsible person shall take immediate action as is
reasonably possible to minimize or abate the prohibited discharge.
   (B)   The responsible person shall send a letter describing the prohibited
discharge to the city within seven days after obtaining knowledge of the
discharge. The letter shall include the following information:
      (1)   The time and location of the spill;
      (2)   Description of the accidentally discharged waste, including
estimate of pollutant concentrations;
      (3)   Time period and volume of wastewater discharged;
      (4)   Actions taken to correct or control the spill; and
      (5)   A schedule of corrective measures to prevent further spill
occurrences.
(Prior Code, § 33.14) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.15 MONITORING.
   (A)   Monitoring facilities.
      (1)   When required by the city, a user shall install a suitable control
structure, together with the necessary meters and other appurtenances at or
near the service connection, to facilitate observation sampling, flow
measurement and measurement of the wastes. The structure and equipment, when
required, shall be constructed at the user’s expense in accordance with plans
approved by the city and shall be maintained by the user so as to be safe and
accessible at all times.
      (2)   The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user’s
premises but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause
undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed elsewhere.
   (B)   Flow measurement.
      (1)   A user, when required by the city, shall install and maintain a
flow measurement device for instantaneous rate and/or cumulative flow volume
determinations. Metered water supply may be used in lieu of flow measurement
devices if it can be documented that the water usage and waste discharge are
the same, or where a measurable adjustment to the metered supply can be made to
determine the waste volume.
      (2)   Meters and flow records shall be maintained at the user’s expense
in good operating condition at all times. The user shall notify the city in
writing within five days in the event that the user becomes aware that the
meter or flow recorder has failed to accurately register the flow. The user
shall also notify the city of the user’s intention to alter the installation of
a meter or flow recorder so as to affect the accurate recording of industrial
waste entering the facilities.
   (C)   City’s self-monitoring analyses. All measurements, tests and analyses
of the characteristics of water and wastes shall be determined in accordance
with EPA guidelines established in 40 C.F.R. part 136 and 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(g)
of the general pretreatment regulations. Representative samples of the city’s
waste shall be collected on a normal operating day.
   (D)   Self-monitoring reports. The city shall complete and submit accurate
routine selfmonitoring reports.
   (E)   Inspection and sampling.
      (1)   The city may conduct such tests as are necessary to enforce this
chapter, and employees of the city may enter upon any property for the purpose
of taking samples, obtaining information or conducting surveys or
investigations relating to the enforcement. Entry shall be made during
operating hours unless circumstances require otherwise. In all cases where
tests are conducted by the city for the purpose of determining whether the user
is in compliance with regulations, the cost of the tests shall be charged to
the user and added to the user’s user fee. In those cases where the city
determines that the nature or volume of a particular user’s wastewater requires
more frequent than normal testing, the city may charge the user for the tests,
after giving the user ten days’ written notice of its intention to do so, and
the cost thereof shall be added to the user’s user fee. Duly authorized
employees of the city, MPCA and EPA bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. Those employees shall have no authority to
inquire into any processes, except as is necessary to determine the kind and
source of the discharge to the facilities.
      (2)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred
to in this section, the authorized employees of the city shall observe all
safety rules applicable to the premises established by the user.
      (3)   Duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials
and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through
which the city holds an easement for the purpose of, but not limited to,
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any
portion of the facilities lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent
work, if any, on the easement shall be done in all accordance with the terms of
the easement pertaining to the private property involved.
   (F)   Testing procedures. Testing procedures for the analysis of pollutants
shall conform to the guidelines established in the EPA Code of Regulations, 40
C.F.R. part 136 and 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(g) of the federal pretreatment
regulations.
   (G)   Wastewater discharge records. Wastewater discharge records of the city
shall be kept by the city for a period of not less than five years or as
otherwise required by law.
(Prior Code, § 33.15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.16 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits, monitoring programs and from inspections shall be
available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction
unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the city that the release of the information would divulge
information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade
secrets of the user.
   (B)   When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a
report that might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written
request to governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter, the NPDES
permit, state disposal system permit, and/or the pretreatment programs;
provided, however, that, the portions of a report shall be available for use by
the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information.
   (C)   Information accepted by the city as confidential shall not be
transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the city
until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the user.
(Prior Code, § 33.16)
§ 53.17 GARAGE FLOOR DRAINS.
   (A)   Purpose and applicability.
      (1)   This section is hereby established in order to safely discharge oil
and/or flammable liquid wastes when the waste is discharged into building
drainage systems (or other point of disposal) when floor drains or trench
drains are provided.
      (2)   This section shall apply to all new plumbing systems and parts of
existing systems which will be altered, extended or repaired, contained in
enclosed garages housing motor vehicles, repair garages, gasoline stations with
grease racks, work or wash racks, auto washes, and all buildings where oil and/
or flammable wastes are produced located in the city. The systems will be
inspected and tested by the city or its designated authority and the inspection
and enforcement is subject to the applicable provisions of the state’s Plumbing
Code, being Minn. Rules, Chapter 4714, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Oil and flammable liquids separator.
      (1)   All enclosed garages housing motor vehicles, repair garages,
gasoline stations with grease racks, work or wash racks, auto washes and all
buildings where oily and/or flammable liquid wastes are produced shall have a
separator installed into which all oil, grease and sand bearing and/or
flammable wastes shall be discharged before emptying into the building drainage
system or other point of disposal, when floor drains or trench drains are
provided.
      (2)   Each separator shall be of watertight construction and of not less
than 35 cubic feet holding capacity, be provided with a water seal of not less
than three inches on the inlet and not less than 18 inches on the outlet. The
minimum depth below the invert of the discharge drain shall be three feet. The
minimum size of the discharge drain shall be four inches. The separator may be
constructed of monolithic poured reinforced concrete with a minimum floor and
wall thickness of six inches, or of iron or steel of a minimum thickness of
three-sixteenths inch, protected with an approved corrosion-resistant coating
on both the inside and outside.
      (3)   The separator must be provided with a non-perforated iron or steel
cover and ring of not less than 24 inches in diameter, and the air space in the
top of the tank must have a three-inch vent pipe, constructed of approved
metallic material, extending separately to a point at least 12 inches above the
roof of the building. Drains and piping from motor vehicle areas must be a
minimum of three inches in size. Drains discharging to an interceptor must not
be trapped and must be constructed so as not to retain liquids. In motor
vehicle wash facilities, a sand interceptor which meets the requirements of
Minn. Rules part 4715.1130, subpart 1 (Minnesota Plumbing Code); except that,
no water seal is permitted, may be installed to receive wastes before
discharging into a flammable waste separator.
      (4)   No cleanout, mechanical joint or backwater valve shall be installed
inside the separator which could provide a bypass of the trap seal. Only wastes
that require separation shall discharge into the separator; except that, a
water supplied and trapped sink may be connected to the vent of the separator.
Whenever the outlet branch drain serving a separator is more than 25 feet from
a vented drain, the branch drain shall be provided with a two-inch vent pipe. A
backwater valve shall be installed in the outlet branch drain whenever, based
upon the judgment of the city or its designated official, backflow from the
building drain could occur.
      (5)   A separator must be installed to be readily accessible for service
and maintenance and must be maintained by periodic removal of accumulated
liquids and solids from the separator.
   (C)   Interceptors and separators for specific installations.
      (1)   Sand interceptors, commercial, establishments. Sand and similar
interceptors for heavy solids shall be so designed and located as to be readily
accessible for cleaning, and shall have a water seal of not less than six
inches.
      (2)   Laundries. Commercial laundries shall be equipped with an
interceptor having a wire basket or similar device, removable for cleaning,
that will prevent passage into the drainage system of solids one-half inch or
larger in size, string, rags, buttons or other material detrimental to the
public sewage system.
      (3)   Bottling establishments. Bottling plants shall discharge their
process wastes into an interceptor which will provide for separation of broken
glass or other solids before discharging liquid wastes into the drainage
system.
      (4)   Slaughter houses. Slaughtering and dressing room drains shall be
equipped with separators or interceptors approved by the administrative
authority, which shall prevent the discharge into the drainage system of
feathers, entrails or other material likely to clog the drainage system.
   (D)   Venting of interceptors and separators. Interceptors and separators
shall be so designed that they will not become air-bound if closed covers are
used. Each interceptor or separator shall be properly vented.
   (E)   Maintenance of interceptors and separators.
      (1)   Interceptors and separators shall be maintained in efficient
operating condition by periodic removal of accumulated grease, scum, oil or
other floating substances, and solids, deposited in the interceptor or
separator.
      (2)   Each interceptor and separator shall be so installed that it is
readily accessible for removal of cover, servicing and maintenance. If
installed substantially below grade, a manhole with flush manhole cover should
be provided.
   (F)   Inspections. Garage floor drains shall be permitted only when a
periodic testing and inspection program conducted by qualified, accredited
personnel will be provided by an agency acceptable to the Public Works Director
or the City Engineer. Inspection intervals shall not exceed five years. The
Public Works Director or the City Engineer may require more frequent testing if
deemed necessary to assure protection of the potable water.
(Prior Code, § 33.17) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.18 SUMP PUMPS.
   (A)   Purpose. Based on the type and condition of surface and subsurface
soils existing in the city, the City Council finds it essential to the
maintenance of health and safety, and to prevent infiltration of waters into
the sanitary sewer system, the requirement that a sump pump system be installed
in all new construction of residential, commercial and industrial primary
structures located within the city.
   (B)   Required. A sump pump system must be installed in all new construction
of residential, commercial and industrial primary structures located within the
city unless the city determines that the installation of a sump pump system is
not necessary to protect the health, safety and general welfare. There is a
presumption that a sump pump system is necessary and exceptions to this
requirement will not be granted unless the owner, occupant or user of the
property makes application to the city. In order to receive an exception the
application materials must establish to the satisfaction of the city or its
designated agent that a sump pump system is not necessary to protect health,
safety and general welfare.
   (C)   Construction standards. All sump pump systems must be constructed in
accordance with the written standards prescribed by the city.
   (D)   Permit. A sump pump discharge permit shall be obtained from the city
prior to construction.
   (E)   Drain.
      (1)   All premises on which sump pumps are installed or in use shall have
permanently installed thereon a drain for the discharge of waste from the pump
directly into the storm sewer system or into a natural waterway.
      (2)   Whenever the drain is connected directly to the storm sewer, an air
break shall be provided to the ground surface to allow the pump to discharge
overland should the storm sewer become plugged or be hydraulically surcharged.
The air break shall be inspected and approved by the Public Works Director or
City Engineer.
      (3)   All underground drain construction hereafter performed shall be
inspected by a city representative before it is covered.
   (F)   By-pass.
      (1)   If, in the opinion of the Public Works Director, it is either
impossible or impractical to install a year-round frost-free sump pump drain on
certain premises within the established written standards, and it is unharmful
to discharge directly in the sanitary sewer system between November 1 and March
31, the Public Works Director may direct the issuance of a written permit (by-
pass permit) to install a by-pass for temporarily pumping into the sanitary
sewage system during any time or times as the permanent drain is frozen or in
danger of freezing.
      (2)   The time of by-pass use (by-pass time) shall be fixed and
determined by the Public Works Director and notice to permit holders of the
beginning and ending of the time shall be given through mailed notice to each
owner or occupant of premises upon which a written permit has been issued.
      (3)   The construction and use of a by-pass shall at not time be
considered a substitute for the construction and use of a permanent drain
requirement in division (E) above.
   (G)   Prohibitions. It is unlawful for any customer of other person:
      (1)   To fail or refuse to have permanently installed on the premises
owned by him or her a sump pump drain constructed in accordance with the
written standards prescribed by the city;
      (2)   To pump or direct the water into the sanitary sewage system except
by-pass permit holders pumping during a by-pass time; and
      (3)   To directly discharge onto the street between November 1 and March
31.
   (H)   Unlawful. It is unlawful for any plumber or other contractor to
install a connection not permitted hereby.
   (I)   Discontinue.
      (1)   In any case where access for inspection of premises by a
representative of the city to verify compliance with this section is denied,
the city may discontinue water service to the premises.
      (2)   In any case of failure or refusal to comply with any provision of
this section, the city may discontinue water service to the premises.
(Prior Code, § 33.18) (Ord. 2018-03, passed 2-12-2018) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.19 POINT OF SALE CERTIFICATION OF SANITARY SEWER SERVICE COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   No property owner with a connection to the city sanitary sewer shall
sell, convey, advertise for sale, give or transact a change in title or
property ownership of real property without first obtaining a certificate from
the city indicating compliance with the city’s sewer regulations, including
regulations regarding the discharge of clear water.
   (B)   Unless the property owner already has a certificate of compliance for
a property, the owner or owner’s representative is required to apply for a
certificate and complete an inspection thereof before such property is offered
for sale, gifted or transferred, and before the owner or owner’s representative
enters into any purchase agreement, contract for deed or similar transaction.
If the property owner has a certificate of compliance which is more than three
years old, a new sump pump inspection is required for all properties containing
sump pumps.
   (C)   Upon receipt of a properly executed application for certificate of
sanitary sewer compliance, and digital copy of video inspection, an approved
public works employee shall determine whether the private service line complies
with city guidelines. The sanitary service shall be deemed to comply with city
guidelines for sanitary services if the sanitary line is in proper working
order, as demonstrated by televising the sanitary service to the city’s
sanitary sewer line and there are no sump pumps, roof drains, foundation drains
or other non-domestic sewer connections to the sanitary line. The applicant
shall be responsible for the cost of and scheduling of the inspection. The
entire property and all buildings on the property shall be made available for
inspection.
   (D)   The city shall maintain a list of contractors that are approved by an
approved public works employee to perform the certificate of sanitary sewer
compliance inspection.
   (E)   If an inspection discloses that use of a property does not comply with
city sanitary sewer regulations, a correction notice may be issued by the city
permitting the transfer of the property, providing the following are met:
      (1)   An agreement by the owner or owner’s representative has been
executed with the city, whereby the owner or owner’s representative agrees to
bring the property into compliance with the city sanitary sewer regulations
within 60 days of the transfer of property or within corrective action dates
approved at the discretion of the approved public works employee.
      (2)   A financial security to ensure completion of any corrections to the
property must be posted with the closing agent in the form of an escrow, or
with the city when a closing agent is not involved, at the time of property
transfer or closing. The security shall be an amount at least equal to 125% of
the estimated cost of the work necessary for compliance with this subsection.
The escrow must be fully maintained until a certificate of compliance is
issued. A correction notice shall not be issued for more than 180 days
following the first inspection of the property, but it may be extended for
additional periods up to 180 days each by the City Administrator, or their
designee, for good cause.
      (3)   The owner or transferor and any real estate agents involved in the
transaction are responsible for disclosing the correction notice to the
transferee and all other persons or entities involved in the transaction. The
responsibility for repairing any nonconformance with the sanitary sewer
regulations is a personal obligation of the owner and runs with the land and
becomes a joint and several obligations of the owner and the transferee of the
property.
   (F)   A certificate of sanitary sewer compliance issued under this section
shall be effective for five years.
   (G)   For houses constructed within the past 10 years, the approved public
works employee may, at their discretion, approve the certificate of sanitary
sewer compliance without requiring televising the service line. A walk-through
inspection will still be required.
   (H)   The failure of any seller or buyer to comply with the provisions of
this section or to comply with an order issued by the city pursuant to this
section shall be a misdemeanor. This section may be enforced by all legal
remedies, including injunction, or other appropriate civil remedies.
   (I)   By enacting and undertaking to enforce this section, neither the city,
nor its employees, agents or representatives warrant or guarantee the safety,
fitness or suitability of any property in the city.
(Ord. 2025-03, passed 9-8-2025) Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC RULES
      
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
73.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Noise
   
70.03   State traffic laws adopted
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Any term used in this code and defined in M.S. § 169.011, as it may be
amended from time to time, has the meaning given it by that section.
(Prior Code, § 40.01)
§ 70.02 NOISE.
   For regulations related to traffic noise, see §
90.04 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 40.02)
§ 70.03 STATE TRAFFIC LAWS ADOPTED.
   The state’s highway traffic regulations, as set forth in M.S. Chapter 169,
as it may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference and made a part of this traffic code as if fully set forth
herein. Additional prohibitions and limitations may be added in other sections
or chapters of this traffic code.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 7-10-2023)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this traffic code for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any violation of the statutes adopted by reference in §
70.03 of this chapter is a violation of the ordinance when it occurs within the
city. Any person thus violating any provision of §
70.03 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
shall be punished not more than the maximum penalty for a misdemeanor as
prescribed by state law. If a minimum fine or imprisonment is prescribed by the
state’s Highway Traffic Act, being M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be maned from
time to time, for the offense or if the offense be classified as a petty
misdemeanor, the penalty and/or classification shall apply to a person
convicted of the same offense under §
70.03 of this chapter.
   (C)   Any person violating any provision of §§
71.03 or
71.04 of this traffic code is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
shall be punished not more than the maximum penalty for a misdemeanor as
prescribed by state law.
   (D)   Any person violating any provision of §
71.06 of this traffic code is guilty of a petty misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be punished not more than the maximum penalty as prescribed
by state statute.
   (E)   The owner and operator of any motor vehicle operated in violation of §
71.07 of this traffic code and any person violating §
71.08 of this traffic code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be punished not more than the maximum penalty for a
misdemeanor as prescribed by state law. If a minimum fine or imprisonment is
prescribed by state law for an offense or if the offense be classified as petty
misdemeanor, the penalty and/or classification shall apply to the person
convicted of the offense under §§
71.07 or
71.08 of this traffic code.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 7-10-2023)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC RULES
Section
   
71.01   Turning movements; restrictions on turns
   
71.02   Through streets; one-way streets
   
71.03   Truck restrictions
   
71.04   Seasonal weight restrictions
   
71.05   Safety zones; lanes of traffic
   
71.06   Unreasonable acceleration, erratic driving and exhibition driving
   
71.07   Vehicle registration
   
71.08   Driver’s licenses; application
§ 71.01 TURNING MOVEMENTS; RESTRICTIONS ON TURNS.
   (A)   The Council, by resolution, may, whenever necessary to preserve a free
flow of traffic on to prevent accidents:
      (1)   Designate any intersection as one where the turning of vehicles to
the left or to the right, or both, is to be restricted at all times or during
specified hours; or (The Street Superintendent shall mark, by appropriate
signs, any intersection so designated. No intersection on a trunk highway shall
be so designated until the consent of the Commissioner of Highways to the
designation is first obtained.)
      (2)   Designate any intersection or street as one where U-turns of
vehicles is prohibited. The Street Superintendent shall mark, by appropriate
signs, any intersection or street so designated.
   (B)   No person shall turn a vehicle contrary to the directions on the
signs.
(Prior Code, § 41.01) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.02 THROUGH STREETS; ONE-WAY STREETS.
   The Council, by resolution, may designate any street or portion of a street
as a through highway or a one-way roadway where necessary to preserve the free
flow of traffic or to prevent accidents. The Street Superintendent shall post
appropriate signs at the entrance of the streets. No trunk highway shall be so
designated unless the consent of the Commissioner of Highways to the
designation is first secured.
(Prior Code, § 41.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.03 TRUCK RESTRICTIONS.
   The Council, by resolution, may designate streets on which travel by
commercial vehicles in excess of a specified gross weights prohibited. The
Street Superintendent shall erect appropriate signs on the streets. No person
shall operate a commercial vehicle on the posted streets in violation of the
restrictions stated.
(Prior Code, § 41.03) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.04 SEASONAL WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   The Maintenance Department may recommend the prohibition of operation of
vehicles upon any street within the city or recommend weight restrictions to be
operated on the street whenever the street by reason of deterioration, rain,
snow or other climatic conditions will be seriously damaged or destroyed unless
the use of vehicles on the street is prohibited or the permissible weights
thereof reduced. The Council shall act on the recommendation and may direct the
Maintenance Department, by resolution, to erect and maintain appropriate signs
plainly indicating the prohibition or restriction at each end of that portion
of the street so affected. No person shall operate a vehicle on a posted street
in violation of the prohibition or restriction.
(Prior Code, § 41.04) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.05 SAFETY ZONES; LANES OF TRAFFIC.
   To assist in the direction and control of traffic, to improve safe driving
conditions at any intersection or dangerous location and to warn pedestrians or
drivers of motor vehicles of dangerous conditions or hazards, the Council may
establish safety zones, lanes of traffic and stop intersections and may order
installation by the Street Superintendent of stop signs, yield signs, warning
signs, signals, pavement markings or other devices. No regulation may be
established on a trunk highway unless the consent of the Commissioner of
Highways is first secured.
(Prior Code, § 41.05)
§ 71.06 UNREASONABLE ACCELERATION, ERRATIC DRIVING AND EXHIBITION DRIVING.
   (A)   Unreasonable acceleration. Unreasonable acceleration by any motor
vehicle upon any public highway, street, parking lot, alley or other public
property within the limits of the city, except when an emergency creates the
necessity for the operation, is prohibited. Unreasonable acceleration of a
motor vehicle includes acceleration which unnecessarily breaks traction between
a tire or tires and the driving surface, thereby causing a squealing or
screeching sound by the tire or tires or the unnecessary throwing of sand or
gravel by the tire or tires or both.
   (B)   Erratic driving. No person shall drive a vehicle on a public highway,
street, parking lot, alley or other public property at erratic or irregular and
changing speeds so as to create a hazard to himself or herself or other persons
or property or so interfere with other traffic in the area.
   (C)   Exhibition driving. No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle
upon any public highway, street, parking lot, alley or other public property
within the limits of the city which causes unnecessary engine noise or
backfire, nor shall anyone between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. parade
a motor vehicle upon any public highway, street, parking lot, alley or other
public property within the limits of the city. PARADE A MOTOR VEHICLE is hereby
defined as driving or operating a motor vehicle up, down or up and down, the
same highway, street, parking lot, alley or other public property more than
three times within a 30-minute period.
(Prior Code, § 41.06) (Ord. 2023-04, passed 7-10-2023) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.07 VEHICLE REGISTRATION.
   Every motor vehicle used or operated on any highway within the city shall be
registered in compliance with the provisions of M.S. Chapter 168, as it may be
amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 7-10-2023) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.08 DRIVER’S LICENSES; APPLICATION.
   Every person who is required by M.S. Chapter 171, as it may be amended from
time to time, to be licensed in order to operate a vehicle or a motor vehicle
upon a highway within the state shall at all times while operating a vehicle or
motor vehicle on any highway within the city have in his or her immediate
possession, a license issued in compliance with the provisions of M.S. Chapter
171, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 7-10-2023) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
72.01   Diagonal angle and parallel parking
   
72.02   No parking, stopping or standing zones
   
72.03   Time limit zones
   
72.04   Winter parking restrictions
   
72.05   Impoundment
   
72.06   Owner responsibility
   
72.07   Truck parking and loading zones
   
72.08   Removing keys
   
72.09   Inoperable motor vehicles
§ 72.01 DIAGONAL ANGLE AND PARALLEL PARKING.
   (A)   The Council, by resolution, may designate streets where vehicles shall
be parked with the front of the vehicle facing the curb or the edge of the
traveled portion of the street at an angle of approximately 60 degrees.
   (B)   On all other streets, cars shall be parked parallel to the curb or
edge of the roadway in accordance with law.
(Prior Code, § 42.01) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.02 NO PARKING, STOPPING OR STANDING ZONES.
   (A)   The Council may, by resolution, designate certain streets or portions
of streets as no parking or no stopping or standing zones and may limit the
hours in which the restrictions apply. The Street Superintendent shall mark, by
appropriate signs, each zone so designated. Except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or a traffic-control device, no person shall stop or park a vehicle in
an established no stopping or standing zone when stopping or standing is
prohibited.
   (B)   No vehicle shall be parked in a no parking zone during hours when
parking is prohibited; except that, a vehicle may be parked temporarily in the
zone for the purpose of forming a funeral procession and a truck may be parked
temporarily between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any business day
for the purpose of loading or unloading where access to the premises is not
otherwise available.
(Prior Code, § 42.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.03 TIME LIMIT ZONES.
   (A)   The Council may, by resolution, designate certain areas where the
right to park is limited during hours specified.
   (B)   The Street Superintendent shall mark by appropriate signs each zone so
designated.
   (C)   During the hours specified on the sign, no person shall park a vehicle
in any limited parking zone for a longer period than is so specified.
(Prior Code, § 42.03) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.04 WINTER PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No parking during the period from November 1 to March 30 inclusive,
for all or any part of the period of time from 1:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. on any
day of the week city-wide.
   (B)   If conditions warrant commencement of city snow/ice removal operations
as regulated by the city’s snow and ice removal policy (i.e., removal is curb-
to-curb), the city specifically reserves the right to call for towing services
and the owner of the vehicle will be responsible for all costs incurred.
   (C)   This restriction shall be enforced 24 hours a day, seven days a week
from the period November 1 to March 30, inclusive.
(Prior Code, § 42.04) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.05 IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle or trailer has been parked
or stopped in violation of any provision of this traffic code, the officer is
hereby authorized to move the vehicle or trailer, provide for the removal of
the vehicle or trailer and the impounding of the same, or require the driver or
other person in charge of the vehicle or trailer to move the same.
   (B)   The vehicle or trailer shall not be released until the fees for towing
and storage are paid in addition to any fine imposed for violation of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 42.05) (Ord. 2023-04, passed 7-10-2023)
§ 72.06 OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   The presence of any motor vehicle on any street when standing or parked in
violation of this chapter is prima facie evidence that the registered owner of
the vehicle committed or authorized the commission of the violation.
(Prior Code, § 42.06)
§ 72.07 TRUCK PARKING AND LOADING ZONES.
   (A)   The Council may, by resolution, establish spaces in streets as loading
zones or truck zones. The hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day, except
Sundays, New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, July 4, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and
Christmas Day or other time as the Council may specify in the resolution
establishing the zone, shall be the loading zone or truck zone hours. The
Street Superintendent shall mark each zone by appropriate signs.
   (B)   During truck zone hours, no person shall stop, stand or park any
vehicle, except a truck in a truck zone. No person shall stop, stand or park a
truck in a truck zone during truck zone hours, except to receive or discharge
passengers or freight and then only for a period no longer than is necessary
for the purpose.
   (C)   During loading zone hours, no person shall stop, stand or park any
vehicle in a loading zone, except to receive or discharge passengers or freight
and then only for a period no longer than is necessary for the purpose. No
person shall occupy a loading zone with a vehicle other than a truck for more
than five minutes during the hours.
   (D)   Any person desiring the establishment of a loading zone or zone
abutting premises occupied by him or her shall make written application to the
Council. If the Council grants the request, the proper city officer shall bill
the applicant for the estimated cost of placing signs and of painting the curb.
When the amount is paid to the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, the designated
law enforcement agency shall install the necessary signs and paint the curb.
   (E)   No person shall allow a semi-trailer to stand or be parked unattached
from a tractor unit for any length of time on any street in the city, except in
an emergency in order to change tractors.
   (F)   No person shall allow any bus, motor truck, truck tractor, truck
trailer or commercial vehicle to be parked or stand longer than two hours
continuously on, in front of, or beside any property in the city, except for
vehicles parked in private parking lots in Industrial Zones. For the purpose of
this section, a BUS is a vehicle designed for carrying passengers and having a
seating capacity of more than 20 persons, and a motor truck, truck tractor,
truck trailer or commercial vehicle is a vehicle having either a capacity of
more than one ton or a weight of more than 5,000 pounds, or both.
(Prior Code, § 42.07) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.08 REMOVING KEYS.
   No person shall leave a motor vehicle, except a truck which is engaged in or
unloading, unattended on any street, used car lot or unattended parking lot
without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition and removing all
ignition keys from the vehicle. Whenever any designated law enforcement agent
finds any motor vehicle standing in violation of this provision, he or she
shall remove the keys from the vehicle and deliver them to City Hall.
(Prior Code, § 42.08) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.09 INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   Except for the city or the county on its own rights-of-way, no person
shall utilize any portion of any local public right-of-way, including the
traveled street, boulevard or public parking lot for the storage or parking of
any object or material which is not a licensed, operable motor vehicle,
passenger vehicle or motorcycle as defined by M.S. § 169.011, subd. 42, 44 and
52, as they may be amended from time to time, except as may be explicitly
permitted on a temporary period of time by the City Council or its designated
representative, or as allowed in this city code.
   (B)   Properly licensed, operable motor vehicles, passenger vehicles and
motorcycles may be parked in the public street where permitted, but not on the
boulevard portion of the public right-of-way subject to the further
requirements of local parking regulations and applicable state statutes. A
trailer of any type, properly licensed or not, is not considered a motor
vehicle or part thereof when disconnected from its tow vehicle. The following
are places where parking or standing of a motor vehicle, passenger vehicle or
motorcycle is prohibited:
      (1)   As provided in M.S. § 169.34, as it may be amended from time to
time;
      (2)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping, standing or
parking;
      (3)   In any manner on any street or highway so as to interfere with or
interrupt the passage of other vehicles;
      (4)   As prohibited in §
72.04 of this traffic code;
      (5)   On any city street for more than 72 consecutive hours; and/or
      (6)   On any city street for more than the posted time limit as
established by the City Council.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 7-10-2023) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 73: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Snowmobiles and Other Recreational Vehicles
   
73.01   State law adopted by reference
   
73.02   Definitions
   
73.03   Limitation of operation
   
73.04   Hours of operation
   
73.05   Speed regulations
   
73.06   Tow bars
   
73.07   Mandatory lights
SNOWMOBILES AND OTHER RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
§ 73.01 STATE LAW ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   M.S. §§ 84.81 through 84.928, Minn. Rules parts 6100.5000 through 6100.5800
and Minn. Rules parts 7460.5100 through 7460.5200, as they presently exist and
as they may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted and are
incorporated by reference and made part of this subchapter as completely as if
set out in full.
(Prior Code, § 43.01)
§ 73.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle and any vehicle used
for recreational purposes, including, but not limited to, snowmobiles, trail
bikes or other all-terrain vehicles, hovercrafts or motor vehicles licensed for
highway operation which is being used for off-road recreational purposes. This
definition includes ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES, as defined by M.S. § 84.92, subd. 8,
as it may be amended from time to time.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The entire strip of land traversed by a highway or street in
which the public owns the fee or easement for road purposes.
   SNOWMOBILE. A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice
steered by skis or runners.
   STREET. A public thorough fare, roadway, alley or trail used for vehicular
traffic which is not an interstate, trunk, county state-aid or county highway.
(Prior Code, § 43.02)
§ 73.03 LIMITATION OF OPERATION.
   (A)   No person shall operate a snowmobile or recreational motor vehicle in
the city, except on public trails, waterways, highways and streets specifically
designated for the use.
   (B)   No person shall operate a snowmobile or recreational motor vehicle on
lands not his or her own, except where otherwise allowed by law, without the
written permission of the owner, occupant or lessee of the lands.
(Prior Code, § 43.03) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.04 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No person shall operate a snowmobile or recreational motor vehicle in the
city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., prevailing time in the
county, Sunday through Thursday, and from 1:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. on other days,
including the day preceding a national holiday.
(Prior Code, § 43.04) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.05 SPEED REGULATIONS.
   No person shall operate a snowmobile or recreational motor vehicle in the
city at speed in excess of 15 mph within 150 feet of any pedestrian, skier,
skater, skating rink, sliding area, city property or other area where the
operation would conflict with or endanger other persons or property.
(Prior Code, § 43.05) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.06 TOW BARS.
   No person shall operate a snowmobile or recreational vehicle so as to tow
any person, sled, trailer or other device, except by the use of a rigid tow bar
attached to the rear of the snowmobile or recreational motor vehicle. Persons
towing disabled snowmobiles or recreational vehicles shall be exempt.
(Prior Code, § 43.06) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.07 MANDATORY LIGHTS.
   No person shall operate a snowmobile or recreational motor vehicle unless
the vehicle is equipped with approved head lamp(s) and tail lamp(s) that are
illuminated at all times during operation.
(Prior Code, § 43.01) Penalty, see §
70.99
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; SAFETY
      
91.   ANIMALS
      
92.   NUISANCES
      
93.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
94.   LARGE ASSEMBLIES
      
95.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION; FIREWORKS
CHAPTER 90: HEALTH AND SANITATION; SAFETY
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Assessable current services
   
90.02   Tree diseases
   
90.03   Abandoned property; abatement
   
90.04   Noise
Abandoned Vehicles
   
90.15   Findings and purpose
   
90.16   Definitions
   
90.17   Violation
   
90.18   Authority to impound vehicles
   
90.19   Sale; waiting periods
   
90.20   Notice of taking and sale
   
90.21   Right to reclaim
   
90.22   Operator’s deficiency claim; consent to sale
   
90.23   Disposition by impound lot
   
90.24   Disposal authority
   
90.25   Contracts; reimbursement by MPCA
   
90.26   Nuisance parking and storage
Drug Lab Sites
   
90.40   Purpose
   
90.41   Definitions
   
90.42   Public nuisance
   
90.43   Notices
   
90.44   Issuance of order
   
90.45   Responsibilities of owner
   
90.46   Responsibility for costs
   
90.47   Recovery of city costs
   
90.48   Removal of public nuisance designation
   
90.49   Relationship to other laws and regulations
Weeds
   
90.60   Short title
   
90.61   Jurisdiction
   
90.62   Definitions; exclusions
   
90.63   Owners responsible for trimming, removal and the like
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 ASSESSABLE CURRENT SERVICES.
   (A)   Definition. CURRENT SERVICE is one or more of the following: snow, ice
or rubbish removal from sidewalks; weed elimination from street grass plots
adjacent to sidewalks or from private property; removal or elimination of
public health or safety hazards from private property, excluding any hazardous
building included in M.S. §§ 463.15 through 463.261, as they may amended from
time to time; installation or repair of water service lines; street sprinkling,
street flushing, light street oiling or other dust treatment of streets; repair
of sidewalks and alleys; trimming and care of trees and removal of unsound and
insect-infected trees from the public streets or private property; and the
operation of a street lighting system.
   (B)   Snow, ice, dirt and rubbish.
      (1)   Duty of owners and occupants.
         (a)   The owner and the occupant of any property adjacent to a public
sidewalk shall use diligence to keep the walk safe for pedestrians.
         (b)   No owner or occupant shall allow snow, ice, dirt or rubbish to
remain on the walk longer than 48 hours after its deposit thereon.
      (2)   Removal by city.
         (a)   The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer or other person
designated by the City Council may cause removal from all public sidewalks all
snow, ice, dirt and rubbish as soon as possible beginning 48 hours after any
matter has been deposited thereon or after the snow has ceased to fall.
         (b)   The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer or other designated
person shall keep a record showing the cost of removal adjacent to each
separate lot and parcel.
   (C)   Public health and safety hazards. When the city removes or eliminates
public health or safety hazards from private property under the following
provisions of this chapter, the administrative officer responsible for doing
the work shall keep a record of the cost of the removal or elimination against
each parcel of property affected and annually deliver that information to the
City Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer.
   (D)   Installation and repair of water service lines. Whenever the city
installs or repairs water service lines serving private property hereunder, the
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall keep a record of the total cost of the
installation or repair against the property.
   (E)   Repair of sidewalks and alleys.
      (1)   Specifications. Repairs to public sidewalks and alleys shall be
made in accordance with the standard specifications approved by the City
Council and on file in City Hall.
      (2)   Inspections. The city’s designee shall make inspections as are
necessary to determine that public sidewalks and alleys within the city are
kept in repair and safe for pedestrians or vehicles.
      (3)   Repair by city. If the city’s designee determines that a public
sidewalk or alley requires repair or is unsafe for pedestrians or vehicles, the
designee shall report the facts to the City Council and the City Council may,
by resolution, order the work done by contract in accordance with law.
   (F)   Personal liability.
      (1)   The owner of property on which or adjacent to which a current
service has been performed shall be personally liable for the cost of the
service.
      (2)   As soon as the service has been completed and the cost determined,
the City Administrator/ Clerk-Treasurer, or other designated official, shall
prepare a bill and mail it to the owner and, thereupon, the amount shall be
immediately due and payable at the office of the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer.
   (G)   Damage to public property.
      (1)   Any person driving any vehicle, equipment, object or contrivance
upon any street, road, highway or structure shall be liable for all damages
which the surface or structure thereof may sustain as a result of any illegal
operation, or driving or moving of the vehicle, equipment or object or
contrivance; or as a result of operating, driving or moving any vehicle,
equipment, object or contrivance weighing in excess of the maximum weight
permitted by statute or this code.
      (2)   When the driver is not the owner of the vehicle, equipment, object
or contrivance, but is operating, driving or moving it with the express or
implied permission of the owner, then the owner and the driver shall be jointly
and severally liable for any damage. Any person who willfully acts or fails to
exercise due care and by that act damages any public property shall be liable
for the amount thereof, which amount shall be collectable by action or as a
lien under M.S. §
   (H)   Assessment.
      (1)   On or before September 1 of each year, the City Administrator/
Clerk-Treasurer shall list the total unpaid charges for each type of current
service and charges under this section against each separate lot or parcel to
which they are attributable under this section.
      (2)   The City Council may then spread the charges against property
benefitted as a special assessment under the authority of M.S. Chapter 429,
M.S. §§ 366.011, 366.012 and 415.01, as they may be amended from time to time,
and any other authority for certification to the County Auditor and collection
along with current taxes the following year or in annual installments, not
exceeding ten, as the City Council may determine in each case.
(Prior Code, § 50.01) (Ord. 2022-02, passed 2-14-2022) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.02 TREE DISEASES.
   The following are public nuisances whenever they may be found within the
city:
   (A)   Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected to any degree
with the Dutch Elm disease fungus Ceratocystis Ulmi (Buisman) Moreau or which
harbors any of the elm bark beetles Scolytus Multistriatus (Eichh.) or
Hylungopinus Rufipes (Marsh);
   (B)   Any living, standing or dead ash tree or part thereof infected to any
degree with the insect infestation known as the Emerald Ash Borer insect
infestation (agrilus planipennis);
   (C)   Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including branches, stumps,
firewood or other elm material from which the bark has not been removed and
burned or sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle insecticide;
   (D)   Any living or standing oak tree or part thereof infected to any degree
with the Oak Wilt fungus Ceratocystis fagacearum;
   (E)   Any living or standing Tree-of-Heaven (Ailanthus altissima) identified
by the Minnesota Department of Agriculture to be invasive and destructive;
   (F)   Any dead oak tree or part thereof which in the opinion of the
designated officer constitutes a hazard, including but not limited to logs,
branches, stumps, roots, firewood or other oak material which has not been
stripped of its bark and burned or sprayed with an effective fungicide; and
   (G)   Any other shade tree with an epidemic disease.
(Prior Code, § 50.02) (Ord. 2025-, passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.03 ABANDONED PROPERTY; ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Procedure. Except for abandoned and junked vehicles, all property
lawfully coming into possession of the city shall be disposed of as provided in
this section which is adopted pursuant to M.S. § 471.195, as it may be amended
from time to time. Abandoned and junked vehicles shall be disposed of according
to the procedures of §§
90.15 through
90.25 of this chapter.
   (B)   Storage. The department of the city acquiring possession of the
property shall arrange for its storage. If city facilities are unavailable or
inadequate, the department may arrange for storage at a privately-owned
facility.
   (C)   Claim by owner. The owner may claim the property by exhibiting
satisfactory proof of ownership and paying the city any storage or maintenance
costs incurred by it. A receipt for the property shall be obtained upon release
to the owner.
   (D)   Sale. If the property remains unclaimed in the possession of the city
for 60 days, the property shall be sold to the highest bidder at a public
auction conducted by the City Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer or his or her
designee after two weeks’ published notice setting forth the time and place of
the sale and the property to be sold.
   (E)   Disposition of proceeds. The proceeds of the sale shall be placed in
the general fund of the city. If the former owner makes application and
furnishes satisfactory proof of ownership within six months of the sale, the
former owner shall be paid the proceeds of the sale of the property less the
costs of storage and the proportionate part of the cost of published notice and
other costs of the sale.
(Prior Code, § 50.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.04 NOISE.
   (A)   Prohibition.
      (1)   No person shall make, continue or cause to be made any loud,
unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which unreasonably annoys, disturbs,
injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety or welfare of
others or precludes their enjoyment of property or affects his, her or their
property value. This general prohibition is not limited by any specific
restrictions of this division (A).
      (2)   The following acts listed herein are declared to be nuisance noises
in violation of this section, but this listing shall not be deemed to be
exclusive:
         (a)   The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile,
motorcycle or other vehicle on any street, public place or private property
within the city, except as a present danger warning;
         (b)   The creation, by means of any horn or signaling device, of any
unreasonably loud or harsh sound;
         (c)   The sounding of any device for an unnecessary and unreasonable
period of time;
         (d)   The use of any signaling device, except one operated by hand or
electricity;
         (e)   The use of any, hour, whistle or other device operated by engine
exhaust;
         (f)   The use of any signaling device when traffic is held up for any
reason;
         (g)   The using, operating or permitting to be played any radio,
musical insert, phonograph, jukebox, amplifier or other machine or device for
the producing, reproducing or amplifying of sound in a manner as to disturb the
peace, quiet or comfort of persons residing or working or peaceably gathered in
its vicinity. The operation of the machine or device between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section
if done in a manner as to be plainly audible:
            1.   Within any building or structure used for residential
purposes; or
            2.   At a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or
vehicle in which it is located.
         (h)   The using, operating or permitting to be played any radio
receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or
other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast
upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting
the attention of the public to any building or structure;
         (i)   Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing at any time or
place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any
office, or in any dwelling, hotel, motel or other place of residence, or of any
persons in the vicinity;
         (j)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor a dog
which habitually barks or cries. HABITUAL BARKING shall be defined as barking
for repeated intervals of at least five minutes with less than one minute of
interruption. The barking must also be audible off of the owner’s or
caretaker’s premises;
         (k)   The blowing of a locomotive whistle or steam whistle attached to
any stationary whistle or any siren whatsoever, except to give notice of the
time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or by public
emergency vehicles;
         (l)   The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out or
repair, operation or in a manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating,
grinding, rattling or other noise which shall disturb the comfort or repose of
any persons in the vicinity;
         (m)   The use of sound trucks or any other vehicle equipped with
sound-amplifying devices for the purposes of advertising any program, project
or meeting of any public agency, private business, religious organization,
civic group, political party or charitable organization;
         (n)   The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with
loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales,
boxes, crates and containers;
         (o)   The erection, including excavating, demolition, alteration or
repair of any building between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on week
days and all day Sunday, except where single individuals or families work on
single-family residences owned by them for their own occupancy; provided that,
the Building Inspector may, in cases of emergency, grant permission to repair
at any time when he or she finds that the repair work will not affect the
health and safety of the persons in the vicinity;
         (p)   The creation of any excessive noise on any street or private
property adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church, court or
hospital while the same are in use which unreasonably interferes with the use
thereof; provided, conspicuous signs are displayed in the streets indicating
that the same is a school, hospital or court street;
         (q)   The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which
disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood;
         (r)   The operation between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of
any pile driver, power shovel, pneumatic hammer, jack hammer, derrick, power or
electric hoist or other appliance the use of which is attended by loud or
unusual noise;
         (s)   The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any
internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the
explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from the blower or fan
is muffled and the engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to
deaden the noise; and/or
         (t)   Party.
            1.   No person shall, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m., congregate because of or participate in any party or gathering of people
from which noise emanates of a sufficient volume so as to disturb the peace
quiet or repose of persons residing in any residential area.
            2.   Noise between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of a
volume as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the residential
dwelling unit wherein the party or gathering is located shall be prima facie
evidence of a violation of this division (A).
            3.   No persons shall visit or remain within any residential
dwelling unit wherein the party or gathering is taking place, except the owner,
persons residing in that unit or persons who have gone there for the sole
purpose of abating the disturbance.
(Prior Code, § 54.01)
   (B)   Motor vehicle noise.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division (B), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
         ABNORMAL OR EXCESSIVE NOISE.
            1.   A distinct and loudly audible noise that unreasonably annoys,
disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort and repose of any person or
precludes their enjoyment of property or affects their property’s value;
            2.   Noise in excess of that permitted by M.S. § 169.69, as it may
be amended from time to time, which requires every motor vehicle to be equipped
with a muffler in good working order; or
            3.   Noise in excess of that permitted by M.S. § 169.693 and Minn.
Rules parts 7030.1000 through 7030.1050, as this statute and these rules may be
amended from time to time, which establish motor vehicle noise standards.
         ENGINE RETARDING BRAKE. A dynamic brake, Jake brake, Jacobs brake, C-
brake, Paccar brake, transmission brake or other similar engine retarding brake
system which alters their normal compression of the engine and subsequently
releases that compression.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge the exhaust or
permit the discharge of the exhaust from any motor vehicle, except through a
muffler that effectively prevents abnormal or excessive noise and complies with
all applicable state laws and regulations.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck to intentionally
use an engine retarding brake on any public highway, street, parking lot or
alley within the city which causes abnormal or excessive noise from the engine
because of an illegally modified or defective brake system, except in an
emergency.
      (4)   M.S. §§ 169.69 and 169.693 (motor vehicle noise limits) and Minn.
Rules parts 7030.1000 through 7030.1050, as these statutes and rules may be
amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference.
      (5)   Signs stating “VEHICLE NOISE LAWS ENFORCED” may be installed at
locations deemed appropriate by the City Council to advise motorists of the
prohibitions contained in this section; except that, no sign stating “VEHICLE
NOISE LAWS ENFORCED” shall be installed on a state highway without a permit
from the state’s Department of Transportation. The provisions of this division
(B) are in full force and effect even if no signs are erected.
(Prior Code, § 54.02)
   (C)   Responsibility. The owner and tenant of any premises on which a
violation of this section occurs shall make every reasonable effort to see that
the violation ceases. Violation of this section shall be deemed the act of the
person committing the act and the person in possession, control, custody or
having charge of premises who allows or permits the violation to take place.
Violation of this section shall also be deemed the act of the non-resident
landlord, provided he or she has received written notice from the city of the
violation and has failed to make every reasonable effort to see that the
violation ceases.
(Prior Code, § 54.03)
Penalty, see §
10.99
ABANDONED VEHICLES
§ 90.15 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   M.S. Chapter 168B and Minn. Rules Chapter 7035, as they may be amended from
time to time, are hereby adopted by reference. Sections of this subchapter
related to disposal are adopted under the authority of M.S. § 168B.09, subd. 2,
as it may be amended from time to time. If any of these provisions are less
stringent that the provisions of M.S. Chapter 168B or Minn. Rules Chapter 7035,
as they may be amended from time to time, the statute or rule shall take
precedence.
(Prior Code, § 51.01)
§ 90.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE.
      (1)   A motor vehicle, as defined in M.S. § 169.011, as it may be amended
from time to time, that:
         (a)   Has remained illegally: for a period of more than 48 hours on
any property owned or controlled by a unit of government, or more than four
hours on that property when it is properly posted; or on private property for a
period of time, as determined under the subchapter, without the consent of the
person in control of the property; and
         (b)   Lacks vital component parts or is in an inoperable condition
that it has no substantial potential for further use consistent with its usual
functions, unless it is kept in an enclosed garage or storage building.
      (2)   A classic car or pioneer car, as defined in M.S. § 168.10, as it
may be amended from time to time, is not considered an ABANDONED VEHICLE;
      (3)   Vehicles on the premises of junk yards and automobile graveyards
that are defined, maintained and licensed in accordance with M.S. § 161.242, as
it may be amended from time to time, or that are licensed and maintained in
accordance with local laws and zoning regulations, are not considered ABANDONED
VEHICLES; and
      (4)   A vehicle being held for storage by agreement or being held under
police authority or pursuant to a writ or court order is not considered
abandoned, nor may it be processed as abandoned while the police hold, writ or
court order is in effect.
   DEPARTMENT. The Minnesota Department of Public Safety.
   IMPOUND. To take and hold a vehicle in legal custody. There are two types of
IMPOUNDS: public and non-public.
   IMPOUND LOT OPERATOR or OPERATOR. A person who engages in impounding or
storing, usually temporarily, unauthorized or abandoned vehicles. OPERATOR
includes an operator of a public or non-public impound lot, regardless of
whether tow truck service is provided.
   JUNK VEHICLE. A vehicle that:
      (1)   Is three years old or older;
      (2)   Is extensively damaged, with the damage including things as broken
or missing wheels, motor, drive train or transmission;
      (3)   Is apparently inoperable;
      (4)   Does not have a valid, current registration plate; and
      (5)   Has an approximate fair market value equal only to the approximate
value of the scrap in it.
   MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE. Has the meaning given “motor vehicle” in M.S. §
169.011, as it may be amended from time to time.
   MOTOR VEHICLE WASTE. Solid waste and liquid wastes derived in the operation
of or in the recycling of a motor vehicle, including such things as tires and
used motor oil, but excluding scrap metal.
   MPCA or AGENCY. The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
   NON-PUBLIC IMPOUND LOT. An impound lot that is not a public impound lot.
   PUBLIC IMPOUND LOT. An impound lot owned by or contracting with a unit of
government under.
   UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLE. A vehicle that is subject to removal and impoundment
pursuant to this subchapter or M.S. § 169.041, as it may be amended from time
to time, but is not a junk vehicle or an abandoned vehicle.
   UNIT OF GOVERNMENT. Includes a state department or agency, a special purpose
district and a county, statutory or home rule charter city, or town.
   VITAL COMPONENT PARTS. Those parts of a motor vehicle that are essential to
the mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including such things as the motor,
drive train and wheels.
(Prior Code, § 51.02)
§ 90.17 VIOLATION.
   (A)   Any person who abandons a motor vehicle on any public or private
property, without the consent of the person in control of the property, is
guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Any person who keeps, parks, stores or maintains an abandoned motor
vehicle, as defined by §
90.16, on their private property, which is partially dismantled, used for
repair of parts or as a source of repair or replacement parts for other
vehicles, kept for scrapping, dismantling or salvage of any kind or which is
not properly licensed for operation with the state, pursuant to M.S. § 168B.11,
as it may be amended from time to time, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (C)   This section does not apply to a motor vehicle enclosed in a building
and/or kept out of view from any street, road or alley, and which does not
foster complaint from a resident of the city.
(Prior Code, § 51.03) (Ord. 2025-, passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.18 AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES.
   (A)   Abandoned or junk vehicles. The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer or
his or her designee or any peace officer employed or whose services are
contracted for by the city may take into custody and impound any abandoned or
junk vehicle if the vehicle is on public property. If the abandoned or junk
vehicle is located on private property, the vehicle shall not be removed or
impounded until the provisions of this section relating to vehicles on private
property are complied with.
   (B)   Unauthorized vehicles. The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, or his
or her designee, or any peace officer employed or whose services are contracted
for by the city may take into custody and impound any unauthorized vehicle
under M.S. § 168B.035, as it may be amended from time to time. A vehicle may
also be impounded after it has been left unattended in one of the following
public or private locations for the indicated period of time:
      (1)   In a public location not governed by M.S. § 168B.035, as it may be
amended from time to time:
         (a)   On a highway and properly tagged by a peace officer: four hours;
         (b)   Located so as to constitute an accident or traffic hazard to the
traveling public, as determined by a peace officer: immediately; or
         (c)   That is a parking facility or other public property owned or
controlled by a unit of government, properly posted: four hours.
      (2)   On private property, only with the express permission of the owner
of the property, a resident or other person in control of the premises:
         (a)   That is single-family or duplex residential property:
immediately;
         (b)   That is private, non-residential property, properly posted:
immediately;
         (c)   That is private, non-residential property, not posted: 24 hours;
or
         (d)   That is any residential property, properly posted: immediately.
      (3)   If under a provision that requires permission, permission is not
granted, then the city shall not remove and impound any vehicle until an
appropriate procedure has been followed to allow entry onto the private
property.
   (C)   Permission. If the vehicle is on private property, the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer or his or her designee or any peace officer
employed or whose services are contracted for by the city may take into custody
and impound any abandoned or junk vehicle on private property only with the
permission of the owner of the property, a resident or other person in control
of the premises. If permission is denied, the city may declare the existence of
the abandoned or junk vehicle to be a nuisance and proceed to abate the
nuisance. Once the abatement procedure has been completed, the city may apply
for an order from a court of competent jurisdiction authorizing the removal and
impoundment of the vehicle and, after the order has been granted, the city may
then remove and impound the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 51.04)
§ 90.19 SALE; WAITING PERIODS.
   (A)   Sale after 15 days. An impounded vehicle is eligible for disposal or
sale under this subchapter, 15 days after notice to the owner, if the vehicle
is determined to be:
      (1)   A junk vehicle; except that, it may have a valid, current
registration plate and still be eligible for disposal or sale under this
chapter; or
      (2)   An abandoned vehicle.
   (B)   Sale after 45 days. An impounded vehicle is eligible for disposal or
sale under this subchapter, 45 days after notice to the owner, if the vehicle
is determined to be an unauthorized vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 51.05)
§ 90.20 NOTICE OF TAKING AND SALE.
   (A)   Contents; notice given within five days. When an impounded vehicle is
taken into custody, the city or impound lot operator taking it into custody
shall give notice of the taking within five days. The notice shall:
      (1)   Set forth the date and place of the taking; the year, make, model
and serial number of the impounded motor vehicle if the information can be
reasonably obtained; and the place where the vehicle is being held;
      (2)   Inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to reclaim the
vehicle; and
      (3)   State that failure of the owner or lienholders to exercise their
right to reclaim the vehicle and contents within the appropriate time allowed
under shall be deemed a waiver by them of all right, title and interest in the
vehicle and contents and a consent to the transfer of title to and disposal or
sale of the vehicle and contents.
   (B)   Notice by mail or publication.
      (1)   The notice shall be sent by mail to the registered owner, if any,
of an impounded vehicle and to all readily identifiable lienholders of record.
The Department makes this information available to impound lot operators for
notification purposes.
      (2)   If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the
identity and address of the registered owner and all lienholders, the notice
shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where
the motor vehicle was towed from or abandoned. Published notices may be grouped
together for convenience and economy.
   (C)   Unauthorized vehicles; notice. If an unauthorized vehicle remains
unclaimed after 30 days from the date the notice was sent under this section, a
second notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
registered owner, if any, of the unauthorized vehicle and to all readily
identifiable lienholders of record.
(Prior Code, § 51.06)
§ 90.21 RIGHT TO RECLAIM.
   (A)   Payment of charges. The owner or any lienholder of an impounded
vehicle shall have a right to reclaim the vehicle from the city or impound lot
operator taking it into custody upon payment of all towing and storage charges
resulting from taking the vehicle into custody within 15 or 45 days, as
applicable under this subchapter and with the notice required by this
subchapter.
   (B)   Lienholders. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair any
lien of a garage keeper under the laws of the state or the right of a
lienholder to foreclose. For the purposes of this section, GARAGE KEEPER is an
operator of a parking place or establishment, an operator of a motor vehicle
storage facility, or an operator of an establishment for the servicing, repair
or maintenance of motor vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 51.07)
§ 90.22 OPERATOR’S DEFICIENCY CLAIM; CONSENT TO SALE.
   (A)   Deficiency claim. The non-public impound lot operator has a deficiency
claim against the registered owner of the vehicle for the reasonable costs of
services provided in the towing, storage and inspection of the vehicle minus
the proceeds of the sale or auction. The claim for storage costs may not exceed
the costs of:
      (1)   Twenty-five days’ storage for a junk vehicle or abandoned vehicle;
and
      (2)   Fifty-five days’ storage for an unauthorized vehicle.
   (B)   Implied consent to sale. A registered owner who fails to claim the
impounded vehicle within the applicable time period allowed under this
subchapter is deemed to waive any right to reclaim the vehicle and consents to
the disposal or sale of the vehicle and its contents and transfer of title.
(Prior Code, § 51.08)
§ 90.23 DISPOSITION BY IMPOUND LOT.
   (A)   Auction or sale.
      (1)   If an abandoned or unauthorized vehicle and contents taken into
custody by the city or any impound lot is not reclaimed under this subchapter,
it may be disposed of or sold at auction or sale when eligible pursuant to the
procedures set out in this subchapter.
      (2)   The purchaser shall be given a receipt in a form prescribed by the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles which shall be sufficient title to dispose of the
vehicle. The receipt shall also entitle the purchaser to register the vehicle
and receive a certificate of title, free and clear of all liens and claims of
ownership. Before a vehicle is issued a new certificate of title, it must
receive a motor vehicle safety check.
   (B)   Unsold vehicles. Abandoned or junk vehicles not sold by the city or
public impound lots pursuant to this Section shall be disposed of in accordance
with this subchapter.
   (C)   Sale proceeds; public entities. From the proceeds of a sale under this
section by the city or public impound lot of an abandoned or unauthorized motor
vehicle, the city shall reimburse itself for the cost of towing, preserving and
storing the vehicle and all administrative, notice and publication costs
incurred in handling the vehicle pursuant to this chapter. Any remainder from
the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled
lienholder for 90 days and then shall be deposited in the treasury of the city.
   (D)   Sale proceeds; non-public impound lots. The operator of a non-public
impound lot may retain any proceeds derived from a sale conducted under the
authority of this section. The operator may retain all proceeds from sale of
any personal belongings and contents in the vehicle that were not claimed by
the owner or the owner’s agent before the sale; except that, any suspected
contraband or other items that likely would be subject to forfeiture in a
criminal trial must be turned over to the appropriate law enforcement agency.
(Prior Code, § 51.09)
§ 90.24 DISPOSAL AUTHORITY.
   The city may contract with others or may utilize its own equipment and
personnel for the inventory of impounded motor vehicles and abandoned scrap
metal and may utilize its own equipment and personnel for the collection,
storage and transportation of these vehicles and abandoned scrap metal. The
city may utilize its own equipment and personnel only for the collection and
storage of not more than five abandoned or unauthorized vehicles without
advertising for or receiving bids in any 120-day period.
(Prior Code, § 51.10)
§ 90.25 CONTRACTS; REIMBURSEMENT BY MPCA.
   (A)   MPCA review and approval. If the city proposes to enter into a
contract with a person licensed by the MPCA pursuant to this section or a
contract pursuant to the city’s disposal authority, the MPCA may review the
proposed contract before it is entered into by the city, to determine whether
it conforms to the MPCA’s plan for solid waste management and is in compliance
with MPCA rules. A contract that does so conform may be approved by the MPCA
and entered into by the city. Where a contract has been approved, the MPCA may
reimburse the City for the costs incurred under the contract that have not been
reimbursed under another section of this subchapter. Except as otherwise
provided in this subchapter, the MPCA shall not approve any contract that has
been entered into without prior notice to and request for bids from all persons
duly licensed by the MPCA to be a party to a disposal contract pursuant to M.S.
§ 116.07, as it may be amended from time to time; does not provide for a full
performance bond; or does not provide for total collection and transportation
of abandoned motor vehicles; except that, the MPCA may approve a contract
covering solely collection or transportation of abandoned motor vehicles where
the MPCA determines total collection and transportation to be impracticable and
where all other requirements herein have been met and the unit of government,
after proper notice and request for bids, has not received any bid for total
collection and transportation of abandoned motor vehicles.
   (B)   City may perform work. If the city utilizes its own equipment and
personnel pursuant to its disposal authority, and the use of the equipment and
personnel conforms to the MPCA’s plan for solid waste management and is in
compliance with MPCA rules, the city may be reimbursed by the MPCA for
reasonable costs incurred which are not reimbursed under another section of
this subchapter.
   (C)   City required to contract work. The MPCA may demand that the city
contract for the disposal of abandoned motor vehicles and other scrap metal
pursuant to the MPCA’s plan for solid waste disposal. If the city fails to
contract within 180 days of the demand, the MPCA, through the Department of
Administration and on behalf of the city, may contract with any person duly
licensed by the MPCA for the disposal.
(Prior Code, § 51.11)
§ 90.26 NUISANCE PARKING AND STORAGE.
   (A)   The outside parking and storage on residentially-zoned property of
large numbers of vehicles and vehicles, materials, supplies or equipment not
customarily used for residential purposes in violation of the requirements set
forth below is declared to be a public nuisance because it:
      (1)   Obstructs views on streets and private property;
      (2)   Creates cluttered and otherwise unsightly areas;
      (3)   Prevents the full use of residential streets for residential
parking;
      (4)   Decreases adjoining landowners’ and occupants’ enjoyment of their
property and neighborhood; and
      (5)   Otherwise adversely affects property values and neighborhood
patterns.
   (B)   Unlawful parking and storage.
      (1)   A person must not place, store or allow the placement or storage of
ice fishing houses, skateboard ramps, playhouses or other similar non-permanent
structures for longer than 24 hours in the front-yard area of residential
property unless the location is more than 100 feet back from the front property
line.
      (2)   A person must not place, store or allow the placement or storage of
pipe, lumber, forms, steel, machinery or similar materials, including all
materials used in connection with a business, outside on residential property,
unless shielded from public view by an opaque cover or fence.
      (3)   A person must not cause, undertake, permit or allow the outside
parking and storage of vehicles on residential property unless it complies with
the following requirements.
         (a)   No more than four vehicles per lawful dwelling unit may be
parked or stored anywhere outside on residential property, except as otherwise
permitted or required by the city because of nonresidential characteristics of
the property. This maximum number does not include vehicles of occasional
guests who do not reside on the property.
         (b)   Vehicles that are parked or stored outside in the front-yard
area must be on a paved or graveled parking surface or driveway area.
         (c)   Vehicles, watercraft and other articles stored outside on
residential property must be owned by a person who resides on that property.
Students who are away at school for periods of time, but still claim the
property as their legal residence will be considered residents on the property.
(Ord. 2025-, passed - -)
DRUG LAB SITES
§ 90.40 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The City Council finds that the existence of drug lab sites and
chemical dump sites in the city pose a serious health and safety threat to
members of the public, particularly minors and persons of child bearing age,
through the exposure to hazardous chemicals and chemical residue.
   (B)   The Council has, therefore, determined that the regulation and proper
removal of those sites is necessary for the protection of the public health,
safety and general welfare.
(Prior Code, § 53.01)
§ 90.41 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   CHEMICAL DUMP SITE. Any place or location where chemicals and/or other
hazardous waste material used in a clandestine drug lab have been deposited.
   CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL. The chief building official for the city or the
official’s designee.
   CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB. The unlawful manufacture or attempt to manufacture
controlled substances.
   CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITE. Any place or location where conditions associated
with the operation of a clandestine drug lab are found to exist and may include
dwellings, accessory buildings or structures, mobile homes, motorized or non-
motorized vehicles or any parcels of land.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Any drug, chemical, substance or immediate precursor
thereto as defined by M.S. § 152.02, Schedules I through V, as may be amended
from time to time, but does not include distilled spirits, wine, malt
beverages, intoxicating liquors or tobacco.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any chemicals or other substances used in the manufacture
of controlled substances in a clandestine drug lab and the resulting by-
products therefrom which pose a risk to the health, safety and welfare of
occupants, visitors or neighbors of the site.
   MANUFACTURE. The production, cultivation, quality control and
standardization, in locations other than a pharmacy, of controlled substances
by mechanical, physical, chemical or pharmaceutical means and the packing,
repacking, tablet producing, encapsulating, labeling, relabeling, filling or
other similar process relating to the substances.
   MDH. The Minnesota Department of Health or any successor thereto.
   MINOR. Any person under the age of 18 years.
   MPCA. The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency or any successor thereto.
   OWNER. Any person, firm, partnership, company, corporation or other entity
that owns or has title to in full or in part, the land, buildings, structures
or other property associated with a clandestine drug lab site or a chemical
dump site.
   SITE. Any defined location, including buildings, structures or other
property, where appropriate tests have determined that, due to the existence of
a clandestine drug lab site or chemical dump site, a risk to the health, safety
and welfare exists for any persons who occupy, visit or neighbor on the
location.
(Prior Code, § 53.02)
§ 90.42 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Existence and maintenance of a clandestine drug lab site or chemical dump
site in the city constitutes a public nuisance subject to the regulations of
this chapter in addition to any and all applicable federal, state or local laws
and ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 53.03)
§ 90.43 NOTICES.
   (A)   To other authorities. Law enforcement agencies that identified
conditions associated with a clandestine drug lab site or chemical dump site
which place neighbors, visiting public or present and future occupants of the
site at risk for exposure to harmful chemicals or other contaminants must
promptly notify the County Sheriff’s Department, the Chief Building Official,
appropriate child protection agencies and the appropriate health authorities.
The notice must, at a minimum, identify the location of the site, the site
owner, if known, and the conditions found on the site.
(Prior Code, § 53.04)
   (B)   To concerned parties.
      (1)   Upon receipt of the notice to other authorities, the Chief Building
Official must promptly notify the following parties by registered or certified
mail:
         (a)   The owner of the property, if known;
         (b)   Occupants of the property;
         (c)   Any neighbors that have been determined to be at risk; and
         (d)   Other appropriate state and local authorities including, but not
limited to, the MDH and the MPCA, which are known to have applicable public and
environmental protection responsibilities.
      (2)   The notice must, at a minimum, include the location of the site,
the name of the property owner, if known, the type and nature of the
contamination and the extent of the contamination.
      (3)   The Chief Building Official must also cause a copy of the notice to
be posted at each appropriate access point to the site.
(Prior Code, § 53.05)
§ 90.44 ISSUANCE OF ORDER.
   (A)   In addition to the required notices, the Chief Building Official will
issue an order to the property owner to abate the public nuisance. The order
must include at a minimum the following:
      (1)   A description of the site and all portions thereof that are
determined to be contaminated. The description may be in any form that readily
identifies the contaminated portion of the site;
      (2)   All portions of the site that are determined to be contaminated and
a risk to occupants or visitors are immediately vacated;
      (3)   The owner commence and complete all testing and clean up procedures
and other required remedial actions on the site by dates specified in the order
or such other dates agreed to by the city;
      (4)   The site may not be re-occupied or used in any manner until it has
been completely cleaned in accordance with the guidelines established by the
MDH;
      (5)   If the owner does not commence testing and complete the clean up
procedures by the dates established in the order, the city, its officials,
employees or agents, will enter the property and provide for the testing and
clean up services at the owner’s expense; and
      (6)   The owner is responsible for all costs associated with the clean up
of the site including all costs incurred by the city and other public agencies,
and that if the owner does not promptly pay those costs, they will be assessed
against the property and collected in the manner of a special tax.
   (B)   (1)   The order must be served upon the owner by personal service or
by registered or certified mail and posted at appropriate access points to the
site.
      (2)   If, after due diligence, the owner cannot be located, the order, in
addition to being posted, must be published once in the official newspaper of
the city.
(Prior Code, § 53.06)
§ 90.45 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNER.
   (A)   Upon receipt of the notice and order, the owner will be responsible
for the following:
      (1)   Ensure that the site and all surrounding areas determined to be at
risk are properly vacated;
      (2)   Engage an appropriate environmental testing firm to assess the
extent of the contamination, monitor the clean up process, provide follow-up
testing after the completion of the clean up process and certify that the risks
of contamination have been sufficiently reduced to allow safe occupancy of the
site;
      (3)   Engage an appropriate contractor to properly clean the site in
accordance with guidelines of the MDH;
      (4)   Provide the city with copies of all testing results and the clean
up plan;
      (5)   Keep the city regularly advised through the process of the testing
and clean up; and
      (6)   Upon completion of the clean up process, provide the city with a
copy of the final certification from the testing firm that the site is fit for
human habitation, including a written, signed statement that the clean up met
all MDH guidelines.
   (B)   (1)   If the owner, after due diligence, cannot be located or has not
commenced appropriate action toward the clean up of the site on or before the
commencement date established by the order, or has not completed the process by
the completion date established by the order, the city, its officials,
employees and agents, are hereby authorized to enter the property for the
purpose of abating the public nuisance through vacating, testing and cleaning
the site, or completing that process, in accordance with the requirements of
this subchapter.
      (2)   When appropriate, the abatement process may include the demolition
and removal of any hazardous building or structure.
(Prior Code, § 53.07)
§ 90.46 RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS.
   (A)   The owner of the site is responsible for any and all costs incurred in
the clean up of that site including, but not limited to, the costs of vacating
the site and surrounding areas, testing, clean up and public expenses.
   (B)   Public expenses will include all costs that may be incurred by the
city and other public agencies such as:
      (1)   Laboratory fees;
      (2)   Preparing and serving notices;
      (3)   Preparing and serving the order;
      (4)   Posting the site;
      (5)   Vacating the site and other necessary properties;
      (6)   Testing services;
      (7)   Clean up services;
      (8)   Expenses incurred in recovering costs, including all special
assessment expenses;
      (9)   Administrative fees; and
      (10)   All other costs associated with the clean up of the site.
(Prior Code, § 53.08)
§ 90.47 RECOVERY OF CITY COSTS.
   (A)   Within 30 days after receipt of an invoice from the city, the owner
will submit payment in full of all city costs associated with the clean up
project.
   (B)   If the city has been unable to locate the owner, or the owner fails to
submit timely payment to the city, the city is authorized to collect its costs
by assessing those costs against the property in the same manner as a special
assessment which will be certified and collected in the manner of a special tax
in accordance with applicable law, or other collection as allowed by law.
(Prior Code, § 53.09)
§ 90.48 REMOVAL OF PUBLIC NUISANCE DESIGNATION.
   (A)   Upon receipt of the appropriate certification that the site has been
cleaned in accordance with MDH guidelines and is no longer a risk to occupants
of the site or others, the Chief Building Official will remove the public
nuisance designation of the site and will so notify in writing the owner and
all parties previously notified.
   (B)   The Chief Building Official will also promptly cause all postings on
the site to be removed.
(Prior Code, § 53.10)
§ 90.49 RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS AND REGULATIONS.
   If any regulation, standard, condition or requirement imposed by this
chapter is determined to be either more or less restrictive than comparable
provisions of any other law, statute, ordinance, rule or regulations, whether
federal, state or local, the more restrictive provision or the one providing
for the higher standards or requirements will prevail.
(Prior Code, § 53.11)
WEEDS
§ 90.60 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be cited as the “Weeds Subchapter”.
(Prior Code, § 56.01) (Ord. 2025-, passed - -)
§ 90.61 JURISDICTION.
   This subchapter shall be in addition to any state statute or county
ordinance presently in effect, subsequently added, amended or repealed.
(Prior Code, § 56.02) (Ord. 2025-, passed - -)
§ 90.62 DEFINITIONS; EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly requires a different
meaning.
      DESTRUCTION ORDER. The notice served by the City Council or designated
city official, in cases of appeal, on the property owner of the ordinance
violation.
      PROPERTY OWNER. The person occupying the property, the holder of legal
title or a person having control over the property of another, such as a right-
of-way, easement, license or lease.
      WEEDS, GRASSES and RANK VEGETATION. Includes, but is not limited to, the
following:
         (a)   Noxious weeds and rank vegetation shall include but not be
limited to: alum (allium), Buckthorn, Bur Cucumber, Black Swallow-Wort, Brown
Knapweed, Canada Thistle, Common Teasel, Corncockle, Cressleaf Groundsel, Curly
Dock, Cutleaf Teasel, Dalmation Toadflax, Diffuse Knapweed, Dodder, Field
Bindweed, French Weed, Giant Hogweed, Grecian Foxglove, Hairy Whitetop, Hedge
Bindweed, Hoary Cress, Hooked, Hair Hops, Horsenettle, Japanese Honeysuckle
(and all cultivars), Johnsongrass, Leafy Spurge, Mile-A-Minute Weed, Musk
Thistle, Oxeye Daisy, Pale Swallow-Wort, Palmer Amaranth, Perennial Sowthistle,
Poison Hemlock, Purple Loosestrife, Quackgrass, Red Hailstone, Russian
Knapweed, Russian Thistle, Serrated Tussock, Shatter Cane, Sorghum, Tree of
Heaven,Wild Carrot, Wild Garlic, Wild Mustard, Wild Onion, Wild Parsnip, Yellow
Starthistle;
         (b)   Grapevines when growing in groups of 100 or more and not pruned,
sprayed, cultivated or otherwise maintained for two consecutive years;
         (c)   Bushes of the species of tall, common or European barberry,
further known as berberis vulgaris or its horticultural varieties;
         (d)   Any weeds, grass or plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers or
other ornamental plants, growing to a height exceeding 12 inches;
         (e)   Rank vegetation includes the uncontrolled, uncultivated growth
of annuals and perennial plants; and
         (f)   The term WEEDS does not include shrubs, trees, cultivated plants
or crops.
   (B)   Exemptions. In no event shall cultivated plants or crops include
plants which have been defined by state statute or administrative rule as being
noxious or detrimental plants.
(Prior Code, § 56.03) (Ord. 2025-, passed - -)
§ 90.63 OWNERS RESPONSIBLE FOR TRIMMING, REMOVAL AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   All property owners shall be responsible for the removal, cutting or
disposal and elimination of noxious weeds, grasses and rank vegetation or other
uncontrolled plant growth on their property, which at the time of notice, is in
excess of six inches in height.
   (B)   All property owners shall be allowed to install and maintain a managed
natural landscape in excess of eight inches under M.S. § 412.925, as it may be
amended from time to time, but only if the landscape is maintained and does not
consist of noxious weeds or other rank vegetation. For purposes of this
subsection, MANAGED NATURAL LANDSCAPE means a planned, intentional and
maintained planting of native or nonnative grasses, wildflowers, forbs, ferns,
shrubs or trees, including, but not limited to, rain gardens, meadow vegetation
and ornamental plants. This definition does not include turf grass lawns left
unattended.
(Prior Code, § 56.04) (Ord. 2025-, passed - -)
CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Nuisances
   
91.02   Definitions
   
91.03   Removal of feces
   
91.04   Abandonment prohibited
   
91.05   Farm animals and non-domestic animals
   
91.06   Horses
   
91.07   Potentially dangerous or dangerous animals
   
91.08   Adoption of state law
Dogs
   
91.20   Running at large prohibited
   
91.21   City pound; designation and location
   
91.22   Seizure and impoundment
   
91.23   Rabies control
   
91.24   Limit on number
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 NUISANCES.
   The owner or custodian of any animal or bird otherwise lawfully kept within
the city limits shall not allow the odor of the animal or bird to become a
nuisance to his or her neighbors. The nuisance may, upon written complaint of
two or more neighbors, be abated.
(Prior Code, § 52.01)
§ 91.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   AT LARGE. A dog is at large when it is off the property of the person
owning, harboring or keeping the dog and it is not under restraint.
   PERSON. Any person, firm or corporation owning, harboring or keeping a dog.
   UNDER RESTRAINT. A dog is under restraint if it is on the premises of the
person harboring or keeping the dog; or is controlled by a leash not exceeding
six feet in length, is at heel beside a person having custody of it or obedient
to the person’s command or is within a private motor vehicle of a person
owning, harboring or keeping the dog.
(Prior Code, § 52.02)
§ 91.03 REMOVAL OF FECES.
   Persons owning any animal, whether that animal is at large or under
restraint, are responsible for the prompt removal of all feces left by the
animal.
(Prior Code, § 52.03)
§ 91.04 ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any animal within the city.
(Prior Code, § 52.04)
§ 91.05 FARM ANIMALS AND NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly requires a different
meaning.
      FARM ANIMALS. Those animals commonly associated with a farm or performing
work in an agricultural setting. Unless otherwise defined, FARM ANIMALS shall
include members of the equestrian family (horses, mules), bovine family (cows,
bulls), sheep, poultry (chickens, turkeys), fowl (ducks, geese), swine
(including Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs), goats, bees and other animals
associated with a farm, ranch or stable.
      NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS. Those animals commonly considered to be naturally
wild and not naturally trained or domesticated, or which are commonly
considered to be inherently dangerous to the health, safety and welfare of
people. Unless otherwise defined, NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS shall include:
         (a)   Any member of the large cat family (family felidae) including
lions, tigers, cougars, bobcats, leopards and jaguars, but excluding commonly
accepted domesticated house cats;
         (b)   Any naturally wild member of the canine family (family canidae)
including wolves, foxes, coyotes, dingoes and jackals, but excluding commonly
accepted domesticated dogs;
         (c)   Any crossbreeds such as the crossbreed between a wolf and a dog,
unless the crossbreed is commonly accepted as a domesticated house pet;
         (d)   Any member or relative of the rodent family including any skunk
(whether or not de- scented), raccoon, squirrel or ferret, but excluding those
members otherwise defined or commonly accepted as domesticated pets;
         (e)   Any poisonous, venomous, constricting or inherently dangerous
member of the reptile or amphibian families including rattlesnakes, boa
constrictors, pit vipers, crocodiles and alligators; and
         (f)   Any other animal which is not explicitly listed above but which
can be reasonably defined by the terms of this section, including, but not
limited to, bears, deer, monkeys and game fish.
   (B)   Non-domestic animals.
      (1)   It shall be illegal for any person to own, possess, harbor or offer
for sale, any non-domestic animal within the city.
      (2)   Any owner of a non-domestic animal at the time of adoption of this
code shall have 30 days in which to remove the animal from the city, after
which time the city may impound the animal as provided for in this section.
      (3)   An exception shall be made to this prohibition for animals
specifically trained for and actually providing assistance to the handicapped
or disabled, and for those animals brought into the city as part of an
operating zoo, veterinarian clinic, scientific research laboratory or a
licensed show or exhibition.
   (C)   Farm animals. Farm animals shall only be kept in an agricultural
district of the city, or on a residential lot of at least ten acres in size;
provided that, no animal shelter shall be within 300 feet of an adjoining piece
of property. An exception shall be made to this section for those animals
brought into the city as part of an operating zoo, veterinarian clinic,
scientific research laboratory or a licensed show or exhibition.
(Prior Code, § 52.11) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.06 HORSES.
   Horses may be ridden on city streets in an orderly manner so as not to cause
traffic. Riders of horses are to clean up feces deposited by horses they are
riding or handling.
(Prior Code, § 52.12) (Ord. 2025-, passed - -)
§ 91.07 POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS OR DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   Adoption by reference. All potentially dangerous or dangerous animals
are subject to regulation and enforcement under County Code of Ordinances
Chapter 90, Dangerous Dogs, as it may be amended from time to time. Except as
otherwise provided in this section, the regulatory and procedural provisions of
M.S. §§ 347.50 to 347.565 (commonly referred to as the “Dangerous Dog
Regulations”), are adopted by reference.
   (B)   Definitions. Definitions in this section shall have the following
meanings:
      DANGEROUS DOG. A dog that:
         (a)   Has, when unprovoked, inflicted substantial bodily harm on a
human being on public or private property;
         (b)   Has killed a domestic animal when unprovoked while off the
owner’s property;
         (c)   Has attacked one or more persons on two or more occasions; or
         (d)   Has been found to be potentially dangerous and after the owner
has notice of the same, the dog aggressively bites, attacks or endangers the
safety of humans or domestic animals.
      DOG. Both the male and female of the canine species, commonly accepted as
domesticated household pets.
      GREAT BODILY HARM. Bodily injury which creates a high probability of
death, or which causes serious permanent disfigurement, or which causes a
permanent or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member
or organ or other serious bodily harm.
      MAINTENANCE COSTS. Any costs incurred as a result of seizing an animal
for impoundment, including, but not limited to, the capturing, impounding,
keeping, treating, examining, securing, confining, feeding, destroying,
boarding or maintaining seized animals, whether these services are provided by
the city or the pound.
      OWNER. Any person or persons, firm, corporation, organization, department
or association owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, having an interest in,
or having care, custody or control of a dog.
      POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG. A dog that:
         (a)   Has, when unprovoked, inflicted a bite on a human or domestic
animal on public or private property;
         (b)   Has, when unprovoked, chased or approached a person, including a
person on a bicycle, upon the streets, sidewalks or any public or private
property, other than the owner’s property, in an apparent attitude of attack;
or
         (c) Has a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
unprovoked, causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of humans or
domestic animals.
      PROPER ENCLOSURE. Securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and
locked pen or structure suitable to prevent the dog from escaping and to
provide protection for the dog from the elements. A proper enclosure does not
include a porch, patio or any part of a house, garage or other structure that
would allow the dog to exit of its own volition, or any house or structure in
which windows are open or in which door or window screens are the only barriers
which prevent the dog from exiting. The enclosure shall not allow the egress of
the dog in any manner without human assistance. A pen or kennel shall meet the
following minimum specifications:
         (a)   A minimum overall floor size of 32 square feet;
         (b)   Sidewalls shall have a minimum height of five feet and be
constructed of 11-gauge or heavier wire. Openings in the wire shall not exceed
two inches, support post shall be one and one-fourth inch or larger steel pipe
buried in the ground 18 inches or more. When a concrete floor is not provided,
the sidewalls shall be buried a minimum of 18 inches in the ground;
         (c)   A cover over the entire pen or kennel shall be provided. The
cover shall be constructed of the same gauge wire or heavier as the sidewalls
and openings in the wire shall not exceed two inches; and
         (d)   An entrance/exit gate shall be provided and be constructed of
the same material as the sidewalls and openings in the wire shall not exceed
two inches. The gate shall be self-closing and self-locking. The gate shall be
locked at all times when the dog is in the pen or kennel.
      SUBSTANTIAL BODILY HARM. Bodily injury that involves a temporary, but
substantial, disfigurement, or that causes a temporary, but substantial, loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ or that causes a
fracture of any bodily member.
      UNPROVOKED. The condition in which the dog is not purposely excited,
stimulated, agitated or disturbed.
   (C)   Declaration of dangerous or potentially dangerous dog.
      (1)   A police officer, community service officer, animal control officer
or other authorized city employee may declare a dog to be dangerous or
potentially dangerous when the officer has probable cause to believe that a dog
is dangerous or potentially dangerous. The following factors will be considered
in determining a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog:
         (a)   Whether any injury or damage to a person by the dog was caused
while the dog was protecting or defending a person or the dog’s offspring
within the immediate vicinity of the dog from an unjustified attack or assault;
         (b)   The size and strength of the dog, including jaw strength, and
the animal’s propensity to bite humans or other domestic animals; and
         (c)   Whether the dog has wounds, scarring, is observed in a fight or
has other indications that the dog has been or will be used, trained or
encouraged to fight with another animal or whose owner is in possession of any
training apparatus, paraphernalia or drugs used to prepare such dogs to fight
with other animals.
      (2)   (a)   Beginning six months after a dog is declared dangerous or
potentially dangerous, an owner may request annually that the city review the
designation.
         (b)   The owner must provide evidence that the dog’s behavior has
changed due to the dog’s age, neutering, environment, completion of obedience
training or other factors. If enough evidence is provided, the city may rescind
the designation.
      (3)    Exceptions.
         (a)   The provisions of this section do not apply to dogs used by law
enforcement.
         (b)   Dogs may not be declared dangerous or potentially dangerous if
the threat, injury or danger was sustained by a person who was:
            1.   Committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises
occupied by the owner of the dog;
            2.   Provoking, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog, or who
can be shown to have a history of repeatedly provoking, tormenting, abusing or
assaulting the dog; or
            3.   Committing or attempting to commit a crime.
   (D)   License required. The owner must annually license dangerous and
potentially dangerous dogs with the city and must license a newly declared
dangerous or potentially dangerous dog within 14 days after notice that a dog
has been declared dangerous or potentially dangerous. Regardless of any appeal
that may be requested, the owner must comply with the requirements of M.S. §
347.52(a) and (c) regarding proper enclosures and notification to the city upon
transfer or death of the dog, until and unless a hearing officer or court of
law reverses the declaration.
      (1)   Process for dangerous dogs. The city will issue a license to the
owner of a dangerous dog if the owner presents sufficient evidence that:
         (a)   There is a proper enclosure;
         (b)   Written proof that there is a surety bond by a surety company
authorized to conduct business in state in the sum of at least $300,000,
payable to any person injured by a dangerous dog, or receipt of a copy of a
policy of liability insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do
business in state in the amount of at least $300,000, insuring the owner for
any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog. Such surety bond or
insurance policy shall provide that no cancellation of the bond or policy will
be made unless the city is notified in writing by the surety company or the
insurance company at least ten days prior to such cancellation;
         (c)   The owner has paid the annual license fee for dangerous dogs as
established in the ordinance establishing fees and charges adopted pursuant to
the Ordinance to Establish Fees and Charges.
         (d)   The owner has had a microchip identification implanted in the
dangerous dog. The name of the microchip manufacturer and identification number
of the microchip must be provided to the city. If the microchip is not
implanted by the owner, it may be implanted by the city at the owner’s expense;
and
         (e)   The owner provides proof that the dog has been sterilized. If
the owner does not sterilize the dog within 30 days, the city may seize the dog
and sterilize it at the owner’s expense.
      (2)   Process for potentially dangerous dogs. The city will issue a
license to the owner of a potentially dangerous dog if the owner presents
sufficient evidence that:
         (a)   There is a proper enclosure;
         (b)   The owner has paid the annual license fee; and
         (c)   The owner has had a microchip identification implanted in the
potentially dangerous dog. The name of the microchip manufacturer and
identification number of the microchip must be provided to the city. If the
microchip is not implanted by the owner, it may be implanted by the city at the
owner’s expense.
      (3)   Inspection. A pre-license inspection of the premises to insure
compliance with the city code is required. If the city issues a license to the
owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, the city shall be allowed at
any reasonable time to inspect the dog, the proper enclosure and all places
where the animal is kept.
      (4)   Warning symbol. The owner of a dangerous dog licensed under this
section must post a sign with the uniform dangerous dog warning symbol on the
property in order to inform children that there is a dangerous dog on the
property. The sign will be provided by the city upon issuance of the license.
      (5)   Tags. A dangerous dog licensed under this section must wear a
standardized, easily identifiable tag at all times that contains the uniform
dangerous dog symbol, identifying the dog as dangerous. The tag shall be
provided by the city upon issuance of the license.
      (6)   License fee. The city will charge the owner an annual license fee
for a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog as established in the Ordinance to
Establish Fees and Charges, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (E)   Properly restrained in proper enclosure or outside of proper
enclosure. While on the owner’s property, an owner of a dangerous or
potentially dangerous dog must keep it in a proper enclosure. Inside a
residential home, there must be a secured area maintained where the dog will
stay when persons other than family members are present. If the dog is outside
the proper enclosure, the dog must be muzzled and restrained by a substantial
chain or leash no longer than four feet and under the physical restraint of an
adult. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will prevent the dog from
biting any person or animal but that will not cause injury to the dog or
interfere with its vision or respiration.
   (F)   Notification requirements to city.
      (1)   Relocation or death. The owner of a dog that has been declared
dangerous or potentially dangerous must notify the City Clerk in writing if the
dog is to be relocated from its current address or if the dog has died. The
notification must be given in writing within 30 days of the relocation or
death. The notification must include the current owner’s name and address, and
the new owner’s name and the relocation address. If the relocation address is
outside of the city, the city may notify the local law enforcement agency of
the transfer of the dog into its jurisdiction.
      (2)   Renter’s obligations. A person who owns or possess a dangerous or
potentially dangerous dog and who will rent property from another where the dog
will reside must disclose to the property owner prior to entering the lease
agreement and at the time of any lease renewal periods that the person owns or
possesses a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog that will reside at the
property. A dog owner who is currently renting property must notify the
property owner within 14 days of city notification if the owned dog is newly
declared as dangerous or potentially dangerous and the owner keeps the dog on
the property.
      (3)   Transfer of ownership into the city. No dog that has been
previously determined to be dangerous or potentially dangerous by another
jurisdiction shall be kept, owned or harbored in the city unless the dog’s
owner complies with the requirements of this section prior to bringing the dog
into the city. Dogs in violation of this division are subject to impoundment
and destruction.
   (G)   Seizure. Animal control may immediately seize any dangerous or
potentially dangerous dog if:
      (1)   After 14 days after the owner has notice that the dog is declared
dangerous or potentially dangerous, the dog is not validly licensed and no
appeal has been filed;
      (2)   After 14 days after the owner has notice that the dog is dangerous,
the owner does not secure the proper liability insurance or surety coverage as
required or such required insurance is cancelled;
      (3)   The dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure;
      (4)   The dog is outside the proper enclosure and not under proper
restraint, as required by §
91.07(E);
      (5)   After 30 days after the owner has notice that the dog is dangerous,
the dog is not sterilized, as required by §
91.07(D)(1)(e); and/or
      (6)   The dog’s microchip has been removed.
   (H)   Reclamation. A dog seized under §
91.07(G) may be reclaimed by the owner of the dog upon payment of maintenance
costs, and presenting proof to animal control that the requirements of this
section have been met. A dog not reclaimed under this division within seven
days may be disposed of and the owner will be liable to the city for
maintenance costs. A person claiming an interest in a seized dog may prevent
disposition of the dog by posting a security in an amount sufficient to provide
for the dog’s maintenance costs. The security must be posted with the city
within seven days of the seizure inclusive of the date seized.
   (I)   Subsequent offenses: seizure. If a person has been convicted of
violating a provision of this section, and the person is charged with a
subsequent violation relating to the same dog, the dog may be seized. If the
owner is convicted of the crime for which the dog was seized, the court may
order that the dog be destroyed in a proper and humane manner and the owner pay
the maintenance costs. If the owner is not convicted and the dog is not
reclaimed by the owner within seven days after the owner has been notified that
the dog may be reclaimed, the dog may be disposed of in manner permitted by
law.
   (J)   Notice, hearings.
      (1)   Notice. After a dog has been declared dangerous or potentially
dangerous or has been seized for destruction, the city shall give notice by
delivering or mailing it to the owner of the dog, or by posting a copy of it at
the place where the dog is kept, or by delivering it to a person residing on
the property, and telephoning, if possible. The notice shall include:
         (a)   A description of the seized dog; the authority for and purpose
of the declaration and seizure; the time, place, and circumstances under which
the dog was declared; and the telephone number and contact person where the dog
is kept;
         (b)   A statement that the owner of the dog may request a hearing
concerning the declaration and that failure to do so within 14 days of the date
of the notice will terminate the owner’s right to a hearing;
         (c)   A statement that if an appeal request is made within 14 days of
the notice, the owner must immediately comply with the requirements of M.S. §
347.52, paragraphs (a) and (c) regarding proper enclosures and notification to
the city upon transfer or death of the dog, until such time as the hearing
officer issues an opinion;
         (d)   A statement that if the hearing officer affirms the dangerous
dog declaration, the owner will have 14 days from receipt of that decision to
comply with all other requirements of M.S. §§ 347.51, 347.515, and 347.52;
         (e)   A form to request a hearing; and
         (f)   A statement that if the dog has been seized, all maintenance
costs of the care, keeping and disposition of the dog pending the outcome of
the hearing are the responsibility of the owner, unless a court or hearing
officer finds that the seizure or impoundment was not reasonably justified by
law.
      (2)   Right to hearing.
         (a)   After a dog has been declared dangerous, potentially dangerous
or has been seized for destruction, the owner may appeal in writing to the city
within 14 days after notice of the declaration or seizure. Failure to do so
within 14 days of the date of the notice will terminate the owner’s right to a
hearing. The owner must pay a $100 fee for an appeal hearing.
         (b)   The appeal hearing will be held within 14 days of the request.
The hearing officer must be an impartial employee of the city or an impartial
person retained by the city to conduct the hearing.
         (c)   If the declaration or destruction is upheld by the hearing
officer, actual expenses of the hearing up to a maximum of $1,000, as well as
all maintenance costs, will be the responsibility of the dog’s owner. The
hearing officer shall issue a decision on the matter within ten days after the
hearing. The decision shall be delivered to the dog’s owner by hand delivery or
registered mail as soon as practical and a copy shall be provided to the city.
The decision of the hearing officer is final.
   (K)   Destruction of certain dogs. The Police Chief and/or hearing officer
are authorized to order the destruction or other disposition of any dog, after
proper notice is given pursuant to § 91.11(J) and upon a finding that:
      (1)   The dog has habitually destroyed property or habitually trespassed
in a damaging manner on property of persons other than the owner;
      (2)   The dog has been declared dangerous, the owner’s right to appeal
hereunder has been exhausted or expired, and the owner has failed to comply
with the provisions of this section;
      (3)   It is determined that the dog is infected with rabies;
      (4)   The dog inflicted substantial or great bodily harm on a human on
public or private property without provocation;
      (5)   The dog inflicted multiple bites on a human on public or private
property without provocation;
      (6)   The dog bit multiple human victims on public or private property in
the same attack without provocation;
      (7)   The dog bit a human on public or private property without
provocation in an attack where more than one dog participated in the attack; or
      (8)   The dog poses a danger to the public’s health, safety or welfare.
In determining whether the dog poses a danger to the public’s health, safety or
welfare, the following factors may be considered:
         (a)   The dog weighs more than 20 pounds;
         (b)   The strength of the dog, including jaw strength;
         (c)   The dog’s tolerance for pain;
         (d)   The dog’s tendency to refuse to terminate an attack;
         (e)   The dog’s propensity to bite humans or other domestic animals;
         (f)   The dog’s potential for unpredictable behavior;
         (g)   The dog’s aggressiveness; and
         (h)   The likelihood that a bite by the dog will result in serious
injury.
   (L)   Concealing of dogs. No person may harbor, hide or conceal a dog that
the city has the authority to seize or that has been ordered into custody for
destruction or other proper disposition.
   (M)   Dog ownership prohibited.
      (1)   Except as provided below, a person shall not own a dog if the
person has been:
         (a)   Convicted of a third or subsequent violation of §
91.07(D), (E) or (F) or similar ordinance in another jurisdiction, or M.S. §§
347.51, 347.515 or 347.52;
         (b)   Convicted of 2nd degree manslaughter due to negligent or
intentional use of a dog under M.S. § 609.205(4); or
         (c)   Convicted of gross misdemeanor harm caused by a dog under M.S. §
609.226, subd. d.
      (2)   Any person who owns a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog and is
found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this section or had owned
a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog but never achieved compliance with
this section may be prohibited from ownership or custody of another dog for a
period of five years after the original declaration. Any dog found to be in
violation, may be impounded until due process is completed, pursuant to §
91.07(J).
         (3)   If any member of a household is prohibited from owning a dog in
§
91.07(M)(1) or (2), unless specifically approved with or without restrictions
by the city, no person in the household is permitted to own a dog.
   (N)   Dog ownership prohibition review. Beginning three years after a
conviction under §
91.07(M)(1) that prohibits a person from owning a dog, and annually thereafter,
the person may request in writing to the Police Chief that the city review the
prohibition. The city may consider such facts as the seriousness of the
violation or violations that led to the prohibition, any criminal convictions
or other facts that the city deems appropriate. The city may rescind the
prohibition entirely or rescind it with limitations. The city also may
establish conditions a person must meet before the prohibition is rescinded,
including, but not limited to, successfully completing dog training or dog
handling courses. If the city rescinds a person’s prohibition and the person
subsequently fails to comply with any limitations imposed by the city or the
person is convicted of any animal violation involving unprovoked bites or dog
attacks, the city may permanently prohibit the person from owning a dog in the
state.
   (O)   Penalties.
      (1)   Unless stated otherwise, any person who violates a provision of
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
      (2)   Any person who is convicted of a second or subsequent violation of
any provision of §
91.07(D), (E) or (F) is guilty of a gross misdemeanor.
      (3)   Any person who violates §
91.07(M), whether an owner or household member, is guilty of a gross
misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 52.13) (Ord. 2025-, passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.08 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.
   The provisions of M.S. §§ 35.67, 35.68 and 35.69, as they may be amended
from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and are incorporated in and
made a part of this chapter as completely as if the same were set down in full.
(Prior Code, § 52.14)
DOGS
§ 91.20 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for the dog of any person who owns, harbors or keeps a
dog, to run at large. A person, who owns, harbors or keeps a dog which runs at
large shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Dogs on a leash and accompanied by a
responsible person or accompanied by and under the control and direction of a
responsible person, so as to be effectively restrained by command as by leash,
shall be permitted in streets or on public land unless the city has posted an
area with signs reading “Dogs Prohibited.”
(Penalty, see § 10.99)
§ 91.21 CITY POUND; DESIGNATION AND LOCATION.
   (A)   The city, from time to time, shall designate the place or places as
city dog pound for keeping and maintaining any dog which may be seized or
impounded pursuant hereto.
   (B)   The city dog pounds may be within or outside the city limits.
(Prior Code, § 52.07)
§ 91.22 SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   A city official or law enforcement officer is authorized to seize and
impound dogs found in the city running at large, as defined in this chapter.
   (B)   Any city official or law enforcement officer may enter upon private
property and seize any animal with the permission of the owner of the property
or with a warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction; provided that,
the following exist:
      (1)   There is an identified complainant other than the city official or
law enforcement officer making a contemporaneous complaint about the animal;
      (2)   The city official or law enforcement officer reasonably believes
that the animal meets either the barking dog criteria set out in §
90.04 of this code of ordinances related to noise regulations; the criteria for
cruelty; or the criteria for an at large animal set out in this chapter;
      (3)   The city official or law enforcement officer can demonstrate that
there has been at least one previous complaint of a barking dog; inhumane
treatment of the animal; or that the animal was at large at this address on a
prior date; and
      (4)   Written notice of the seizure is left in a conspicuous place if
personal contact with the owner of the animal is not possible.
   (C)   The city official or law enforcement officer shall not enter the
property of the owner of an animal described in this section unless the officer
has first obtained the permission of the owner of the property to do so or has
obtained a warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction, to search for
and seize the animal. If the city official or law enforcement officer has the
permission of the owner, a property manager, landlord, innkeeper or other
authorized person to enter the property or has obtained a pass key from a
property manager, landlord, innkeeper or other authorized person to have that
key shall not be considered unauthorized entry, and a warrant to search for and
seize the animal need not be obtained.
   (D)   In lieu of picking up an animal on private property, the city official
or law enforcement officer will notify the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer
and then will issue a citation to the owner of the animal found to be in
violation.
(Prior Code, § 52.08)
§ 91.23 RABIES CONTROL.
   If the city becomes aware of any dog exhibiting symptoms of rabies or known
or thought to have come in contact with rabies, the city may notify the
appropriate authority or may seize on the premises of the owner or elsewhere
and impounded the dog. Once the dog has been impounded and turned over to the
city dog pound, all regulations relating to impoundment are the responsibility
of the pound.
(Prior Code, § 52.09)
§ 91.24 LIMIT ON NUMBER.
   (A)   The keeping of more than three dogs without the permission of the City
Council in any dwelling shall be deemed a public nuisance and unlawful. For
purposes of this section, DWELLING is defined as any building or portion
thereof, designated exclusively for residential occupancy.
   (B)   The keeping of a dog or dogs that annoy other persons by habitually
barking, howling or baying shall be deemed a public nuisance and unlawful. For
purposes of this section, a PUBLIC NUISANCE is determined to be barking,
howling, baying or making any other noise continuously for a period of ten
minutes, or that makes noises intermittently for one-half hour or more, and in
so doing disturbs another person.
(Prior Code, § 52.10) (Ord. 2025-, passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 92: NUISANCES
Section
   
92.01   Public nuisance
   
92.02   Public nuisances affecting health
   
92.03   Public nuisances constituting illegal activity
   
92.04   Public nuisances affecting peace and safety
   
92.05   Duties of city officers
   
92.06   Parking and storage
   
92.07   Inoperable motor vehicles
   
92.08   Building maintenance and appearance
   
92.09   Duties of city officers
   
92.10   Abatement
   
92.11   Recovery of cost
§ 92.01 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   A person must not act or fail to act in a manner that is or causes a public
nuisance. For purpose of this chapter, a person who does any of the following
is guilty of maintaining a public nuisance, which is a misdemeanor:
   (A)   Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures or
endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort or repose of any considerable
number of members of the public;
   (B)   Interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous for passage any public
highway, or right-of-way or waters used by the public; or
   (C)   Does any other act or omission declared by law or §§
90.16,
90.17,
90.18 or any other part of this code to be a public nuisance and for which no
sentence is specifically provided.
(Prior Code, § 55.01) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.02 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.
   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health:
   (A)   Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or vegetable
matter;
   (B)   All diseased animals running at large;
   (C)   All ponds or pools of stagnant water;
   (D)   Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours after
death;
   (E)   Accumulations of manure, refuse or other debris;
   (F)   Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent-free or fly-tight
or which are so maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to emit foul and
disagreeable odors;
   (G)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake, canal or
body of water by sewage, industrial waste or other substances;
   (H)   All noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation upon public or
private property;
   (I)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot or cinders in unreasonable
quantities;
   (J)   All public exposure of people having a contagious disease; and
   (K)   Any offensive trade or business as defined by statute not operating
under local license.
(Prior Code, § 55.02) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.03 PUBLIC NUISANCES CONSTITUTING ILLEGAL ACTIVITY.
   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public morals
and decency:
      (1)   All gambling devices, slot machines and punch boards, except as
otherwise authorized by federal, state or local law;
      (2)   Betting, bookmaking and all apparatus used in those occupations;
      (3)   All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous
sexual intercourse, gambling houses, houses of ill fame and bawdy houses; and
      (4)   All places where intoxicating or 3.2% malt liquor is manufactured
or disposed of in violation of law or where, in violation of law, people are
permitted to resort for the purpose of drinking intoxicating or 3.2% malt
liquor, or where intoxicating or 3.2% malt liquor is kept for sale or other
disposition in violation of law, and all liquor and other property used for
maintaining that place.
(Prior Code, § 55.03) (Ord. 2025-, passed - -) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.04 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.
   The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and
safety:
   (A)   All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks 48 hours after the
snow or other precipitation causing the condition has ceased to fall;
   (B)   All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent
people from having a clear view of all traffic approaching an intersection;
   (C)   All wires and limbs of trees which are so close to the surface of a
sidewalk or street as to constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles;
   (D)   All obnoxious noises in violation of Minn. Rules Ch. 7030, as they may
be amended from time to time which are hereby incorporated by reference into
this code;
   (E)   The discharging of the exhaust or permitting the discharging of the
exhaust of any stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat, motor
vehicle, motorcycle, all terrain vehicle, snowmobile or any recreational device
except through a muffler or other device that effectively prevents loud or
explosive noises therefrom and complies with all applicable state laws and
regulations;
   (F)   (1)   The using or operation or permitting the using or operation of
any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, paging system, machine
or other device for producing or reproduction of sound in a distinctly and
loudly audible manner so as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of any
person nearby.
      (2)   Operation of any device referred to above between the hours of 10:
00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner so as to be plainly audible at the property
line of the structure or building in which it is located, or at a distance of
50 feet if the source is located outside a structure or building shall be prima
facie evidence of violation of this section. PLAINLY AUDIBLE is defined as
sound that can be detected by a person using their unaided hearing faculties;
   (G)   The participation in a party or gathering of people giving rise to
noise which disturbs the peace, quiet or repose of the occupants of adjoining
or other property;
   (H)   All unnecessary and annoying vibrations;
   (I)   Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary public use of
streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds, except under conditions as are
permitted by this code or other applicable law;
   (J)   Radio aerials or television antennae erected or maintained in a
dangerous manner;
   (K)   Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use
of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather,
obstructing traffic and the free use of the street or sidewalk;
   (L)   All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures over streets
and sidewalks, so situated so as to endanger public safety, or not constructed
and maintained as provided by ordinance;
   (M)   The allowing of rainwater, ice or snow to fall from any building or
structure upon any street or sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk;
   (N)   Any barbed wire fence less than six feet above the ground and within
three feet of a public sidewalk or way;
   (O)   All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so situated
or operated on private property as to attract the public;
   (P)   Wastewater cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or other public
properties;
   (Q)   Accumulations in the open of discarded or disused machinery, household
appliances, automobile bodies or other material in a manner conducive to the
harboring of rats, mice, snakes or vermin or the rank growth of vegetation
among the items so accumulated, or in a manner creating fire, health or safety
hazards from accumulation;
   (R)   Any well, hole or similar excavation which is left uncovered or in
another condition as to constitute a hazard to any child or other person coming
on the premises where it is located;
   (S)   Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or a
public street drain, gutter or ditch with trash of other materials;
   (T)   The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk or other public
property of any glass, tacks, nails, bottles or other substance which may
injure any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire when passing over the
substance;
   (U)   The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public right-of-way or on
adjacent private property;
   (V)   All other conditions or things which are likely to cause injury to the
person or property of anyone;
   (W)   Accumulation in the open. Accumulation in the open of broken or unused
metal, wood, lumber, cement, electrical fixtures, plumbing fixtures, building
materials (but excluding building materials awaiting use in construction or
improvement presently in progress on the same premises), trash, debris rubbish
in a manner conducive to the harboring of rats, mice, snakes, or vermin, or the
rank growth of vegetation among the items so accumulated, or in a manner
creating fire, health or safety hazards from such accumulation; and
   (X)   Reflected glare or light from private exterior lighting exceeding one-
half (0.5) footcandles as measured on the property line of the property where
the lighting is located when abutting any residential parcel, and one
footcandle when abutting any commercial or industrial parcel.
(Prior Code, § 55.04) (Ord. 2025-, passed - -) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.05 DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.
   The Police Department or Sheriff, if the city has at the time no Police
Department, shall enforce the provisions relating to nuisances. Any peace
officer shall have the power to inspect private premises and take all
reasonable precautions to prevent the commission and maintenance of public
nuisances. Except in emergency situations of imminent danger to human life and
safety, no police officer or designated person shall enter private property for
the purpose of inspection or preventing public nuisances without the permission
of the owner, resident or other person in control of the property, unless the
officer or person designated has obtained a warrant or order from a court of
competent jurisdiction authorizing the entry.
(Prior Code, § 55.05) (Ord. 2025-, passed - -)
§ 92.06 NUISANCE PARKING AND STORAGE.
   (A)   Declaration of nuisance. The outside parking and storage on
residentially-zoned property of large numbers of vehicles and vehicles,
materials, supplies or equipment not customarily used for residential purposes
in violation of the requirements set forth below is declared to be a public
nuisance because it:
         (1)   Obstructs views on streets and private property;
         (2)   Creates cluttered and otherwise unsightly areas;
         (3)   Prevents the full use of residential streets for residential
parking;
         (4)   Introduces commercial advertising signs into areas where
commercial advertising signs are otherwise prohibited;
         (5)   Decreases adjoining landowners’ and occupants’ enjoyment of
their property and neighborhood; and
         (6)   Otherwise adversely affects property values and neighborhood
patterns.
   (B)   Unlawful parking and storage.
      (1)   A person must not place, store or allow the placement or storage of
ice fishing houses, skateboard ramps, playhouses or other similar non-permanent
structures outside continuously for longer than 24 hours in the front-yard area
of residential property unless more than 100 feet back from the front property
line.
      (2)   A person must not place, store or allow the placement or storage of
pipe, lumber, forms, steel, machinery, or similar materials, including all
materials used in connection with a business, outside on residential property,
unless shielded from public view by an opaque cover or fence.
      (3)   A person must not cause, undertake, permit or allow the outside
parking and storage of vehicles on residential property unless it complies with
the following requirements:
         (a)   No more than four vehicles per lawful dwelling unit may be
parked or stored anywhere outside on residential property, except as otherwise
permitted or required by the city because of nonresidential characteristics of
the property. This maximum number does not include vehicles of occasional
guests who do not reside on the property;
         (b)   Vehicles that are parked or stored outside in the front-yard
area must be on a paved or graveled parking surface or driveway area; and
         (c)   Vehicles, watercraft and other articles stored outside on
residential property must be owned by a person who resides on that property.
Students who are away at school for periods of time, but still claim the
property as their legal residence, will be considered residents on the
property.
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.07 INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   Declaration of a nuisance. Any motor vehicles described in this
section shall constitute a hazard to the health and welfare of the residents of
the community as such vehicles can harbor noxious diseases, furnish a shelter
and breeding place for vermin, and present physical danger to the safety and
well-being of children and citizens. Motor vehicles also contain various fluids
which, if released into the environment, can and do cause significant health
risks to the community.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to keep, park, store or abandon any motor vehicle
which is not in operating condition, partially dismantled, used for repair of
parts or as a source of repair or replacement parts for other vehicles, kept
for scrapping, dismantling, or salvage of any kind, or which is not properly
licensed for operation with the state, pursuant to M.S. § 168.B,11, subd. 3, as
it may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   This section does not apply to a motor vehicle enclosed in a building
and/or kept out of view from any street, road or alley, and which does not
foster complaint from a resident of the city. A privacy fence is permissible.
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.08 BUILDING MAINTENANCE AND APPEARANCE.
   (A)   Declaration of nuisance. Buildings, fences and other structures that
have been so poorly maintained that their physical condition and appearance
detract from the surrounding neighborhood are declared to be public nuisances
because they are unsightly, decrease adjoining landowners and occupants’
enjoyment of their property and neighborhood and adversely affect property
values and neighborhood patterns.
   (B)   Standards. A building, fence or other structure is a public nuisance
if it does not comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   No part of any exterior surface may have deterioration, holes,
breaks, gaps, loose or rotting boards or timbers;
      (2)   Every exterior surface that has had a surface finish such as paint
applied must be maintained to avoid noticeable deterioration of the finish. No
wall or other exterior surface may have peeling, cracked, chipped or otherwise
deteriorated surface finish on more than 20% of:
         (a)   Any one wall or other flat surface; or
         (b)   All door and window moldings, eaves, gutters and similar
projections on any one side or surface.
      (3)   No glass, including windows and exterior light fixtures, may be
broken or cracked, and no screens may be torn or separated from moldings;
      (4)   Exterior doors and shutters must be hung properly and have an
operable mechanism to keep them securely shut or in place;
      (5)   Cornices, moldings, lintels, sills, bay or dormer windows and
similar projections must be kept in good repair and free from cracks and
defects that make them hazardous or unsightly;
      (6)   Roof surfaces must be tight and have no defects that admit water.
All roof drainage systems must be secured and hung properly;
      (7)   Chimneys, antennae, air vents and other similar projections must be
structurally sound and in good repair. These projections must be secured
properly, where applicable, to an exterior wall or exterior roof; and
      (8)   Foundations must be structurally sound and in good repair.
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.09 DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.
   For purposes of this section and §
92.10, the Police Department, or Sheriff or person designated by the City
Council under §
10.20, if the city has at the time no Police Department, may enforce the
provisions relating to nuisances. Any peace officer or designated person shall
have the power to inspect private premises and take all reasonable precautions
to prevent the commission and maintenance of public nuisances. Except in
emergency situations of imminent danger to human life and safety, no police
officer or designated person shall enter private property for the purpose of
inspecting or preventing public nuisances without the permission of the owner,
resident or other person in control of the property, unless the officer or
person designated has obtained a warrant or order from a court of competent
jurisdiction authorizing the entry, as provided in §
10.20.
§ 92.10 ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Procedure. Whenever a peace officer or designated person determines
that a public nuisance is being maintained or exists on the premises in the
city, the officer or person designated may notify in writing the owner of
record or occupant of the premises of such fact and order that the nuisance be
terminated or abated. The notice of violation shall specify the steps to be
taken to abate the nuisance and the time within which the nuisance is to be
abated. If the notice of violation is not complied with within the time
specified, the officer or designated person shall report that fact forthwith to
the City Council. Thereafter, the City Council may, after notice to the owner
or occupant and an opportunity to be heard, determine that the condition
identified in the notice of violation is a nuisance and further order that if
the nuisance is not abated within the time prescribed by the City Council, the
city may seek injunctive relief by serving a copy of the City Council order and
notice of motion for summary enforcement or obtain an administrative search and
seizure warrant and abate the nuisance.
   (B)   Notice. Written notice of violation; notice of the time, date, place
and subject of any hearing before the City Council; notice of City Council
order; and notice of motion for summary enforcement hearing shall be given as
set forth in this section.
      (1)   Notice of violation. Written notice of violation shall be served by
a peace officer or designated person on the owner of record or occupant of the
premises either in person or by certified or registered mail. If the premises
is not occupied, the owner of record is unknown, or the owner of record or
occupant refuses to accept notice of violation, notice of violation shall be
served by posting it on the premises.
      (2)   Notice of City Council hearing. Written notice of any City Council
hearing to determine or abate a nuisance shall be served on the owner of record
and occupant of the premises either in person or by certified or registered
mail. If the premises is not occupied, the owner of record is unknown, or the
owner of record or occupant refuses to accept notice of the City Council
hearing, notice of City Council hearing shall be served by posting it on the
premises.
      (3)   Notice of City Council order. Except for those cases determined by
the city to require summary enforcement, written notice of any City Council
order shall be made as provided in M.S. § 463.17 (Hazardous and Substandard
Building Act), as it may be amended from time to time.
      (4)   Notice of motion for summary enforcement. Written notice of any
motion for summary enforcement shall be made as provided for in M.S. § 463.17
(Hazardous and Substandard Building Act), as it may be amended from time to
time.
   (C)   Emergency procedure; summary enforcement. In cases of emergency, where
delay in abatement required to complete the notice and procedure requirements
set forth in divisions (A) and (B) of this section will permit a continuing
nuisance to unreasonably endanger public health safety or welfare, the City
Council may order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance. To proceed with
summary enforcement, the officer or designated person shall determine that a
public nuisance exists or is being maintained on premises in the city and that
delay in abatement of the nuisance will unreasonably endanger public health,
safety or welfare. The officer or designated person shall notify in writing the
occupant or owner of the premises of the nature of the nuisance, whether public
health, safety or welfare will be unreasonably endangered by delay in abatement
required to complete the procedure set forth in division (A) above and may
order that the nuisance be immediately terminated or abated. If the nuisance is
not immediately terminated or abated, the City Council may order summary
enforcement and abate the nuisance.
   (D)   Immediate abatement. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city,
without notice or other process, from immediately abating any condition which
poses an imminent and serious hazard to human life or safety.
   (E)   Unlawful parties or gatherings. When law enforcement determines that a
gathering is creating such a noise disturbance as prohibited under § 92.18(D),
the officer may order all persons present, other than the owner or tenant of
the premises where the disturbance is occurring, to disburse immediately. No
person shall refuse to leave after being ordered to do so by law enforcement.
Every owner or tenant of such premises who has knowledge of the disturbance
shall make every reasonable effort to see that the disturbance is stopped.
   (F)   Judicial remedy. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from
seeking a judicial remedy when no other adequate administrative remedy exists.
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.11 RECOVERY OF COST.
   (A)   Personal liability. The owner of premises on which a nuisance has been
abated by the city or a person who has caused a public nuisance on a property
not owned by that person shall be personally liable for the cost to the city of
the abatement, including administrative costs. As soon as the work has been
completed and the cost determined, the City Clerk or other official shall
prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner. Thereupon the amount
shall be immediately due and payable at the office of the City Clerk.
   (B)   Assessment. After notice and hearing as provided in M.S. § 429.061, as
it may be amended from time to time, if the nuisance is a public health or
safety hazard on private property, the accumulation of snow and ice on public
sidewalks, the growth of weeds on private property or outside the traveled
portion of streets, or unsound or insect-infected trees, the City Clerk shall,
on or before September 1 next following abatement of the nuisance, list the
total unpaid charges along with all other charges as well as other charges for
current services to be assessed under M.S. § 429.101 against each separate lot
or parcel to which the charges are attributable. The City Council may then
spread the charges against the property under that statute and other pertinent
statutes for certification to the County Auditor and collection along with
current taxes the following year or in annual installments, not exceeding ten,
as the City Council may determine in each case.
Penalty, see § 92.99
CHAPTER 93: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
93.01   Reservations
   
93.02   Overnight usage
   
93.03   Vandalism
   
93.04   Noise in parks
§ 93.01 RESERVATIONS.
   (A)   The city parks shall be available for all of the people in the area
for picnics. Reservations for the use of the city park shelter may be made
through the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer or designee and shall be granted in
the order received.
   (B)   The grant of a reservation of the city park shelter shall not prohibit
any other person from using park facilities other than the shelter during the
same period as the reservation period.
(Prior Code, § 60.01)
§ 93.02 OVERNIGHT USE.
   The city parks shall not be used or occupied between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. of the following day. Overnight camping or parking is prohibited, except
by special permit obtained from the Administrator/ Clerk-Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 60.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.03 VANDALISM.
   No person shall remove, break, destroy, injure, mutilate, deface or damage
in any way any structure, monument, statue, vase, foundation, fence, railing,
flag pole, vehicle, bench, tree, shrub, fern, plant, flower, fireplace or other
property in the parks.
(Prior Code, § 60.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.04 NOISE IN PARKS.
   Noises or obnoxious behavior reasonably tending to annoy other persons
within or without the parks is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 60.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 94: LARGE ASSEMBLIES
Section
   
94.01   Purpose
   
94.02   Definition
   
94.03   Permit required
   
94.04   Conditions of issuance
   
94.05   Application
   
94.06   Issuance
   
94.07   Waiver
   
94.08   Conduct of assembly
§ 94.01 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of the Council of the city to regulate the assemblage of
large numbers of people, in excess of those normally needing the health,
sanitary, fire, police, transportation and utility services regularly provided
in the city, in order that the health, safety and welfare of all persons in the
city, residents and visitors alike, may be protected.
(Prior Code, § 61.01)
§ 94.02 DEFINITION.
   ASSEMBLY is a company of persons gathered together at any location at any
single time for any purpose.
(Prior Code, § 61.02)
§ 94.03 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall permit, maintain, promote, conduct, advertise, act as
entrepreneur, undertake, organize, manage or sell or give tickets to an actual
or reasonably anticipated assembly of 250 or more people, which continues or
can reasonably be expected to continue for four or more consecutive hours,
whether on public or private property, unless a permit to hold the assembly has
first been issued by the city. A permit to hold an assembly issued to one
person shall permit any person to engage in any lawful activity in connection
with the holding of the permitted assembly.
   (B)   A separate permit shall be required for each day and each location in
which 250 people assemble or can reasonably be anticipated to assemble.
   (C)   The fee for each permit shall be established as set by Council.
   (D)   This chapter shall not apply to any regularly established permanent
place of worship, stadium, athletic field, arena, auditorium, coliseum or other
similar permanently established place of assembly for assemblies which do not
exceed, by more than 50%, the maximum seating capacity of the structure where
the show or exhibition is held.
   (E)   This chapter shall not apply to activities conducted upon city ground
or public property with the prior approval of the Council. The city shall make
appropriate conditions on the use of the park and public property to assure
compliance with the intent of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 61.03)
§ 94.04 CONDITIONS OF ISSUANCE.
   No permit shall be issued unless the applicant shall make provision of the
following:
   (A)   A fence or barrier, sufficient to prevent ingress/exit, except at
established gates, completely enclosing the proposed location of sufficient
height and strength to prevent people in excess of the maximum permissible
number from gaining access to the assembly grounds, which shall have sufficient
entrances and exits to allow easy movement into and out of the assembly grounds
and provide traffic control onto established public road systems;
   (B)   Potable water, meeting all federal and state requirements for sanitary
quality, sufficient to provide drinking water for the maximum number of people
to be assembled at the rate of at least one gallon per person per day and where
the assembly is to continue for more than 12 hours, water for bathing at the
rate of at least ten gallons per person per day, or portion of a day;
   (C)   Enclosed toilets, meeting all state and local specifications,
conveniently located throughout the grounds, sufficient to provide facilities
for the maximum number of people to be assembled, in accordance with the State
Board of Health Regulations and Standards;
   (D)   A sanitary method of disposing of solid waste, in compliance with
state and local laws and regulations, sufficient to dispose of the solid waste
production of the maximum number of people to be assembled at the rate of at
least two and one-half pounds of solid waste per person per day, together with
a plan for holding and collecting all waste at least once each day of the
assembly, and sufficient trash containers and personnel to perform tasks;
   (E)   Physicians and nurses licensed to practice in the state sufficient to
provide the average medical care enjoyed by residents of the state for the
maximum number of people to be assembled at the rate of at least one physician
and nurse for every 1,000 people, together with an enclosed covered structure
where treatment may be rendered, containing separately enclosed treatment rooms
for each physician, and at least two emergency ambulances with attendants for
each 1,000 people;
   (F)   If the assembly is to continue during hours of darkness, illumination
sufficient to light the entire area of the assembly, but not to shine
unreasonably beyond the boundaries of the enclosed location of the assembly;
   (G)   A parking area sufficient to provide parking space for the maximum
number of people to be assembled at the rate of at least one parking space for
every four persons;
   (H)   If the assembly is to continue overnight, camping facilities in
compliance with all state and local requirements, as set forth in state
statutes and regulations and ordinances of the city, sufficient to provide
camping accommodations for the maximum number of people to be assembled;
   (I)   Security and traffic and narcotics control plan which will meet the
requirements of local authorities and the state’s Department of Public Safety;
regularly employed off-duty state law enforcement officers or protective agents
licensed in the state sufficient to provide adequate security for the maximum
number of people to be assembled; (At least one security guard for every 100
people will be provided for the first 1,000 people to assemble. For assemblies
of more than 1,000 people, additional security guards will be provided at the
rate of one for each 250 people or major fraction thereof.)
   (J)   Fire protection shall be provided by the sponsor which may include,
but not be limited to, fire alarms, extinguishing devices and fire lanes, and
which shall be sufficient to meet all applicable state laws and local
regulations which are in effect, or may be set forth by the political
subdivision concerned; and sufficient emergency personnel to efficiently
operate the required equipment will be provided by the sponsor;
   (K)   All reasonably necessary precautions to ensure that the sound of the
assembly will not carry unreasonably beyond the enclosed boundaries of the
location of the assembly;
   (L)   Administrative control center with telephones where local authority
can contact the sponsors and law enforcement personnel inside the assembly
area;
   (M)   Direction of pedestrians and vehicle traffic to prevent trespass on
private abutting property; and
   (N)   Prevention on littering and deposit of waste materials on private and
public property and clean-up of private and public property.
(Prior Code, § 61.04)
§ 94.05 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application for a permit must be made at least 60 days in advance of
an assembly. Each application shall be in writing and shall contain a statement
made under oath or affirmation that the statements contained therein are true
and correct to the best knowledge of the applicant and shall be signed and
sworn to or affirmed by the individual making application in the case of a
corporation, by all partners in the case of a partnership or by all officers of
an unincorporated association, society or group, or, if there are no officers,
by all members of the association, society or group.
   (B)   Each application shall contain the following:
      (1)   The name, date of birth, residence and mailing address of all
persons required to sign the application and, in the case of a corporation, a
certified copy of the articles of incorporation together with the name, date of
birth, residence and mailing address of each person holding 10% or more of the
stock of the corporation;
      (2)   The address or legal description of all property upon which the
assembly is to be held, together with the name, residence and mailing address
of the record owner(s) of all property;
      (3)   Proof of ownership of all property upon which the assembly is to be
held or a statement made upon oath or affirmation by the record owner(s) of all
property that the applicant has permission to use the property;
      (4)   The nature or purpose of the assembly;
      (5)   The total number of days and/or hours during which the assembly is
to last;
      (6)   The maximum number of persons which the applicant shall permit to
assemble at any time, not to exceed the maximum number which can reasonably
assemble at the location of the assembly, in consideration of the nature of the
assembly, or the maximum number of persons allowed to sleep within the
boundaries of the location of the assembly by the zoning regulations of the
city if the assembly is to continue overnight;
      (7)   The maximum number of tickets to be sold, if any; and
      (8)   The plans of the applicant to limit the maximum number of people
permitted to assemble.
   (C)   Attached to each application shall be complete plans for complying
with the requirements in this chapter.
   (D)   (1)   Each application shall be accompanied by payment in full of the
permit fee.
      (2)   The city reserves the right to require a bond or insurance policy,
if such is required it must be attached to the application. Any person who
violates any provision or condition of this chapter shall forfeit an
appropriate amount from the bond. No portion of the bond shall be released
until all provisions of the permit agreement and this chapter have been met.
   (E)   Also, attached to each application shall be certified copies of any
other necessary state license or permit.
(Prior Code, § 61.05)
§ 94.06 ISSUANCE.
   (A)   The application for a permit shall be processed within 60 days of
receipt and shall be issued if all conditions are complied with.
   (B)   Ten days prior to the assembly, the city shall cause the premises to
be inspected to determine whether the requirements of this chapter are met.
(Prior Code, § 61.06)
§ 94.07 WAIVER.
   In cases deemed appropriate, the city may grant a waiver from any section of
this chapter, where the waiver will not deter from the basic intent and purpose
of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 61.07)
§ 94.08 CONDUCT OF ASSEMBLY.
   Each assembly permitted under this chapter shall be conducted in accordance
with the following.
   (A)   The permit shall allow assembly of only the maximum number of persons
stated in the permit application. The permitee shall not sell tickets to or
allow to assemble at the permitted location more than that number of persons.
   (B)   The permit shall not allow the sound of the assembly to carry
unreasonably beyond the enclosed boundaries of the location of the assembly.
The city hereby adopts by reference the regulations of the state’s Pollution
Control Agency Noise Pollution Control Section. Sound from the permitted
activity shall not exceed the standard set for the protection of household or
residential units.
   (C)   In the event that any boundary of the permitted premises is within 500
feet of any residential dwelling, the permitted activity shall not be carried
on between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
   (D)   All persons sleeping during the night hours shall sleep only in a
tent, camper, enclosed trailer, mobile home, building or similar enclosed item.
(Prior Code, § 61.08) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 95: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION; FIREWORKS
Section
Open Burning
   
95.01   Definitions
   
95.02   Prohibited materials
   
95.03   Permit required; application; fees; process
   
95.04   Purposes allowed
   
95.05   Burning ban or air quality alert
   
95.06   Rules and laws adopted by reference
Fireworks
   
95.20   Purpose and applicability
   
95.21   Definition
   
95.22   Permit required
   
95.23   Sales and storage
   
95.24   Use and possession
OPEN BURNING
§ 95.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   FIRE CHIEF, FIRE MARSHAL and ASSISTANT FIRE MARSHALS. The Fire Chief, Fire
Marshal and Assistant Fire Marshals of the Fire Department which provides fire
protection services to the city.
   OPEN BURNING. The burning of any matter if the resultant combustion products
are emitted directly to the atmosphere without passing through a stack, duct or
chimney, except a recreational fire, as defined herein. Mobile cooking devices
such as manufactured hibachis, charcoal grills, wood smokers, and propane or
natural gas devices are not defined as OPEN BURNING.
   RECREATIONAL FIRE.
      (1)   A fire set with approved starter fuel no more than three feet in
height, contained within the border of a recreational fire site using dry,
clean wood; producing little detectable smoke, odor or soot beyond the property
line; conducted with an adult tending the fire at all times; for recreational,
ceremonial, food preparation for social purposes; extinguished completely
before quitting the occasion; and respecting weather conditions, neighbors,
burning bans and air quality so that nuisance, health or safety hazards will
not be created.
      (2)   No more than one RECREATIONAL FIRE is allowed on any property at
one time.
   RECREATIONAL FIRE SITE.
      (1)   An area of no more than a three foot diameter circle (measured from
the inside of the fire ring or border); completely surrounded by non-
combustible and non-smoke or odor producing material, either of natural rock,
cement, brick, tile or blocks or ferrous metal only an which area is depressed
below ground, on the ground or on a raised bed. Included are permanent outdoor
wood burning fireplaces.
      (2)   Burning barrels are not a RECREATION FIRE SITE, as defined herein.
RECREATIONAL FIRE SITES shall not be located closer than 25 feet to any
structure.
   STARTER FUELS. Dry, untreated, unpainted, kindling, branches, cardboard or
charcoal fire starter. Paraffin candles and alcohols are permitted as STARTER
FUELS and as aids to ignition only. Propane gas torches or other clean gas
burning devices causing minimal pollution must be used to start an open burn.
   WOOD. Dry, clean fuel only such as twigs, branches, limbs, presto logs,
charcoal, cord wood or untreated dimensional lumber. The term does not include
wood that is green with leaves or needles, rotten, wet, oil soaked or treated
with paint, glue or preservatives. Clean pallets may be used for recreational
fires when cut into three-foot lengths.
(Prior Code, § 62.01)
§ 95.02 PROHIBITED MATERIALS.
   (A)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning oils, petro
fuels, rubber, plastics, chemically treated materials or other materials which
produce excessive or noxious smoke such as tires, railroad ties, treated,
painted or glued wood composite shingles, tar paper, insulation, composition
board, Sheetrock, wiring, paint or paint fillers.
   (B)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of hazardous
waste or salvage operations, open burning of solid waste generated from an
industrial or manufacturing process or from a service or commercial
establishment or building material generated from demolition of commercial or
institutional structures.
   (C)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of discarded
material resulting from the handling, processing, storage, preparation, serving
or consumption of food.
   (D)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of any leaves or
grass clippings.
(Prior Code, § 62.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.03 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEES; PROCESS.
   (A)   No person shall start or allow any open burning on any property in the
city without first having obtained an open burn permit; except that, a permit
is not required for any fire which is a recreational fire, as defined in this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 62.03)
   (B)   (1)   Open burning permits shall be obtained by making application on
a form prescribed the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and adopted by the
Fire Department. The permit application shall be presented to the Fire Chief,
Fire Marshal and Assistant Fire Marshals for reviewing and processing those
applications.
      (2)   An open burning permit shall require the payment of a fee. Permit
fees shall be in the amount established by the city from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 62.05)
   (C)   Upon receipt of the completed open burning permit application and
permit fee, the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal or Assistant Fire Marshals shall
schedule a preliminary site inspection to locate the proposed burn site, note
special conditions and set dates and time of permitted burn and review fire
safety considerations.
(Prior Code, § 62.06)
   (D)   (1)   (a)   Prior to starting an open burn, the permit holder shall be
responsible for confirming that no burning ban or air quality alert is in
effect.
         (b)   Every open burn event shall be constantly attended by the permit
holder or his or her competent representative.
         (c)   The open burning site shall have available, appropriate
communication and fire suppression equipment as set out in the fire safety
plan.
         (d)   The open burn fire shall be completely extinguished before the
permit holder or his or her representative leaves the site.
         (e)   No fire may be allowed to smolder with no person present.
         (f)   It is the responsibility of the permit holder to have a valid
permit, as required by this subchapter, available for inspection on the site by
the Police Department, Fire Department, MPCA representative or DNR Forest
Officer.
      (2)   The permit holder is responsible for compliance and implementation
of all general conditions, special conditions and the burn event safety plan as
established in the permit issued. The permit holder shall be responsible for
all costs incurred as a result of the burn, including, but not limited to, fire
suppression and administrative fees.
(Prior Code, § 62.07)
   (E)   (1)   The open burning permit is subject to revocation at the
discretion of DNR Forest Officer, the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal or Assistant
Fire Marshals.
      (2)   Reasons for revocation include, but are not limited to, a fire
hazard existing or developing during the course of the burn, any of the
conditions of the permit being violated during the course of the burn,
pollution or nuisance conditions developing during the course of the burn, or a
fire smoldering with no flame present.
(Prior Code, § 62.08)
   (F)   If established criteria for the issuance of an open burning permit are
not met during review of the application, it is determined that a practical
alternative method for disposal of the material exists, or a pollution or
nuisance condition would result, or if a burn event safety plan cannot be
drafted to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal or Assistant Fire
Marshals, these officers may deny the application for the open burn permit.
(Prior Code, § 62.09)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.04 PURPOSES ALLOWED.
   (A)   Open burn permits may be issued only for the following purposes:
      (1)   Elimination of fire of health hazard that cannot be abated by other
practical means;
      (2)   Ground thawing for utility repair and construction;
      (3)   Disposal of vegetative matter for managing forest, prairie or
wildlife habitat, and in the development and maintenance of land and rights-of-
way where chipping, composting, landspreading or other alternative methods are
not practical;
      (4)   Disposal of diseased trees generated on site, diseased or infected
nursery stock, diseased bee hives;
      (5)   Disposal of unpainted, untreated, non-glued lumber and wood shakes
generated from construction, where recycling, reuse, removal or other
alternative disposal methods are not practical; and
      (6)   Public purpose bonfire held on public property by city officials
for special events.
   (B)   Fire training permits can only issued by the state’s Department of
Natural Resources.
(Prior Code, § 62.04)
§ 95.05 BURNING BAN OR AIR QUALITY ALERT.
   No recreational fire or open burn will be permitted when the city or DNR has
officially declared a burning ban due to potential hazardous fire conditions or
when the MPCA has declared an air quality alert.
(Prior Code, § 62.10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.06 RULES AND LAWS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The provisions of M.S. §§ 88.16 to 88.22 and the Minnesota Uniform Fire
Code, Minn. Rules Chapter 1510, as these statutes and rules may be amended from
time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
subchapter as if fully set forth at this point.
(Prior Code, § 62.11)
FIREWORKS
§ 95.20 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This subchapter is hereby established in order to regulate the sale of
fireworks in the city. This chapter does not regulate the conduct of fireworks
displays.
   (B)   Regulation of the conduct of fireworks displays may be regulated
elsewhere.
(Prior Code, § 77.01)
§ 95.21 DEFINITION.
   FIREWORKS has the same meaning as defined in M.S. § 624.20, as it may be
amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 77.02)
§ 95.22 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall sell or possess for sale fireworks without first
having obtained an annual permit from the city.
   (B)   The Fire Chief shall give final approval or denial of an application
for the manufacture, storage for commercial purposes or sale of fireworks
within 14 days of the application being made to the city.
   (C)   Permits shall be issued for a period not to exceed one calendar year.
   (D)   Prior to processing the application, the city must conduct a criminal
records check of the permit applicant. Neither the applicant nor the
responsible party for the permit shall have been convicted of a felony or a
fire/fireworks-related misdemeanor within the three years prior to the
application.
   (E)   Prior to processing the application, the Fire Chief, Code Official
and/or Zoning Administrator shall determine that the proposed location complies
with relevant city provisions.
   (F)   The application shall include a letter from the person legally
responsible for the property which the fireworks related activity will occur.
The letter shall grant permission to the applicant for the use of the property.
(Prior Code, § 77.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.23 SALES AND STORAGE.
   (A)   No person shall sell or store fireworks within 100 feet of any fuel
dispensing apparatus.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any seller of any fireworks to permit smoking
at any site containing fireworks. “NO SMOKING” signs must be conspicuously
posted at the site and approved fire extinguishers must be located at the site
and be readily available for use.
   (C)   In buildings that do not have an automated sprinkling system, retail
sales displays of fireworks shall be limited to a gross weight of 400 pounds of
fireworks. In buildings that do contain an automated sprinkling system, the
amount of fireworks contained in retail sales displays shall be determined by
the City Fire Chief, Code Official and/or Zoning Administrator on a case by
case basis after considering the building’s construction, fire suppression
apparatus and any other relevant factors.
   (D)   The requirements of this section are in addition to any requirements
otherwise imposed by any building and zoning regulations, fire codes or state
laws.
   (E)   Only persons 18 years of age or older may purchase fireworks and the
age of the purchaser must be verified by photographic identification.
   (F)   No exterior storage, display, sales or transient sales of fireworks is
permitted. No manufacturing, sales or storage for commercial purposes shall
occur on residentially zoned property or properties used for educational
purposes or assemblies.
   (G)   A list of all consumer fireworks displayed and stored on the property
shall be available at all times. The list shall document the name, weight and
quantity of the fireworks and shall be accompanied by the material safety data
sheets.
   (H)   Manufacturing, warehouse buildings or display in excess of the
quantities listed in division (C) above for retail consumer fireworks shall be
classified as an “H occupancy” and protected similarly to explosives and
aerosols.
   (I)   A handout describing fireworks shall be provided to each consumer
purchasing fireworks.
   (J)   The City Fire Chief, Code Official and/or Zoning Administrator has the
right to inspect the site where fireworks are stored at any time during the
permit period.
(Prior Code, § 77.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.24 USE AND POSSESSION.
   (A)   It is unlawful to use, fire or discharge any fireworks along the route
of and during any parade, in any place of public assembly on any public
property or in any commercial or industrial zoning district.
   (B)   It is unlawful at any time to throw, toss or aim any fireworks at any
person, animal, vehicle or other thing or object or used in any manner that may
threaten or cause possible harm to life or property.
   (C)   The discharge of fireworks shall be prohibited inside a building and
within 15 feet of any building.
   (D)   The Fire Chief may ban fireworks if dry or windy conditions occur.
   (E)   Juveniles may not possess or use fireworks unless under the direct
supervision of a responsible adult.
   (F)   Fireworks may not be discharged in a manner that may create a
nuisance, nor between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 77.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
      
111.   AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT; GAMBLING
      
112.   JUNK YARDS, PAWN SHOPS AND PAWNBROKERS
      
113.   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
      
114.   PERSONAL SALES
      
115.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
116.   CANNABINOID PRODUCTS
      
117.   MASSAGE BUSINESSES AND SERVICES
CHAPTER 110: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   Licensing; exemptions
   
110.03   License ineligibility
   
110.04   License transferability
   
110.05   Registration
   
110.06   Restrictions
   
110.07   Exclusion by placard
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      MOBILE FOOD UNIT.
         (a)   A food and beverage service establishment that is a vehicle
mounted unit, such as:
            1.   Motorized or trailered, operating no more than 21 days
annually at any one place, or operating more than 21 days annually at any one
place with the approval of the regulatory authority as defined in Minn. Rules
part 4626.0020, subpart 70; and a self-contained unit, in which food is stored,
cooked and prepared for direct sale to the consumer; and
            2.   Operated in conjunction with a permanent business licensed
under M.S. Chapters 128A or 157, as they may be amended from time to time, at
the site of the permanent business by the same individual or company, and
readily movable, without disassembling, for transport to another location; and
a self-contained unit, in which food is stored, cooked and prepared for direct
sale to the consumer.
         (b)   FOOD CART. A food and beverage service establishment that is a
non-motorized vehicle self-propelled by the operator.
         (c)   ICE CREAM TRUCK. A motor vehicle utilized as the point of retail
sales of prewrapped or prepackaged ice cream, frozen yogurt, frozen custard,
flavored frozen water or similar frozen dessert products.
      PEDDLER.
         (a)   A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-
to-business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place, for the
purpose of offering for sale, displaying or exposing for sale, selling or
attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares,
products, merchandise or other personnel property that the person is carrying
or otherwise transporting.
         (b)   The term PEDDLER shall mean the same as the term HAWKER.
      PERSON. Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation,
partnership or association. As applied to groups, organizations, corporations,
partnerships and associations, the term shall include each member, officer,
partner, associate, agent or employee.
      REGULAR BUSINESS DAY.
         (a)   Any day during which the City Hall is normally open for the
purpose of conducting public business.
         (b)   Holidays, defined by state law, shall not be counted as REGULAR
BUSINESS DAYS.
      SOLICITOR.
         (a)   A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-
to-business, street-to-street or any other type of place-to-place, for the
purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares, products,
merchandise, other personal property or services of which he or she may be
carrying or transporting samples or that may be described in a catalog or by
other means, and for which delivery or performance shall occur at a later time.
         (b)   The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person
from the scope of this provision if the actual purpose of the person’s activity
is to obtain or attempt to obtain orders as discussed above. The term shall
mean the same as the term CANVASSER.
      TRANSIENT MERCHANT. A person who temporarily sets up business out of a
vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, other portable shelter or empty store front for
the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling or attempting to sell,
and delivering, goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal property
and who does not remain or intend to remain in any one location for more than
14 consecutive days.
      (B)   (1)   For the purpose of the requirements of this chapter, the
terms PEDDLER, SOLICITOR and TRANSIENT MERCHANT shall not apply to any person
selling or attempting to sell at wholesale any goods, wares, products,
merchandise or other personal property to a retailer of the items being sold by
the wholesaler. The terms also shall not apply to any person who makes initial
contacts with other people for the purpose of establishing or trying to
establish a regular customer delivery route for the delivery of perishable food
and dairy products such as baked goods and milk, nor shall they apply to any
person making deliveries of perishable food and dairy products to the customers
on his or her established regular delivery route.
      (2)   In addition, persons conducting the type of sales commonly known as
garage sales, rummage sales or estate sales, as well as those persons
participating in an organized multi-person bazaar or flea market, shall be
exempt from the definitions of PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS and TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, as
shall be anyone conducting an auction as a properly licensed auctioneer or any
officer of the court conducting a court-ordered sale. Exemption from the
definitions for the scope of this chapter shall not excuse any person from
complying with any other applicable statutory provision or local ordinance.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 8-10-2020)
§ 110.02 LICENSING; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   County license authorized. No person shall conduct business as a
peddler, solicitor mobile food unit or transient merchant within the city
limits without first having obtained the appropriate license from the county,
if the county licenses peddlers, solicitors or transient merchants, as
authorized by M.S. Chapter 329, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   City license required. Except as otherwise provided for by this
chapter, no person shall conduct business as either a peddler mobile food unit
or a transient merchant without first having obtained a license from the city.
Solicitors need not be licensed, but are still required to register pursuant to
this chapter.
   (C)   Application. Application for a city license to conduct business as a
peddler, mobile food unit or transient merchant shall be made at least 14
regular business days before the applicant desires to begin conducting
business. Application for a license shall be made on a form approved by the
City Council and available from the office of the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer. All applications shall be signed by the applicant. All applications
shall include the following information:
      (1)   Applicant’s full legal name;
      (2)   All other names under which the applicant conducts business or to
which applicant officially answers;
      (3)   A physical description of the applicant, such as hair color, eye
color, height, weight, distinguishing marks and features and the like;
      (4)   Full address of applicant’s permanent residence;
      (5)   Telephone number of applicant’s permanent residence;
      (6)   Full legal name of any and all business operations owned, managed
or operated by applicant, or for which the applicant is an employee or agent;
      (7)   Full address of applicant’s regular place of business, if any;
      (8)   Any and all business related telephone numbers of the applicant;
      (9)   The type of business for which the applicant is applying for a
license;
      (10)   Whether the applicant is applying for an annual or daily license;
      (11)   The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct business,
and if the applicant is applying for a daily license, the number of days he or
she will be conducting business in the city, maximum 14 consecutive days for
peddler or transient merchant;
      (12)   Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the applicant
can be reached while conducting business within the city, including the
location where a transient merchant intends to set up business;
      (13)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
within the last five years of any felony, gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor for
violation of any state or federal statute or any local ordinance, other than
traffic offenses;
      (14)   A list of the three most recent locations where the applicant has
conducted business as a peddler or transient merchant;
      (15)   Proof of any requested county license;
      (16)   Written permission of the property owner or the property owner’s
agent for any property to be used by a transient merchant;
      (17)   A general description of the items to be sold or services to be
provided;
      (18)   All additional information deemed necessary by the City Council;
      (19)   The applicant’s driver’s license number or other acceptable form
of identification; and
      (20)   The license plate number, registration information and vehicle
identification number for any vehicle to be used in conjunction with the
licensed business and a description of the vehicle.
   (D)   Fee. All applications for a license under this chapter shall be
accompanied by the fee established by the Council. Mobile food units conducting
business during Montrose Days are exempt from this fee.
   (E)   Procedure.
      (1)   Upon receipt of the completed application and payment of the
license fee, the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, within two regular
business days, must determine if the application is complete. An application is
determined to be complete only if all required information is provided.
      (2)   If the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer determines that the
application is incomplete, the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer must inform
the applicant of the required necessary information that is missing. If the
application is complete, the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer must order any
investigation, including background checks, necessary to verify the information
provided with the application.
      (3)   Within ten regular business days of receiving a complete
application, the city’s Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer must issue the license
unless there exist grounds for denying the license under this chapter, in which
case the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer must deny the license. If the city’s
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer denies the license, the applicant must be
notified in writing of the decision, the reason for denial and of the
applicant’s right to appeal the denial by requesting, within 20 days of
receiving notice of rejection, a public hearing before the City Council.
      (4)   The City Council shall hear the appeal within 20 days of the date
of the request. The decision of the City Council following the public hearing
can be appealed by petitioning the State Court of Appeals for a writ of
certiorari.
   (F)   Duration.
      (1)   An annual license granted under this chapter shall be valid for one
calendar year from the date of issue.
      (2)   All other licenses granted under this chapter shall be valid only
during the time period indicated on the license.
   (G)   License exemptions.
      (1)   No license shall be required for any person to sell or attempt to
sell, or to take or attempt to take orders for, any product grown, produced,
cultivated or raised on any farm.
      (2)   No license shall be required of any person going from house-to-
house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street or other type of
place-to-place when the activity is for the purpose of exercising that person’s
state or federal Constitutional rights, such as the freedom of speech, press,
religion and the like; except that, this exemption may be lost if the person’s
exercise of Constitutional rights is merely incidental to a commercial
activity.
      (3)   Professional fund-raisers working on behalf of an otherwise exempt
person or group shall not be exempt from the licensing requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 8-10-2020)
§ 110.03 LICENSE INELIGIBILITY.
   The following shall be grounds for denying a license under this chapter:
   (A)   The failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of having
obtained any required county license;
   (B)   The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the
information requested by the city as a part of the application, or the failure
to sign the application, or the failure to pay the required fee at the time of
application;
   (C)   The conviction of the applicant within the past five years from the
date of application for any violation of any federal or state statute or
regulation, or of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects on the person’s
ability to conduct the business for which the license is being sought in an
honest and legal manner (those violations shall include, but not be limited to,
burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices and any
form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person);
   (D)   The revocation within the past five years of any license issued to the
applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or
transient merchant; and/or
   (E)   The applicant is found to have a bad business reputation. Evidence of
a bad business reputation shall include, but not be limited to, the existence
of more than three complaints against the applicant with the Better Business
Bureau, the Attorney General’s office or other similar business or consumer
rights office or agency, within the preceding 12 months, or three complaints
filed against the applicant within the preceding five years.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 8-10-2020)
§ 110.04 LICENSE TRANSFERABILITY.
   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred to any person
other than the person to whom the license was issued.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 8-10-2020)
§ 110.05 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   All solicitors, and any person exempt from the licensing requirements
of this chapter, shall be required to register with the city. Registration
shall be made on the same form required for a license application, but no fee
shall be required.
   (B)   Immediately upon completion of the registration form, the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall issue to the registrant a certificate of
registration as proof of the registration. Certificates of registration shall
be non-transferable.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 8-10-2020)
§ 110.06 RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   General. No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall conduct
business in any of the following manners:
      (1)   Calling attention to his or her business or items to be sold by
means of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out or by any
other noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed structure;
      (2)   Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian traffic
on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public right-of-way;
      (3)   Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the health,
safety and welfare of any individual or the general public;
      (4)   Conducting business before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.;
      (5)   Failing to provide proof of license, registration and
identification when requested, or using the license or registration of another
person;
      (6)   Making any false or misleading statements about the product or
service being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement (no peddler,
solicitor or transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the city
solely based on the city having issued a license or certificate of registration
to that person.); and
      (7)   Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave, or to
otherwise conduct business in a manner a reasonable person would find obscene,
threatening, intimidating or abusive.
   (B)   Mobile food units (MFUs). Mobile food units (MFUs) are required to
meet the additional following standards.
      (1)   MFU licenses issued are issued by the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer or a designee under the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer. Licenses
are issued on an annual basis and permit MFUs to operate at up to four
locations in the community during the course of the year, not to exceed 21 days
per location.
      (2)   MFUs must be licensed by the state’s Health Department, and must
adhere to state regulations for food trucks as provided in Minn. Rule
4626.1855. Evidence of the state license and proof of insurance must be
provided to the city as part of the local license application.
      (3)   With the exception of MFUs serving special events for public or
institutional uses in residential districts, MFUs operations are limited to the
business and industrial districts. Ice cream truck vendors may operate in all
zoning districts.
      (4)   MFUs must be located on private property, and the applicant must
provide written consent from the property owner. However, MFUs may be located
in a public park with approval from the city and ice cream trucks are allowed
to operate within the public right-of-way in residential districts.
      (5)   Private properties may host no more than four MFUs over the course
of the year.
      (6)   MFU sites shall be kept in a neat and orderly manner, and shall
adhere to the following site and operational requirements.
         (a)   Trash and/or recycling collection and cleanup must be provided.
If the MFU is on public property, the trash and recycling that is generated by
the MFU must be hauled off by the MFU operator.
         (b)   MFUs must provide independent power supply which is screened
from view. Generators are permitted.
         (c)   MFUs may not maintain or use outside sound amplifying equipment,
televisions or other similar visual entertainment devices, or noisemakers such
as bells, horns or whistles. Ice cream trucks traveling through a residential
district may have outdoor music or noise-making devices to announce their
presence.
         (d)   MFUs cannot obstruct the movement of pedestrians or vehicles or
pose a hazard to public safety.
         (e)   MFUs shall be located on an asphalt or concrete surface.
         (f)   MFUs may not be located within 500 feet of existing restaurants
or coffee shops, as measured from the MFU to the property line of the food
service building.
         (g)   MFUs must close during adverse weather conditions when shelter
is not provided.
         (h)   MFUs are not permitted to operate between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
      (7)   Ice cream truck vendors are required to undergo a criminal
background check prior to operating in the community, at the cost of the
applicant.
      (8)   If MFU sites are found to be in non-compliance with any conditions
as provided in this chapter, the city reserves the right to revoke the MFU
transient merchant license.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 8-10-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.07 EXCLUSION BY PLACARD.
   No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant, unless invited to do so by the
property owner or tenant, shall enter the property of another for the purpose
of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant when the
property is marked with a sign or placard at least four inches long and four
inches wide with print of at least 48 point in size stating “No Peddlers,
Solicitors or Transient Merchants”, “Peddlers, Solicitors and Transient
Merchants Prohibited” or other comparable statement. No person other than the
property owner or tenant shall remove, deface or otherwise tamper with any sign
or placard under this section.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 8-10-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 111: AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT; GAMBLING
Section
General Provisions
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   License required
   
111.03   Application
   
111.04   Issuance
   
111.05   Term and fee
   
111.06   Display of license
   
111.07   Location of machines
   
111.08   Gambling restrictions
   
111.09   Amusement center restrictions
Lawful Gambling
   
111.20   State law adopted by reference
   
111.21   City may be more restrictive than state law
   
111.22   Purpose
   
111.23   Definitions
   
111.24   Applicability
   
111.25   Lawful gambling permitted
   
111.26   Council approval
   
111.27   Permits; local approval of premises; application
   
111.28   License and permit display
   
111.29   Notification of material changes to application
   
111.30   Designated trade area
   
111.31   Records and reporting
 
   
111.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   AMUSEMENT CENTER. Any place wherein any person operates four or more
machines for public use upon premises solely within one enclose. Premises
licensed as a liquor establishment may not be an AMUSEMENT CENTER and are not
eligible for a license.
   MACHINE. A mechanical amusement device of any of the following types.
      (1)   A machine or contrivance, including electric game, pinball
machines, mechanical pool tables, foosball, bowling machines, shuffle boards,
electric rifle or gun ranges, miniature mechanical devices and games or
amusements patterned after baseball, basketball, hockey and similar games and
like devices, machines or games which may be played solely for amusement and
not as a gambling device and which devices or games are played by the insertion
of a coin or coins or at a fee fixed and charged by the establishment in which
the devices or machines are located, and which contain no automatic pay-off
devices for the return of coins, merchandise, checks, takers or any other thing
or item of value; provided, however, that, the machine may be equipped to
permit a free play or game.
      (2)   Amusement devices designed for and used exclusively as rides by
children, such as, but not limited to, kiddie cars, miniature airplane rides,
mechanical horses and other miniature mechanical. devices not operated as a
part of or in connection with any carnival, circus, show or other entertainment
or exhibition.
(Prior Code, § 71.01)
§ 111.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall own, operate or permit operation of a machine and/or
an amusement center on premises owned, leased or operated by him or her, or
engage in the business of operating an amusement center, in the city unless an
amusement center or machine license has been obtained.
   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to require licensing of
coin-operated music boxes, more commonly known as “jukeboxes”. Nothing in this
subchapter shall be held to apply to any machine held or kept for sale or
storage and which is not actually in use or displayed for use.
(Prior Code, § 71.02) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.03 APPLICATION.
   The application for the licenses shall contain the following information:
   (A)   Name and address of the applicant, age, date and place of birth;
   (B)   Prior convictions for violation of law of applicant, if any;
   (C)   Place where machine or device is to be displayed or operated and the
business conducted at that place;
   (D)   If the interest of the applicant be that of a corporation or other
business entity, the names of any persons having a 5% or more interest in the
business entity shall be listed; and
   (E)   For all amusement centers, the applicant shall provide proof of
general liability insurance in a form acceptable to the city. The insurance
shall provide minimum coverage of $300,000 per occurrence and $100,000 per
individual and $50,000 property damage.
(Prior Code, § 71.03)
§ 111.04 ISSUANCE.
   A copy of each application for license shall be referred to the designated
law enforcement agency. The designated law enforcement agency or its designee
shall investigate the location wherein it is proposed to operate the amusement
center and shall ascertain if the applicant is of good moral character. On the
basis of his or her investigation, the Police Department shall recommend either
approval or denial of the license. The completed application, together with the
Police Department’s report and recommendation, shall be presented to the
Council which shall, in its discretion, grant or refuse the license.
(Prior Code, § 71.04)
§ 111.05 TERM AND FEE.
   (A)   Licenses for amusement centers and machines shall cover an annual
period from July 1 to June 30.
   (B)   The license fee shall be established pursuant hereto.
   (C)   The initial license fee for each applicant shall be prorated as of the
date of the application.
(Prior Code, § 71.05)
§ 111.06 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   The license shall be posted permanently and conspicuously at the location
the machine in the premises wherein the device is to be operated or maintained
to be operated.
(Prior Code, § 71.06) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.07 LOCATION OF MACHINES.
   (A)   No machine shall be located, placed, maintained or operated on any
public street, avenue, boulevard, lane, alley or other public ground within the
city.
   (B)   No machine shall be so located that its operation will create a
nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 71.07) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.08 GAMBLING RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No machine shall be so constructed, maintained or operated as to a
capable of taking more than one coin, token or plug per player for any one
game.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any machine; or for the owner or
operator of any establishment where it is located, to permit the same to be
used for gambling or for the making of bets or wagers.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for the licensee or for the owner or operator of
the establishment where the machine is located to give any money, token,
merchandise or any other thing of value or any reward or prize in lieu of free
games registered on the machine, and all free games so registered shall be
played on the machine registering the free games, and there shall be no device
on the machine whereby the operator can cancel registered free games.
   (D)   (1)   No person shall keep, maintain, sell or permit to be operated in
his or her place of business any machine which has been converted into an
automatic pay-off device which shall automatically award money, prizes, tokens,
merchandise, gifts or anything of value, other than free games to the operator
or player of the machine.
      (2)   No person shall convert any machine into an automatic pay-off
device.
   (E)   Any machine which shall have been made use of in violation of this
section may be seized and destroyed in compliance with the provisions of the
statutes of the state relating to gambling devices.
(Prior Code, § 71.08) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.09 AMUSEMENT CENTER RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Days and hours.
      (1)   Amusement centers shall be closed at 10:00 p.m. on Sunday through
Thursday and at 12:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday evenings.
      (2)   Amusement centers shall not open until 9:00 a.m. on weekdays or
until 12:00 p.m. on Sundays.
   (B)   Public nuisance. No amusement center nor any coin-operated amusement
device or coin- operated musical device therein shall be operated so as to
constitute a public nuisance.
   (C)   Responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to
maintain order on the licensed premises at all times.
   (D)   Overcrowding.
      (1)   It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to see that the
license premises do not become overcrowded so as to constitute a hazard to the
health or safety of persons therein.
      (2)   The Fire Chief may designate the maximum number of persons to be
permitted on the licensed premises.
   (E)   Supervision. The licensee shall provide reasonable adult supervision,
with a minimum of one, taking into consideration the number of machines and
patrons, and the number, nature, type and proximity of other businesses in the
premises or in the vicinity.
   (F)   Alcohol, controlled substances. It shall be unlawful for any person
engaged in the business of operating an amusement center to sell, offer for
sale or knowingly permit to be sold or offered for sale or to be dispensed or
consumed or knowingly brought on the licensed premises any alcoholic beverages,
controlled substances or to knowingly allow any illegal activity upon the
licensed premises.
   (G)   Food, beverage. No food or beverages shall be sold or dispensed upon
the licensed premises without special approval by the Council.
   (H)   Intoxicated persons. The licensee of an amusement center shall not
permit intoxicated persons to remain on the premises.
(Prior Code, § 71.01) Penalty, see §
111.99
LAWFUL GAMBLING
§ 111.20 STATE LAW ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The provisions of M.S. Chapter 349, as it may be amended from time to time,
with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation, provisions
relating to sales, and all other matters pertaining to lawful gambling are
hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of this subchapter as if set
out in full. It is the intention of the Council that all future amendments of
M.S. Chapter 349, as it may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by
reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this
subchapter was adopted.
(Ord. 2022-03, passed 3-14-2022)
§ 111.21 CITY MAY BE MORE RESTRICTIVE THAN STATE LAW.
   The Council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. § 349.213, as it may be
amended from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in this subchapter,
additional restrictions on gambling within its limits beyond those contained in
M.S. Chapter 349, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2022-03, passed 3-14-2022)
§ 111.22 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to regulate lawful gambling within the
city, to prevent its commercialization, to ensure the integrity of operations,
and to provide for the use of net profits only for lawful purposes.
(Ord. 2022-03, passed 3-14-2022)
§ 111.23 DEFINITIONS.
   In addition to the definitions contained in M.S. § 349.12, as it may be
amended from time to time, the following terms are defined for purposes of this
subchapter. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   BOARD. The State of Minnesota Gambling Control Board.
   CITY. The City of Montrose.
   COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Montrose.
   LICENSED ORGANIZATION. An organization licensed by the Board.
   TRADE AREA. The Cities of Montrose and Waverly and the Townships of Woodland
and Marysville.
(Ord. 2022-03, passed 3-14-2022)
§ 111.24 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This subchapter shall be construed to regulate all forms of lawful
gambling within the city.
   (B)   The city does not require a local permit for lawful gambling
categorized under M.S. § 349.166, subd. 1, and M.S. § 349.166, subd. 2, as they
may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2022-03, passed 3-14-2022)
§ 111.25 LAWFUL GAMBLING PERMITTED.
   Lawful gambling is permitted within the city; provided, it is conducted in
accordance with M.S. §§ 609.75 through 609.763, inclusive, as they may be
amended from time to time; M.S. §§ 349.11 through 349.23, inclusive, as they
may be amended from time to time; and this subchapter.
(Ord. 2022-03, passed 3-14-2022)
§ 111.26 COUNCIL APPROVAL.
   Lawful gambling authorized by M.S. §§ 349.11 through 349.23 inclusive, as
they may be amended from time to time, shall not be conducted unless approved
by the Council, subject to the provisions of this subchapter and state law.
(Ord. 2022-03, passed 3-14-2022)
§ 111.27 PERMITS; LOCAL APPROVAL OF PREMISES; APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any organization seeking to obtain a premises permit from the Board
shall file with the City Clerk/Treasurer an executed, complete duplicate
application, together with all exhibits and documents accompanying the
application as will be filed with the Board.
   (B)   The applicant shall be notified in writing of the date on which the
Council will consider the recommendation.
   (C)   The Council shall, by resolution, approve or disapprove the
application within 60 days of receipt of the application.
   (D)   The Council shall deny an application for issuance or renewal of a
premises permit for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   Violation by the gambling organization of any state statute, state
rule or city code provision relating to gambling within the last three years;
      (2)   Violation by the on-sale establishment or organization leasing its
premises for gambling of any state statute, state rule or city code provisions
relating to the operation of the establishment, including, but not limited to,
laws relating to alcoholic beverages, gambling, controlled substances,
suppression of vice, and protection of public safety within the last three
years; and
      (3)   Operation of gambling at the site would be detrimental to health,
safety and welfare of the community.
   (E)   Otherwise, the Council shall pass a resolution approving the
application.
(Ord. 2022-03, passed 3-14-2022)
§ 111.28 LICENSE AND PERMIT DISPLAY.
   All permits issued under state law shall be prominently displayed during the
permit year at the premises where gambling is conducted.
(Ord. 2022-03, passed 3-14-2022)
§ 111.29 NOTIFICATION OF MATERIAL CHANGES TO APPLICATION.
   An organization holding a state-issued premises permit shall notify the city
within ten days in writing whenever any material change is made in the
information submitted on the application.
(Ord. 2022-03, passed 3-14-2022)
§ 111.30 DESIGNATED TRADE AREA.
   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct gambling within the city shall
expend 40% of its lawful purpose expenditures on lawful purposes conducted
within the city’s trade area.
   (B)   This section applies only to lawful purpose expenditures of gross
profits derived from gambling conducted at a premises within the city’s
jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2022-03, passed 3-14-2022; Ord. 2022-05, passed 8-8-2022)
§ 111.31 RECORDS AND REPORTING.
   (A)   Organizations conducting lawful gambling shall file with the City
Clerk/Treasurer one copy of all records and reports required to be filed with
the Board, pursuant to M.S. Chapter 349, as it may be amended from time to
time, and rules adopted pursuant thereto, as they may be amended from time to
time. The records and reports shall be filed on or before the day they are
required to be filed with the Board.
   (B)   Organizations licensed by the Board shall file a report with the city
proving compliance with the trade area spending requirements imposed by §
111.30 of this chapter. The report shall be made on a form prescribed by the
city and shall be submitted annually.
(Ord. 2022-03, passed 3-14-2022)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
111.20 through
111.31 of this chapter, M.S. §§ 609.75 through 609.763, inclusive, as they may
be amended from time to time, or M.S. §§ 349.11 through 349.23, as they may be
amended from time to time, or any rules promulgated under those sections, as
they may be amended from time to time, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 90 days, or both, plus in either case the costs of prosecution. In
addition, violations shall be reported to the Board and recommendation shall be
made for suspension, revocation or cancellation of an organization’s license.
(Ord. 2022-03, passed 3-14-2022)
CHAPTER 112: JUNK YARDS, PAWN SHOPS AND PAWNBROKERS
Section
Junk Yards and Businesses
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   License required
   
112.03   Application
   
112.04   Inspection
   
112.05   License term
   
112.06   Premises requirements
Pawn Shops and Pawnbrokers
   
112.20   Definitions
   
112.21   Exemptions
   
112.22   Licenses; fee, application; ineligibility; limitations
   
112.23   Bond
   
112.24   Site plan
   
112.25   Investigations
   
112.26   Public hearing
   
112.27   Records; weekly reports
   
112.28   Stolen goods
   
112.29   Holding periods
   
112.30   Receipts
   
112.31   Police orders
   
112.32   Weapons
   
112.33   Prohibited acts
   
112.34   Redemption period
   
112.35   Payments by check
   
112.36   Inspections
   
112.37   Applicability
JUNK YARDS AND BUSINESSES
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   JUNK. Any old, used or second hand materials of any kind, including, but not
limited to cloth, rags, clothing, paper, rubbish, bottles, rubber, iron, brass,
copper or other metals, furniture, unlicensed, used and inoperative boats and
motor vehicles or parts thereof, used and inoperative agricultural and
construction equipment, or parts thereof, building materials or any other
article which from its worn condition renders it useless for the purpose for
which it was made and which is commonly classed and referred to as JUNK.
   JUNK BUSINESS. The keeping, conducting or maintaining of any building,
structure, yard or place for keeping, storing or piling in commercial
quantities, whether temporarily, irregularly or continually, or the buying and
selling at retail or wholesale or dealing in any junk.
   JUNK DEALER. Any person engaged in the junk business.
   JUNK YARD. Any building, structure, yard or place in or upon which is kept,
stored or piled in commercial quantities, whether temporarily, irregularly or
continually any junk.
   PERSON. Natural persons, corporations, partnerships and unincorporated
associations.
(Prior Code, § 72.01)
§ 112.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No junk dealer shall henceforth engage in the junk business within the city
limits, without first obtaining a license pursuant to this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 72.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.03 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Every applicant for a license to engage in the junk business shall
file with the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer a written application to be
supplied by the city, signed by the applicant and accompanied by a license fee
established pursuant hereto.
   (B)   The application shall state:
      (1)   The natives and residences of the applicants or its or their
principal offices and their residences if the applicant is an association or
corporation;
      (2)   The detailed nature of the business to be conducted and the kind of
materials to be collected, stored, bought, sold or otherwise handled; and
      (3)   The premises where the business or activity is to be located or
carried on.
(Prior Code, § 72.03)
§ 112.04 INSPECTION.
   The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall report the application to the
Fire Chief and Building Inspector, who shall inspect or cause to be inspected
the premises to determine whether they are appropriate for carrying on the junk
business in terms of whether there is or will be compliance with all laws and
ordinances and whether a fire, health or safety hazard would be created by the
activity. The city officers shall report their findings to the City Council at
its next regular meeting.
(Prior Code, § 72.04)
§ 112.05 LICENSE TERM.
   The City Council shall act upon all applications and its discretion shall
grant a license to conduct the junk business for a period not to exceed one
year. After expiration of one year, the applicant must resubmit a new
application pursuant to this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 72.05)
§ 112.06 PREMISES REQUIREMENTS.
   The following general operating requirements shall apply to all junk dealers
license in accordance with this subchapter.
   (A)   The license issued pursuant hereto shall be plainly displayed on the
business premises.
   (B)   The premises on which the junk business is carried on shall, at all
times, be maintained in a sanitary condition.
   (C)   No land or space, not covered by the license, shall be used in the
licensed business.
   (D)   No water shall be allowed to stand in any place on the premises in a
manner as to afford a breeding place for mosquitoes.
   (E)   Weeds and vegetation on the premises, other than trees and shrubs,
shall be kept at a height of not more than four inches.
   (F)   No garbage or waste liable to give off a foul odor or attract vermin
shall be kept on the premises.
   (G)   No junk shall be allowed to rest upon or protrude over any public
street, sidewalk or become scattered or blown off the business premises.
   (H)   (1)   There shall be maintained a so-called buffer zone of not less
than ten feet between any public street or right-of-way bordering the licensed
premises and the area on the licensed premises wherein the licensee keeps,
stores or piles the junk or articles for sale, within which buffer zone no junk
shall be kept, stored or piled.
      (2)   The buffer zone shall be landscaped with the planting of
appropriate grass and/or sod and trees and shrubbery which shall be maintained
and kept by the licensee in a presentable appearance.
   (I)   Junk shall be stored in piles not exceeding seven feet in height, and
shall be arranged in a neat and tidy manner with accessways between rows
sufficient to allow easy firefighting access to all areas of the premises
wherein junk is kept, stored or piled.
   (J)   No combustible material of any kind not necessary or beneficial to the
licensed premises shall be kept on the premises, nor shall the premises be
allowed to become a fire hazard.
   (K)   All gasoline and oil shall be removed from any inoperative engines or
motor vehicles on the premises.
   (L)   No junk or material shall be burned on the premises.
   (M)   No noisy processing of junk or other noisy activity shall be carried
on in connection with the licensed premises on Sunday, Christmas, Easter,
Thanksgiving or at any time between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
   (N)   The area on the premises where junk is kept, stored, piled other than
indoors shall be enclosed, except for entrances and exits, with a solid
vertical wall or fence of a minimum height of seven feet measured from ground
level. There shall be not more than one entrance and exit of a width of not
more than ten feet on any one side of the licensed premises. All entrances and
exits shall have a closeable solid gate of a height not less than that of the
fence itself.
   (O)   The licensee shall permit inspection of the premises by any employee
or agent of the city at any reasonable time.
   (P)   No junk dealer licensed hereunder or his or her agent or employee
shall purchase or receive any junk for use in the licensed business from any
person under the age of 18 years without the written consent of a parent or
guardian of the person.
   (Q)   No licensee shall allow the licensed premises to become a nuisance;
nor shall any junk business be operated in a manner as to become injurious to
the health, safety or welfare of the community or of any residents close by.
(Prior Code, § 72.06) Penalty, see §
10.99
PAWN SHOPS AND PAWNBROKERS
§ 112.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   PAWNBROKER. A person who loans money on deposit or pledge or personal
property or other valuable thing, or who deals in the purchasing of personal
property or other valuable thing on condition of selling the same back again at
a stipulated price, or who loans money secured by chattel mortgage on personal
property, taking possession of the property or any part thereof so mortgaged.
   SECONDHAND GOODS DEALER. A person whose regular business includes selling or
receiving tangible personal property, excluding motor vehicles, previously
used, rented, owned or leased.
(Prior Code, § 75.01)
§ 112.21 EXEMPTIONS.
   This subchapter does not apply to or include the following:
   (A)   The sale of secondhand goods where all of the following conditions are
present:
      (1)   The sale is held on property occupied as a dwelling by the seller,
or owned, rented or leased by a charitable or political organization;
      (2)   The items offered for sale are owned by the occupant;
      (3)   The sale does not exceed a period of three days;
      (4)   Not more than four sales are held either by the same person or the
same property in any 12-month period; and
      (5)   None of the items offered for sale have been purchased for resale
or received on consignment for purpose of resale.
   (B)   Sales of motor vehicles;
   (C)   The sale of secondhand books, magazines, video recordings or
furniture;
   (D)   The sale of goods at an auction held by a licensed auctioneer;
   (E)   The business of buying or selling only those secondhand goods taken as
part or full payment of new goods, and where the business is incidental to and
not the primary business of a person;
   (F)   A bulk sale of property from a merchant, manufacturer or wholesaler
having an established place of business or of goods sold at open sale from
bankrupt stock;
   (G)   Goods sold only at a public market;
   (H)   Goods sold at an exhibition;
   (I)   The sale of secondhand goods by a secondhand goods dealer on property
where no pawnbroker license is in effect;
   (J)   Sale of secondhand clothes, except furs; and
   (K)   Sale of secondhand washers, dryers, air conditioners, refrigerators,
trash compactors, dishwashers or kitchen ranges.
(Prior Code, § 75.02)
§ 112.22 LICENSES; FEE, APPLICATION; INELIGIBILITY; LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   License required; fee and application.
      (1)   License.
         (a)   Except as herein otherwise provided, it is unlawful for any
person to engage in the business of second hand goods dealer without first
obtaining a secondhand goods dealer license from the city.
         (b)   It is unlawful for any person to conduct, operate or engage in
the business of pawnbroker without first having obtained a license from the
city.
         (c)   A pawnbroker may not conduct, operate or engage in the business
of secondhand goods dealer without having obtained a secondhand goods dealer
license in addition to a pawnbroker license. A secondhand goods dealer license
in addition to a pawnbroker license. A secondhand goods dealer may not conduct,
operate or engage in the business of pawnbroker without having obtained a
pawnbroker license in addition to a secondhand goods dealer license.
      (2)   Multiple dealers.
         (a)   The owner of a business at which two or more secondhand goods
dealers are engaged in business by maintaining separate sales space and
identifying themselves to the public as individual dealers may obtain a
multiple license provided the following requirements are met:
            1.   The businesses must have a single name and address;
            2.   The businesses must operate in a compact and contiguous space;
            3.   The businesses must be under the unified control and
supervision of the one person who hold the license; and
            4.   Sales must be consummated at a central point or register
operated by the owner of the business and the owner must maintain a
comprehensive account of all sales.
         (b)   The holder of a secondhand goods dealer license under this
section for a business with more than one dealer at the same location must
comply with all of the requirements of this section, including the
responsibility for police reporting and record-keeping in the same manner as
any other dealer licensed under this section. A dealer licensed under this
section is responsible to its customers for stolen or misrepresented goods sold
at its place of business in the same manner as any other dealer under this
section.
      (3)   Fee.
         (a)   The annual license fee for a secondhand goods dealer shall be
established by the City Council.
         (b)   The annual license fee for a pawnbroker shall be established by
the City Council. The fee shall be the same if the license is only issued for
part of a year.
      (4)   Application.
         (a)   If the applicant is a natural person, the application must be
signed and sworn to by the person; if a corporation, by an officer authorized
to sign; if a partnership, by all general partners.
         (b)   The application must be accompanied by the required license fee.
The fee will be returned to the applicant if the application is rejected.
         (c)   It is unlawful to knowingly make a false statement in the
license application. In addition to other penalties, the license may be
subsequently revoked by the Council for a violation of this section.
      (5)   County license. Secondhand goods dealer and pawnbrokers dealing in
precious metals and gems must be licensed by the county, as required by M.S. §
325F.73, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 75.03)
   (B)   Granting of license. After review of the license application,
investigation report and public hearing, the Council may grant or refuse the
application for a new or renewed pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer license.
A license will not be effective unless the fees have been paid and the bond has
been filed with the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer’s office.
(Prior Code, § 75.08)
   (C)   Ineligibility for license.
      (1)   A pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer license will not be issued
to:
         (a)   A person not a citizen of the United States or a legal resident
alien;
         (b)   A person under 18 years of age;
         (c)   Subject to the provisions of law, a person who within five years
of license application date has been convicted of receiving stolen property,
sale of stolen property or controlled substance, burglary, robbery or any law
or city code provision regulating the business of pawnbroker or secondhand
goods dealer;
         (d)   A person who within five years of the license application date
had a pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer license revoked; and
         (e)   When the Council determines, after investigation and public
hearing, that issuance or renewal of the license would adversely affect the
public health, safety or welfare.
      (2)   Partnerships, whose partners include any of the above ineligible
persons, or corporations whose officers or board members include any of the
above ineligible persons shall not be eligible for a pawnbroker or secondhand
goods dealers license.
      (3)   A license will not be issued or renewed under this section for any
place or for any business:
         (a)   If taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the city or
the state on the licensee’s business premises are delinquent and unpaid;
         (b)   If the premises is located within 300 feet of a school or
church;
         (c)   Where operation of a licensed premises would violate the zoning
provisions of the city code; or
         (d)   Where the applicant’s present license was issued conditioned
upon the applicant making specified improvements to the licensed premises or
the property of the licensed premises which improvements have not been
completed.
(Prior Code, § 75.09)
   (D)   Conditional licenses.
      (1)   The Council may grant an application for a new or renewed
pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer license conditioned upon the applicant
making reasonable improvements to the proposed business premises or the
property upon which the business premises is situated.
      (2)   The improvements shall be required by city zoning or building code
requirements, or other improvements related to the health, safety, welfare or
police power functions.
      (3)   The Council, in granting a conditional license, will specify when
the modifications must be completed.
      (4)   Failure to comply with the conditions of the license is grounds for
the Council to revoke or refuse to renew the license.
(Prior Code, § 75.10)
   (E)   License limitations.
      (1)   A license will be issued to the applicant only, and only for the
business premises as described in the application.
      (2)   The license is effective only for the premises specified in the
approved license application and may not be transferred to any other person,
partnership, corporation or premises.
(Prior Code, § 75.11)
   (F)   Term; expiration. Initial licenses will be effective on the date of
issue and expire on December 31 at midnight of the year of issue. Renewals
shall be for one-year periods commencing on January 1 with expiration on
December 31 at midnight.
(Prior Code, § 75.12)
   (G)   Death of licensee. In the case of death of a licensee, the personal
representative of the licensee may continue operation of the business for not
more than 90 days after the licensee’s death or until the existing license
expires, whichever occurs first.
(Prior Code, § 75.13)
§ 112.23 BOND.
   Before a license shall be granted to any person as a pawnbroker, he or she
shall execute and deposit with the city a corporate surety bond in the sum of
$2,000 on which the city is obligee, conditioned that the applicant will
observe the conditions and provisions of this section and obey all laws
governing the licensed business, and pay all fees, taxes, penalties and other
charges associated with the business.
(Prior Code, § 75.04)
§ 112.24 SITE PLAN.
   (A)   The application for a pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer license
must be accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale.
   (B)   The site plan must contain:
      (1)   A legal description of the property upon which the proposed
licensed premises is situated;
      (2)   A plot plan;
      (3)   The exact location of the licensed premises on the property,
customer and employee parking areas, accesses onto the property and entrance
into the premises;
      (4)   The location of and distance from the nearest church, school,
hospital and residence; and
      (5)   A floor plan of the licensed premises.
(Prior Code, § 75.05)
§ 112.25 INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   The city, prior to the granting of an initial or renewed pawnbroker or
secondhand goods dealer license, must conduct a preliminary background and
financial investigation of the applicant. Any person having a beneficial
interest in the license must be investigated. The investigation shall be
conducted by the County Sheriff’s Department or designated agent to the Council
and the results reported to the Council. The investigation shall seek
verification of the facts stated in the application, and must report all
convicted violations of state law, federal law or city code provisions
involving the applicant, interested persons or the licensed premises while
under that applicant’s proprietorship.
   (B)   The fee charged by the city to an applicant for the costs of
investigation shall be established by the City Council. The investigation fee
must accompany the application form when submitted to the city by the
applicant.
(Prior Code, § 75.06)
§ 112.26 PUBLIC HEARING.
   (A)   Hearing.
      (1)   A pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer license will not be issued
or renewed without a public hearing.
      (2)   Any person having an interest in or who will be affected by the
proposed license will be permitted to testify at the hearing.
   (B)   Notice. The public hearing must be preceded by at least ten days’
published notice specifying the location of the proposed licensed business
premises and the purpose of the hearing.
(Prior Code, § 75.07)
§ 112.27 RECORDS; WEEKLY REPORTS.
   (A)   A licensed secondhand goods dealer and pawnbroker, at the time of
receipt of an item, must immediately record, in ink or other indelible medium
in a book or word processing unit, the following information:
      (1)   An accurate description of the item including, but not limited to,
any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number, brand name
or other identifying mark on the item;
      (2)   The purchase price;
      (3)   Dated receipt;
      (4)   Name, address and date of birth of the person from whom the item
was received;
      (5)   Identification number:
         (a)   The identification number from any one of the following forms of
identification of the seller:
            1.   Valid picture driver’s license; and/or
            2.   State or federal issued picture identification card.
         (b)   The form of identification used must be specified in the
records. Transactions are not permitted with sellers unable to provide the
required identification.
      (6)   The books as well as the goods received must be open for inspection
by the appropriate law enforcement agency at reasonable times. Records required
by this section must be stored and maintained by the licensee for a period of
at least three years.
   (B)   For all items, regardless of resale price, a secondhand goods dealer
or pawnbroker shall make out, on forms approved by the County Sheriff, and send
weekly by mail to the County Sheriff’s Department, a legible description of the
goods received during the preceding week and the price paid, together with the
time received and a description of the person from whom the goods were
received.
(Prior Code, § 75.14)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.28 STOLEN GOODS.
   A licensed pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer must report immediately to
the Police Department any article pledged or received, or sought to be pledged
or received, if the licensee has reason to believe that the article was stolen
or lost.
(Prior Code, § 75.15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.29 HOLDING PERIODS.
   No holding period shall be required for purchases made by the license holder
if a receipt showing the name, address and phone number of the seller is on
file; however, pawned items must be held a minimum of 72 hours after the items
are received on deposit, excluding Sundays and legal holidays.
(Prior Code, § 75.16)
§ 112.30 RECEIPTS.
   (A)   A licensed secondhand goods dealer or pawnbroker must provide a
receipt to the seller or consignor of any items which includes:
      (1)   The address and phone number of the business;
      (2)   The date;
      (3)   A description of the item purchased;
      (4)   The purchaser’s signature; and
      (5)   The sum needed to redeem the article.
   (B)   A duplicate of each receipt shall be retained in the records of the
license holder.
(Prior Code, § 75.17)
§ 112.31 POLICE ORDERS.
   If an authorized law enforcement agency notifies a dealer not to sell an
item, the item may not be sold or removed from the licensed premises until
authorized to be released by the appropriate law enforcement agency. The
release shall be requested by the licensee, and must be approved or denied by
the law enforcement agency.
(Prior Code, § 75.18)
§ 112.32 WEAPONS.
   A licensed pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer may not receive as a pledge
or otherwise accept for consignment or sale any revolver, pistol, sawed-off
shotgun, automatic rifle, blackjack, switchblade, knife or other similar
weapons or firearms unless the licensee is in possession of a current valid
federal firearms license or federal firearms pawnbrokers license. This section
is not intended to restrict the legitimate retailing of firearms under a
federal firearms license.
(Prior Code, § 75.19)
§ 112.33 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   It is unlawful for any:
   (A)   A minor to sell or consign, or attempt to sell or consign, goods with
a secondhand goods dealer or pawnbroker; (It is also unlawful for any
secondhand goods dealer or pawnbroker to receive goods from a minor.)
   (B)   Secondhand goods dealer or pawnbroker to receive any goods from a
person of unsound mind or an intoxicated person; and/or
   (C)   Secondhand goods dealer or pawnbroker to receive goods unless the
seller presents identification in the form of a valid picture driver’s license
or other pictured identification issued by the state of federal government.
(Prior Code, § 75.20) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.34 REDEMPTION PERIOD.
   A person who pawns an item shall have at least 30 days to redeem the item
before it may be sold, subject to the additional holding requirement provided
for herein.
(Prior Code, § 75.21)
§ 112.35 PAYMENTS BY CHECK.
   (A)   When a secondhand goods dealer buys or otherwise receives an item at
the licensed place of business, payment must be made by check payable to the
named payee who is the actual intended seller.
   (B)   This section does not apply to pawnbrokers.
(Prior Code, § 75.22)
§ 112.36 INSPECTIONS.
   A peace officer or any properly designated employee of the city, the county
or the state may enter, inspect and search business premises licensed under
this section during business hours without a warrant.
(Prior Code, § 75.23)
§ 112.37 APPLICABILITY.
   The licenses required by this subchapter shall be applied for within 30 days
of the effective date of this section. The licenses shall be obtained within 60
days of the effective date of this section. If the licenses are not obtained
within the 60-day period, the designated business shall cease operating within
the city, unless the Council extends the time for issuance of the license. All
other provisions of this chapter shall be effective and complied with within 60
days after the effective date of this section.
(Prior Code, § 75.24)
CHAPTER 113: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
113.01   Findings and purpose
   
113.02   Definitions
   
113.03   Location
   
113.04   Hours of operation
   
113.05   Adult cabarets; additional provisions
   
113.06   License required
   
113.07   High-risk sexual conduct
§ 113.01 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   Studies conducted by the State Attorney General, the American Planning
Association and cities such as St. Paul, Minnesota, Indianapolis, Indiana,
Hopkins, Minnesota, Ramsey, Minnesota, Rochester, Minnesota, Phoenix, Arizona,
Los Angeles, California, and Seattle, Washington, have studied the impacts that
adult establishments have in those communities.
   (B)   These studies have concluded that adult establishments have adverse
impacts on the surrounding neighborhoods.
   (C)   These impacts include increased crime rates, lower property values,
increased transiency, neighborhood blight and potential health risks.
   (D)   Based on these studies and findings, the City Council concludes:
      (1)   Adult establishments have adverse secondary impacts of the types
set forth above;
      (2)   The adverse impacts caused by adult establishments tend to diminish
if adult establishments are governed by geographic, licensing and health
requirements;
      (3)   It is not the intent of the City Council to prohibit adult
establishments from having a reasonable opportunity to locate in the city;
      (4)   M.S. § 462.357, as it may be amended from time to time, allows the
city to adopt regulations to promote the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare; and
      (5)   The public health, safety, morals and general welfare will be
promoted by the city adopting regulations governing adult establishments.
(Prior Code, § 74.01)
§ 113.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   ADULT ESTABLISHMENT.
      (1)   Any business that is conducted exclusively for the patronage of
adults and that excludes minors from patronage, either by operation of law or
by the owners of the business;
      (2)   Any business that devotes 25% or more of its floor area (not
including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements or any portion of the
business not open to the public) to items, merchandise, devices or other
materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on material depicting,
exposing, simulating, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas; or
      (3)   Any business that engages in any adult use as defined herein.
   ADULT USE. Any of the following activities or businesses.
      (1)   ADULT BODY PAINTING STUDIO. An establishment or business that
provides the service of applying paint, ink or other substance, whether
transparent or non-transparent, to the body of a patron when the person is
nude.
      (2)   ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment or business used for the barter,
rental or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides,
records, audio tape, videotape or motion picture film, if:
         (a)   The business is not open to the public generally but only to one
or more classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason of age; or
         (b)   Twenty-five percent or more of the floor area of the business
(not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements or any portion of
the business not open to the public) is devoted to items, merchandise or other
materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on material depicting,
exposing, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      (3)   ADULT CABARET. A business or establishment that provides dancing or
other live entertainment distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on:
         (a)   The depiction of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas; or
         (b)   The presentation, display or depiction of matter that seeks to
evoke, arouse or excite sexual or erotic feelings or desire.
      (4)   ADULT COMPANIONSHIP ESTABLISHMENT. A business or establishment that
excludes minors by reason of age, and that provides the service of engaging in
or listening to conversation, talk or discussion distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (5)   ADULT CONVERSATION/RAP PARLOR. A business or establishment that
excludes minors by reason of age, and that provides the services of engaging in
or listening to conversation, talk or discussion distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (6)   ADULT HEALTH/SPORT CLUB. A health/sport club that excludes minors
by reason of age, and that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (7)   ADULT HOTEL OR MOTEL. A hotel or motel that excludes minors by
reason of age, and that presents material distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (8)   ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR/HEALTH CLUB. A massage parlor or health club
that excludes minors by reason of age, and that provides massage services
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      (9)   ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A business or establishment with
a capacity of less than 50 persons that presents material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
      (10)   ADULT MODELING STUDIO. A business or establishment that provides
figure models who, with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual
gratification, engage in specified sexual activities or display specified
anatomical areas while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn,
sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted.
      (11)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE. Any place to which the public is
permitted or invited where coin or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically or mechanically controlled or operated still or motion picture
machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are used to show images
to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or
describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (12)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A motion picture theater with a
capacity of 50 or more persons that as a prevailing practice excludes minors by
reason of age or that as a prevailing practice presents material distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas for observation by patrons.
      (13)   ADULT NOVELTY BUSINESS. An establishment or business that devotes
25% or more of its floor area (not including storerooms, stock areas,
bathrooms, basements or any portion of the business not open to the public) to
items, merchandise or if the business not open to the public, to items,
merchandise or devices that either simulate specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas or are designed for sexual stimulation.
      (14)   ADULT SAUNA. A sauna that excludes minors by reason of age, and
that provides a steam bath or heath bathing room used for the purpose of
bathing, relaxation or reducing, if the service provided by the sauna is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      (15)   ADULT STEAM ROOM/BATHHOUSE FACILITY. A building or portion of a
building used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the
purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation or reducing, if the building or
portion of a building restricts minors by reason of age and if the service
provided by the steam room/ bathhouse facility is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
   NUDE or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
regions, buttocks, anuses or female breasts below a point immediately above the
top of the areola; and
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernable turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
      (1)   Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal
intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of
unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual
relationship, the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual
relationship, anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus,
fellatio; necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism or
zooerastia;
      (2)   Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation,
arousal or tumescence;
      (3)   Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus
or masturbation;
      (4)   Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic regions,
buttocks or female breasts;
      (5)   Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, who
are clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes and engaged in the
flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other physical restraints of any
person;
      (6)   Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually-oriented
contact with an animal by a human being; or
      (7)   Human excretion, urination, menstruation or vaginal or anal
irrigation.
(Prior Code, § 74.02)
§ 113.03 LOCATION.
   An adult establishment may not be located within 600 feet of any
residentially-zoned property boundary or any church site, school site, day-care
facility or park. An adult establishment may not be located within 1,000 feet
of another adult establishment. For the purposes of this section, this distance
is a horizontal measurement from the main public entrance of the adult
establishment to the nearest point of a residentially-zoned property boundary,
the property line of a church site, school site, day-care facility or park and
the main public entrance of another adult establishment.
(Prior Code, § 74.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.04 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   An adult establishment may not be open to the public between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 74.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.05 ADULT CABARETS; ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS.
   The following additional conditions apply to adult cabarets.
   (A)   An owner, operator or manager of an adult cabaret may not allow any
dancer or other live entertainer to display specified anatomical areas or to
display or perform specified sexual activities on the premises of the adult
cabaret.
   (B)   A dancer, live entertainer, performer, patron or any other person may
not display specified anatomical areas in an adult cabaret.
   (C)   The owner, operator or manager of an adult cabaret must provide the
following information to the city concerning any person who dances or performs
live entertainment at the adult cabaret: the person’s name, home address, home
telephone number, date of birth and any aliases.
(Prior Code, § 74.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.06 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   A person may not own or operate an adult establishment without having
first secured a license as provided for in this section. Notwithstanding any
other provision of this code to the contrary, the procedures set forth in this
section establish the exclusive method for obtaining an adult establishment
license.
   (B)   The application for an adult establishment license must be submitted
on a form provided by the city and must include:
      (1)   If the applicant is an individual, the name, residence, phone
number and birth date of the applicant; if the applicant is a partnership, the
name, residence, phone number and birth date of each general and limited
partner; if the applicant is a corporation, the names, residences, phone
numbers and birth dates of all persons holding more than 5% of the issued and
outstanding stock of the corporation;
      (2)   The name, address, phone number and birth date of the operator and
manager of the adult establishment, if different from the owner’s;
      (3)   The address and legal description of the premises where the adult
establishment is to be located;
      (4)   A statement detailing any gross misdemeanor or felony convictions
relating to sex offenses, obscenity or the operation of an adult establishment
or adult business by the applicant, operator or manager, and whether or not the
applicant, operator or manager has ever applied for or held a license to
operate a similar type of business in another community; (In the case of a
corporation, a statement detailing any felony convictions by the owners of more
than 5% of the issued outstanding stock of the corporation, and whether or not
those owners have ever applied for or held a license to operate a similar type
of business in another community.)
      (5)   The activities and types of business to be conducted;
      (6)   The hours of operation;
      (7)   The provisions made to restrict access by minors; and
      (8)   A building plan of the premises detailing all internal operations
and activities.
   (C)   The license fee provisions for adult use establishments are as
follows.
      (1)   The annual license fee is set by Council resolution.
      (2)   An application for a license must be submitted to the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer and accompanied by payment of the required
license fee. Upon rejection of an application for a license, the city will
refund the license fee.
      (3)   Licenses will expire on December 31 of each year. Each license will
be issued for a period of one year; except that, if a portion of the license
year has elapsed when the application is made, a license may be issued for the
remainder of the year for a pro rated fee. In computing a pro rated fee, any
unexpired fraction of a month will be counted as one month.
      (4)   No part of the fee paid by any license will be refunded; except
that, a pro rata portion of the fee will be refunded in the following instances
upon application to the City Council within 30 days from the happening of one
of the following events; provided that, the event occurs more than 30 days
before the expiration of the license:
         (a)   Destruction or damage of the licensed premises by fire or other
catastrophe;
         (b)   The licensee’s illness, if the illness renders the licensee
unable to continue operating the licensed adult establishment;
         (c)   The licensee’s death; or
         (d)   A change in the legal status making it unlawful for the licensed
business to continue.
      (5)   (a)   An application must contain a provision in bold print
indicating that withholding information or providing false or misleading
information will be grounds for denial or revocation of a license.
         (b)   Changes in the information provided on the application or
provided during the investigation must be brought to the attention of the City
Council by the applicant or licensee.
         (c)   If a change takes place during the investigation, it must be
reported to the Police Chief or the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer in
writing and they will report it to the City Council. A failure by an applicant
or licensee to report a change may result in a denial or revocation of a
license.
   (D)   The investigative fee for an adult establishment license is
established by Council resolution.
   (E)   The procedures for granting an adult establishment license are as
follows.
      (1)   The Chief of Police will conduct and complete an investigation
within 30 days after the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer receives a complete
application and all license and investigative fees.
      (2)   If the application is for a renewal, the applicant will be allowed
to continue business until the City Council has determined whether to renew or
refuse to renew a license.
      (3)   If, after the investigation, it appears that the applicant and the
place proposed for the business are eligible for a license, then the license
will be issued by the City Council within 30 days after the investigation is
completed. If the City Council fails to act within 30 days after the
investigation is completed, the application will be deemed approved.
      (4)   (a)   A license will be issued to the applicant only and is not
transferable to another holder. Each license will be issued only for the
premises described in the application.
         (b)   A license may not be transferred to another premise without the
approval of the City Council. If the licensee is a partnership or a
corporation, a change in the identity of any partner or holder of more than 5%
of the issued and outstanding stock of the corporation will be deemed a
transfer of the license.
         (c)   Adult establishments existing at the time of the adoption of
this section must obtain an annual license.
   (F)   A license will not be granted to or held by a person who:
      (1)   Is under 18 years of age;
      (2)   Who is overdue or whose spouse is overdue in payments to the city,
county or state of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against them or
imposed upon them;
      (3)   Who has been convicted or whose spouse has been convicted of a
gross misdemeanor or felony or of violating any law of this state or local
ordinance relating to sex offenses, obscenity offenses or adult establishments;
      (4)   Who is not the proprietor of the establishment for which the
license is issued;
      (5)   Who is residing with a person who has been denied a license by the
city or any other state municipal corporation to operate an adult establishment
or residing with a person whose license to operate an adult establishment has
been suspended or revoked within the preceding 12 months; or
      (6)   Who has not paid the license and investigative fees required by
this section.
   (G)   An adult establishment license will not be granted for:
      (1)   Any adult establishment on premises where the applicant or any of
its officers, agents or employees has been convicted of a violation of this
chapter or where a license hereunder has been revoked for cause, until one year
has elapsed after the conviction or revocation; or
      (2)   Any adult establishment that is not in full compliance with the
city code and all provisions of state and federal law.
   (H)   A license is subject to the provisions of this chapter and of any
applicable sections of the city code and all provisions of state and federal
law.
   (I)   Licensed premises must have the license posted in a conspicuous place
at all times.
   (J)   A minor may not be permitted on the licensed premises.
   (K)   Any designated inspection officer of the city has the right to enter,
inspect and search the premises of a licensee during business hours.
   (L)   The licensee is responsible for the conduct of the licensed place of
business and must maintain conditions of order.
   (M)   Adult goods or materials may not be offered, sold, transferred,
conveyed, given or bartered to a minor, or displayed in a fashion that allows
them to be viewed by a minor, whether or not the minor is on the licensed
premises.
   (N)   (1)   The licensee must keep itemized written records of all
transactions involving the sale or rental of all items or merchandise for at
least one year after the transaction.
      (2)   At a minimum, those records must describe the date of the
transaction, a description of the transaction, the purchase price or rental
price and a detailed description of the item or merchandise that is being
purchased or rented.
      (3)   These written records must be provided to the city upon request.
(Prior Code, § 74.06)
§ 113.07 HIGH-RISK SEXUAL CONDUCT.
   (A)   Findings and purpose. The City Council makes the following findings
regarding the need to regulate commercial premises, buildings and structures
that are conducive to the spread of communicable disease of danger to persons
in order to further the substantial interest of public health.
      (1)   The experience of other cities establishes that certain commercial
premises, buildings and structures or parts thereof, by reason of design and
use of the premises, buildings or structures are conducive to the spread of
communicable disease of danger to persons frequenting the premises, buildings
or structures, as well as to the general public, and that the risk of spreading
infectious and contagious diseases can be minimized by regulating the
commercial premises, buildings and structures.
      (2)   The experience of other cities where the premises, buildings and
structures are present indicates that the risk of spreading the sexually
transmittable disease of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) is
increased by the presence of the premises, buildings and structures, because
the design or use of the premises, buildings and structures, or parts thereof
can facilitate high-risk sexual conduct.
      (3)   (a)   Medical publications of the Center for Disease Control of the
United States Department of Health and Human Services indicate that the
sexually transmittable disease of AIDS is currently irreversible and uniformly
fatal.
         (b)   Medical research has further established that the risk factors
for obtaining or spreading AIDS are associated with high-risk sexual conduct.
      (4)   Certain commercial premises, buildings and structures, or parts
thereof, by reason of their design and use, are conducive to high-risk sexual
conduct and hence the spread of communicable disease, and that the risk of
spreading infectious and contagious diseases can be minimized by regulating
these commercial premises, buildings and structures.
      (5)   The public health, safety, morals and general welfare will be
promoted by the city adopting regulations governing commercial premises,
buildings and structures conduce to high-risk sexual conduct.
      (6)   The purpose of these regulations is to prescribe regulations
governing commercial premises, buildings and structures that are conducive, by
virtue of design and use, to high-risk sexual conduct which can result in the
spread of sexually transmitted diseases to persons frequenting the premises,
buildings and structures.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly requires a different
meaning.
      BOOTHS, STALLS or PARTITIONED PORTIONS OF A ROOM OR INDIVIDUAL ROOM.
Enclosures specifically offered to persons for a fee or as an incident to
performing high-risk sexual conduct or enclosures which are part of a business
operated on the premises which offers movies or other entertainment to be
viewed within the enclosure, including enclosures wherein movies or other
entertainment is dispensed for a fee, but does not include enclosures that are
private offices used by the owners, managers or persons employed by the
premises for attending to the tasks of their employment and which are not held
out to the public or members of the establishment for hire or for a fee or for
the purpose of viewing movies or other entertainment for a fee, and are not
open to any persons other than employees.
      DOORS, CURTAINS or PORTAL PARTITIONS. Full, complete, non-transparent
closure devices through which one cannot see or view activity taking place
within the enclosure.
      HAZARDOUS SITE. Any commercial premises, building or structure, or any
part thereof, which is a site of high-risk sexual conduct, as defined herein.
      HIGH-RISK SEXUAL CONDUCT. Fellatio, anal intercourse and vaginal
intercourse with persons who engage in sexual acts in exchange for money.
      OPEN TO AN ADJACENT PUBLIC ROOM SO THAT THE AREA INSIDE IS VISIBLE TO
PERSONS IN THE ADJACENT PUBLIC ROOM. The absence of any entire door, curtain or
portal partition or a door or other device which is made of clear, transparent
material, such as glass, plexiglass or other similar material meeting Building
Code and safety standards, which permits the activity inside the enclosure to
be entirely viewed or seen by persons outside the enclosure.
      PUBLIC HEALTH OFFICIAL. An agent or employee of the city, county or state
charged with the enforcement of the state or local health laws.
   (C)   Public health regulations.
      (1)   A commercial building, structure, premises or part thereof or
facilities therein may not be constructed, used, designed or operated in the
city for the purpose of engaging in, or permitting persons to engage in sexual
activities which include high-risk sexual conduct.
      (2)   It is unlawful to own, operate, manage, rent, lease or exercise
control of a commercial building, structure, premises or portion or part
thereof in the city, that contains:
         (a)   Partitions between subdivisions of a room, portion or part of a
building, structure or premises having an aperture which is designed or
constructed to facilitate sexual activity, including but not limited to vaginal
intercourse, anal intercourse or fellatio, between persons on either side of
the partition; or
         (b)   Booths, stalls or partitioned portions of a room or individual
room, as defined herein, which have doors, curtains or portal partitions, as
defined herein, unless the booths, stalls or partitioned portions of a room or
individual room have at least one side open to an adjacent public room so that
the area inside is visible to persons in the adjacent public room as defined
herein. Booths, stalls or partitioned portions of a room or individual room
that are so open to an adjacent public room must be lighted in a manner that
the persons in the area used for viewing motion pictures or other forms of
entertainment are visible from the adjacent public rooms, but the lighting need
not be of the intensity as to prevent the viewing of the motion pictures or
other offered entertainment.
   (D)   Exceptions. The regulations set forth in this section do not apply to
premises, buildings or structures that are lawfully operating and licensed as
hotels, motels, apartment complexes, condominiums, townhomes or boarding houses
which are subject to other general health and sanitation requirements under
state and local law.
   (E)   Health enforcement powers.
      (1)   In exercising powers conferred by this or any other section of this
code relating to communicable diseases, the Public Health Official is to be
guided by the most recent instructions, opinions and guidelines of the Center
for Disease Control of the United States Department of Health and Human
Services that relate to the spread of infectious diseases.
      (2)   In order to ascertain the source of infection and reduce its
spread, the Public Health Official, and persons under the Public Health
Official’s direction and control, may inspect or cause to be inspected, and to
issue orders regarding any commercial building, structure or premises, or any
part thereof, that may be a site of high-risk sexual conduct.
      (3)   If the Public Health Official determines that a hazardous site as
defined herein exists, the Public Health Official will declare it to be a
public health hazard and public health nuisance and will:
         (a)   Notify the manager, owner or tenant of the hazardous site that
the Public Health Official has reasonable belief that the premises, building or
structure is a hazardous site, as defined herein;
         (b)   Issue two written warnings at least ten days apart to the
manager, owner or tenant of the premises stating the specific reasons for the
Public Health Official’s opinion that the premises, building or structure is a
hazardous site, as defined herein;
            1.   Once the notices and warnings have been issued, the Public
Health Official must proceed as follows:
            2.   After the manager, owner or tenant of the premises has been
notified in writing as to the basis of the Public Health Official’s
determination, the manager, owner or tenant will have ten days from the date of
the last warning to request a hearing before the Public Health Official or the
Public Health Official’s appointee for the determination as to the existence of
the hazardous site. If the manager, owner or tenant of the premises does not
request a hearing within ten days of the date of the last warning notice, the
Public Health Official will then cause the premises to be posted with a warning
advising the public that the premises have been declared a hazardous site and
the Public Health Official will cause the orders to be issued to the manager,
owner or tenant of the premises constituting the hazardous site to take
specified corrective measures to prevent high-risk sexual conduct from taking
place within the premises.
            3.   If the manager, owner or tenant of the premises requests a
hearing, the hearing will be held before the Public Health Official or the
Public Health Official’s appointee at a date not more than 30 days after demand
for a hearing. After considering all evidence, the Public Health Official or
the Public Health Official’s appointee will make a determination as to whether
the premises constitute a hazardous site, as defined herein, and issue a
decision based upon all hearing evidence presented. If the Public Health
Official or the Public Health Official’s appointee makes a determination that
the premises constitute a hazardous site, the Public Health Official will then
issue orders to the manager, owner or tenant of the premises to take corrective
measures to prevent high-risk sexual conduct from taking place within the
premises and cause the premises to be posted with a warning advising the public
that the premises have been declared a hazardous site.
         (c)   If, within 30 days after issuance of the orders to the manager,
owner or tenant of the hazardous site, the Public Health Official determines
that the corrective measures have not been undertaken, the Public Health
Official may order the abatement of the hazardous site as a public nuisance,
which may be enforced by mandatory or prohibitory injunction in a court of
competent jurisdiction or may secure a court order for the closure of the
premises, constituting the hazardous site until the premises, building or
structure is in compliance with all provisions of this code.
(Prior Code, § 74.07)
CHAPTER 114: PERSONAL SALES
Section
   
114.01   Garage sales, rummage sales and yard sales
§ 114.01 GARAGE SALES, RUMMAGE SALES AND YARD SALES.
   (A)   All garage/rummage/yard sales shall be limited to a maximum of four
consecutive days and shall occur no more than five times within one calendar
year per property.
   (B)   Signs for garage/rummage/yard sales may be posted up to one week in
advance. All signs must be removed promptly at the end of the sale.
(Prior Code, § 76.01)
CHAPTER 115: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
Intoxicating Liquor
   
115.01   Adoption of state law
   
115.02   License required
   
115.03   License application
   
115.04   License fees
   
115.05   Granting of licenses
   
115.06   Ineligibility
   
115.07   Conditions of license
   
115.08   Closing hours
   
115.09   Purchase and consumption
3.2% Malt Liquor
   
115.20   Definitions
   
115.21   License required
   
115.22   Application
   
115.23   Fees
   
115.24   Granting of license
   
115.25   Ineligibility
   
115.26   Conditions of license
   
115.27   Closing hours
   
115.28   Purchase and consumption
Consumption and Display
   
115.40   License required
   
115.41   Fees
   
115.42   Inspections
   
115.43   Adoption of state law
   
115.44   Exemptions
Club Licenses
   
115.55   Adoption of state law
   
115.56   License application
   
115.57   Fees
   
115.58   Granting of licenses
   
115.59   Conditions of license
INTOXICATING LIQUOR
§ 115.01 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.
   The provisions of M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time,
relating to the definition of terms, licensing, consumption, sales, conditions
of bonds of licensees, hours of sale and all other matters pertaining to the
retail sale, distribution and consumption of intoxicating liquor are adopted
and made a part of this subchapter as if set out in full.
(Prior Code, § 80.01)
§ 115.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Licenses.
      (1)   No person, except a wholesaler or manufacturer, to the extent
authorized, state license, shall directly or indirectly deal in, sell or keep
for sale in the city any intoxicating liquor without a license to do so as
provided in this subchapter.
      (2)   Liquor licenses shall be of three kinds: on-sale; Sunday on-sale;
and off-sale.
   (B)   On-sale licenses. On-sale licenses shall be issued only to hotels,
restaurants and exclusive liquor stores and shall permit on-sale of liquor
only.
   (C)   Sunday.
      (1)   A Sunday on-sale license authorizes the licensee to sell or serve
liquor between the hours of 8:00 a.m. Sunday and 1:00 a.m. Monday.
      (2)   Sunday on-sale licenses shall be issued only to a hotel or
restaurant having facilities for serving at least 30 guests at a time, and
which has an on-sale license.
      (3)   No Sunday on-sale license shall be valid unless a valid on-sale
license is also in effect for the same premises.
   (D)   Off-sale. Off-sale licenses shall be issued only to exclusive liquor
stores and for a permit off-sale of liquor only. An exclusive liquor store
shall include an on-sale or a combination on-sale and off-sale establishment at
which food is sold for consumption on the premises.
      (1)   No sale of intoxicating liquor me be made by an off-sale licensee:
         (a)   On Sundays, except between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m.;
         (b)   Before 8:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday;
         (c)   On Thanksgiving Day;
         (d)   After 8:00 p.m. on Christmas Eve, December 24; or
         (e)   On Christmas Day, December 25.
      (2)   No delivery of alcohol to an off-sale licensee may be made by a
wholesaler or accepted by an off-sale license on a Sunday. No order
solicitation or merchandising may be made by a wholesaler on a Sunday.
(Prior Code, § 80.01) (Ord. 2013-08, passed 10-28-2013; Ord. 2017-04, passed 6-
12-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.03 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   (1)   Every application for a license to sell liquor shall state the
name of the applicant, his or her age, representations as to his or her
character, with references as the Council may require, his or her citizenship,
the type of license applied for, the business in connection with which the
proposed license will operate and its location, whether the applicant is owner
and operator of the, business, how long he or she has been in that business at
that place; and other information as the Council may require from time to time.
      (2)   In addition to containing the information, the application shall be
in the form prescribed by the Department of Public Safety and shall be verified
and filed with the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer.
      (3)   No person shall make a false statement in an application.
   (B)   Every applicant for the issuance of renewal of an on-sale or off-sale
license shall demonstrate proof of financial responsibility by filing with the
city one of the following:
      (1)   A certificate showing insurance against general liability and that
imposed by M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time, in the
amount of $50,000 coverage for bodily injury to one person, $100,000 for
coverage for two or more persons injured in one occurrence, $10,000 for damage
to property of others in one occurrence, and $100,000 for loss of means of
support of any one person in any one occurrence, and $100,000 for loss of means
of support of two or more persons in any one occurrence;
      (2)   A surety bond with minimum coverage as provided in this section; or
      (3)   A certificate of the State Treasurer that the licensee has
deposited with him or her or her $360,000 in cash for securities in accordance
with M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   On-sale or off-sale liquor business without having on file at all
times the insurance bond or other security required hereby shall be grounds for
immediate revocation of the license.
   (D)   The operation of an on-sale or off-sale liquor business shall be on
file at all times. The insurance bond or other security required hereby shall
be grounds for immediate revocation of the license.
(Prior Code, § 80.03)
§ 115.04 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   The annual fee for liquor licenses shall be as follows:
      (1)   On-sale license: $3,900;
      (2)   Off-sale license: $100;
      (3)   Sunday on-sale: $200; and
      (4)   Special three-day on-sale license: $25.
   (B)   (1)   Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a receipt
from the Clerk/Treasurer for payment in full of the license fee.
      (2)   All fees shall be paid into the General Fund. If an application for
a license is rejected, the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall refund the
amount paid.
   (C)   Each license shall be issued for a period of one year; except that, if
the application is made during the license year, a license may be issued for
the remainder of the year for a pro rata fee, with any unexpired fraction of a
month being counted as one month. Every license shall expire on December 31.
   (D)   No refund of any fee shall be made, except as authorized by statute.
(Prior Code, § 80.04)
§ 115.05 GRANTING OF LICENSES.
   (A)   (1)   The Council shall investigate all facts set out in the
application. Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or
against the granting of the license.
      (2)   After the investigation and hearing, the Council shall, in its
discretion, grant or refuse the application.
      (3)   No off-sale license shall become effective until the application,
together with the security furnished by the applicant, has been approved by the
Department of Public Safety.
   (B)   Each license shall be issued only to the applicant and/or the premises
described in the application. No license may be transferred to another person,
nor place without Council approval. Any transfer of stock of a corporate
licensee is deemed a transfer of the license and a transfer of stock without
prior Council approval is a ground for revocation of the license.
(Prior Code, § 80.05)
§ 115.06 INELIGIBILITY.
   (A)   No license shall be granted to any person made ineligible for a
license by state law.
   (B)   (1)   No license shall be issued for any place or any business
ineligible for a license under state law.
      (2)   No license shall be granted for operation on any premises on which
taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the city are delinquent and
unpaid.
(Prior Code, § 80.06)
§ 115.07 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Every license is subject to the conditions in the following
subdivisions and other provisions of this chapter and of any other applicable
chapter, state law or regulation.
   (B)   Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of his or her place of
business and the conditions of sobriety and order in it. The act of any
employee in the licensed premises authorized to sell intoxicating liquor there
is deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the licensee shall be liable to
all penalties provided by this subchapter and the law equally with the
employee.
   (C)   Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health officer or
properly designated officer or employee of the city to enter, inspect and
search the premises of the licensee during business hours without a warrant.
   (D)   No intoxicating beverage shall be displayed or exhibited upon the bar
or tables or booths within the premises of an establishment licensed for on-
sale of intoxicating liquor between the hours of 1:15 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. of any
day.
   (E)   No licensee shall possess a federal wholesale liquor dealer’s special
tax stamp or a federal gambling stamp.
   (F)   No licensee shall allow any person under 18 years of age to sell or
serve liquor. No licensee shall allow any person under the age of 21 who has
consumed intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor to be in or on the licensed
premises whether the person has consumed the beverages on the premises or any
other place.
(Prior Code, § 80.07) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.08 CLOSING HOURS.
   (A)   No person other than an employee of the licensed establishment shall
remain on the premises of any licensed liquor establishment after one-half hour
after sales are closed.
   (B)   Employees shall be off the premises by one hour after sales are
closed. Employees shall not re-enter the premises until 8:00 a.m. the following
day.
   (C)   The licensee shall post and display a legible list of the names of all
current employees. The list shall be displayed in the same location as the
liquor license and shall be furnished to law enforcement officers on demand.
(Prior Code, § 80.08) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.09 PURCHASE AND CONSUMPTION.
   (A)   No person shall mix or prepare liquor for consumption in any public
place or place of business unless it has a license to sell liquor on-sale or a
permit from the Department of Public Safety under M.S. § 340A.414, as it may be
amended from time to time, and no person shall consume liquor in any place,
which does not have a license or permit.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall consume liquor on a public street, public
sidewalk or is parking lot.
      (2)   No license holder shall allow the consumption of intoxicating
liquor by its patrons within any parking lot owned or operated by any
intoxicating liquor license holder.
(Prior Code, § 80.09) Penalty, see §
10.99
3.2% MALT LIQUOR
§ 115.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   3.2% MALT LIQUOR. Any malt beverage with an alcoholic content of more than
0.5% by volume and not more than 3.2% by weight.
   3.2% MALT LIQUOR STORE. An establishment for the sale of 3.2% malt liquor,
cigars, cigarettes, all forms of tobacco, beverages and soft drinks at retail.
(Prior Code, § 81.01)
§ 115.21 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person, except wholesalers and manufacturers to the extent
authorized by law, shall deal in or dispose of by gift, sale or otherwise, or
keep or offer for sale, any 3.2% malt liquor within the city without first
having received a license as hereinafter provided. Licenses shall be of three
kinds: regular on-sale, temporary on-sale and off-sale.
   (B)   Regular on-sale licenses shall be granted only to bona fide clubs,
3.2% malt liquor stores, exclusive on-sale liquor stores, restaurants and
hotels where food is prepared and served for consumption on the premises. On-
sale licenses shall permit the sale of 3.2% malt liquor for consumption on the
premises only.
   (C)   Temporary on-sale licenses shall be granted only to bona fide clubs
and charitable, religious and non-profit organizations for the sale of 3.2%
malt liquor for consumption on the premises only.
   (D)   Off-sale licenses shall permit the sale of 3.2% malt liquor at retail
in the original package for consumption off the premises only.
(Prior Code, § 81.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.22 APPLICATION.
   Every application for a license to sell 3.2% malt liquor shall be made to
the Administrator/ Clerk-Treasurer on a form supplied by the city and
containing the information as the Administrator/ Clerk-Treasurer or the Council
may require. It shall be unlawful to make any false statement in an
application.
(Prior Code, § 81.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.23 FEES.
   (A)   Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a receipt from
the Administrator/ Clerk-Treasurer for payment in full of the required fee for
the license. All fees shall be paid into the General Fund of the city. Upon
rejection of any application for a license, the Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer
shall refund the amount paid.
   (B)   Every license, except a temporary license, shall expire on December 31
of each year. Each license, except a temporary license, shall be issued for a
period of one year; except that, if a portion of the license year has elapsed
when the license is granted, the license shall be issued for the remainder of
the year for a pro rata fee. In computing the fee, any unexpired fraction of a
month shall be counted as one month. A temporary license shall be issued for a
specific period in which a special event to which the sale is incident is being
held and the period shall be stated on the license.
   (C)   The annual fee for 3.2% malt liquor licenses are as set by the
Council.
   (D)   No part of the fee paid for any license issued under this chapter sere
refunded, except in the following instances, upon application to the Council
within 30 days from the happening of the event. There shall be refunded a pro
rata portion of the fee for the unexpired period of the license, computed on a
monthly basis, when operation of the licensed business ceases not less than one
month before expiration of the license because of:
      (1)   Destruction or damage of the licensed premises by fire or other
catastrophe;
      (2)   The licensee’s illness;
      (3)   The licensee’s death; and
      (4)   A change in the legal status of the municipality making it unlawful
for the licensed business to continue.
(Prior Code, § 81.04)
§ 115.24 GRANTING OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The Council shall investigate all facts set out in an application.
Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or against the
granting of the license. After the investigation and hearing, the Council shall
grant or refuse the application in its discretion.
   (B)   (1)   Each license shall be issued to the applicant only and shall not
be transferable to another holder. Each license shall be issued only for the
premises described in the application.
      (2)   No license may be transferred to another place without the approval
of the Council.
   (C)   (1)   Prior to the issuance of a license, the applicant shall file
with the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer a dram shop liability insurance policy
in the amount of $100,000 coverage for one person and $300,000 coverage for
more than one person.
      (2)   If sales are less than $25,000 in the case of an on-sale license
and $50,000 in the case of an off-sale license and no dram shop insurance is
required, the city has the right to inspect records of sales.
(Prior Code, § 81.05)
§ 115.25 INELIGIBILITY.
   (A)   No license shall be granted to any person made ineligible for a
license by state law.
   (B)   (1)   No license shall be issued for any place or business ineligible
for a license understate law.
      (2)   No license shall be granted for operation on any premises on which
taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the city are delinquent and
unpaid.
(Prior Code, § 81.06)
§ 115.26 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Every license shall be granted subject to the conditions in the
following subdivisions and all other provisions of this subchapter and of any
other applicable chapter of the city or state law.
   (B)   No 3.2% malt liquor shall be sold or served to any intoxicated person
or to any person under 21 years of age.
   (C)   No person under 18 years of age shall be employed on the premises of a
3.2% malt liquor store.
   (D)   No gambling or any gambling device shall be permitted on any licensed
premises.
   (E)   No manufacturer or wholesaler of 3.2% malt liquor shall have any
ownership of or interest in an establishment licensed to sell at retail
contrary to the provisions of M.S. § 340A.301, as it may be amended from time
to time. No retail licensee and manufacturer or wholesaler of 3.2% malt liquor
shall be parties to any exclusive purchase contract. No retail licensee shall
receive any benefits contrary to law from a manufacturer or wholesaler of 3.2%
malt liquor and no manufacturer or wholesaler shall confer any benefits
contrary to law upon a retail licensee.
   (F)   No licensee shall sell 3.2% malt liquor while holding or exhibiting a
licensed pressed by a federal retail liquor dealer’s special tax stamp unless
he or she is licensed under the laws of the state to sell intoxicating liquors.
   (G)   (1)   No licensee who is not also licensed to sell intoxicating liquor
and who does not hold a consumption or display permit shall sell or permit the
consumption and display of intoxicating liquors on the licenses premises or
serve any liquids for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquor.
      (2)   The presence of intoxicating liquors on the premises of a licensee
shall be prima facie evidence of possession of intoxicating liquors for the
purpose of sale and the serving of any liquid for the purpose of mixing with
intoxicating liquors shall be prima, facie evidence that intoxicating liquor is
being permitted to be consumed or displayed contrary to this subchapter.
   (H)   Any peace officer, health officer or other properly designated
employee of the city, may enter, inspect and search the premises of a licensee
during business hours without a search and seize warrant and may seize all
intoxicating liquors found on the licensed premises in violation of this
section.
   (I)   Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of his or her
place of business and shall maintain conditions of sobriety and order. The act
of any employee on the licensed premises authorized to sell or serve 3.2% malt
liquor shall be deed the act of the licensee as well and the licensee shall be
liable to all penalties provided by this subchapter equally with the employee.
   (J)   A regular on-sale license shall entitle the holder to serve 3.2% malt
liquor in a separate room of the licensed premises for banquets or dinners at
which are present not fewer than 25 persons.
(Prior Code, § 81.07) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.27 CLOSING HOURS.
   No sale of 3.2% malt liquor shall be made on any Sunday between the hours of
1:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. No sales shall be made between the hours of 1:00 a.m.
and 8:00 a.m. on any other day.
(Prior Code, § 81.08) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.28 PURCHASE AND CONSUMPTION.
   (A)   No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent his or her age for
the purpose of obtaining 3.2% malt liquor.
   (B)   No person shall induce a person under 21 years of age to purchase or
procure 3.2% malt liquor.
   (C)   No person other than the parent or legal guardian shall procure 3.2%
malt liquor for any person under 21 years of age.
   (D)   No person under 21 years of age shall have 3.2% malt liquor in his or
her possession with the intent to consume it at a place other than the
household of his or her parent or guardian.
   (E)   No person under 21 years of age shall consume 3.2% malt liquor unless
in the company of his or her parent or guardian.
   (F)   (1)   No person shall consume 3.2% malt liquor on a public street,
public sidewalk or public parking lot unless the location is under a temporary
license in force when the consumption takes place.
      (2)   The Council may by resolution regulate 3.2% malt liquor consumption
at public parks and shall post notice of the regulations in the park.
   (G)   No person shall consume or display any intoxicating liquor on premises
of a licensee who is not also licensed to sell intoxicating liquors or who does
not hold an option and display permit.
(Prior Code, § 81.09) Penalty, see §
10.99
CONSUMPTION AND DISPLAY
§ 115.40 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any private club or public place, directly or
indirectly or upon any pretense or by any device to allow the consumption or
display of intoxicating liquor, or the serving of any liquid for the purpose of
mixing with intoxicating liquor without first securing a license from the
Commissioner of Public Safety and paying the annual fee as provided in this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 82.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.41 FEES.
   Every private club or public place desiring to allow the consumption or
display of intoxicating liquor shall, on or before January 1 of each year, pay
to the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer a fee as established herein and shall be
issued a written receipt therefor. No proration of fees shall be made. The
written receipt shall be posted in scene conspicuous place upon the premises
alongside the license issued by the Commissioner of Public Safety and shall be
kept posted at all times.
(Prior Code, § 82.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.42 INSPECTIONS.
   Any private club or public place allowing the consumption or display of
intoxicating liquor shall be open at all reasonable hours for inspection by the
Commissioner of Public Safety, his or her designated agents, and any peace
officer, Health Officer or other properly designated officer or employee of the
city. Refusal to permit the inspection shall be a violation of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 82.03)
§ 115.43 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.
   The regulatory provisions of M.S. § 340A.414, as it may be amended from time
to time, are hereby adopted by reference.
(Prior Code, § 82.04)
§ 115.44 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter do not apply to any premises licensed the
sale of intoxicating liquor.
(Prior Code, § 82.05)
CLUB LICENSES
§ 115.55 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.
   The provisions of M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time,
relating to the definition of terms, licensing, consumption, sales, conditions
of bonds of licensees, hours of sale and all other matters pertaining to the
retail sale, distribution and consumption of intoxicating liquor insofar as
they are applicable to club licenses authorizing the sale of liquor for
consumption on the licensed premises only, are adopted and made a part of this
subchapter as if set out in full.
(Prior Code, § 83.01)
§ 115.56 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Every club, as herein defined, requesting a club license pursuant to
M.S. § 340A.404, as it may be amended from time to time, from the city shall,
through its proper officers, file with the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer,
a verified application setting forth all information necessary to show whether
or not the club qualifies for a license within the meaning of this subchapter,
together with all additional information as may be required by the City
Council. In addition to containing this information, the application shall be
in the form prescribed by the Commissioner of Public Safety. No person shall
make a false statement in an application.
   (B)   Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a surety bond
or, in lieu thereof, cash or U.S. Government bonds of equivalent market value
as provided in M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time. The
surety bond or other security shall be in the sum of $3,000.
   (C)   Prior to the issuance of a club license, the applicant shall file with
the City Administrator/ Clerk-Treasurer a liability insurance policy in the
amount of $50,000 coverage for one person and $100,000 coverage for more than
one person and shall comply with the provisions of M.S. § 340A.409, as it may
be amended from time to time, relating to liability insurance policies. If a
liability insurance policy is made subject to all the conditions of a bond
under that statute, the policy may be accepted by the Council in lieu of the
bond required under this section.
   (D)   The security offered under this section above shall be approved by the
City Council and the Commissioner of Public Safety. Surety bonds and liability
insurance policies shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney. Operation
of a licensed club without having on file with the city at all times effective
security, as required in this section, is a cause for revocation of the
license.
(Prior Code, § 83.02)
§ 115.57 FEES.
   (A)   The annual fee for a club license is $100.
   (B)   Each application for a club license shall be accompanied by a receipt
from the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer for payment in full of the license
fee. All fees shall be paid into the General Fund. If an application for a
license is rejected, the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall refund the
amount paid.
   (C)   Each license shall be issued for a period of one year; except that, if
the application is made during the license year, a license may be issued for
the remainder of the year for a pro rata fee, with any unexpired fraction of a
month being counted as one month. Every license shall expire on December 31.
   (D)   No refund of any fee shall be made, except as authorized by statute.
(Prior Code, § 83.03)
§ 115.58 GRANTING OF LICENSES.
   (A)   The City Council shall investigate all facts set out in the
application. Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or
against the granting of the license. After the investigation and hearing, the
Council shall, in its discretion, grant or refuse the application. No club
license shall become effective until it, together with the security furnished
by the applicant, has been approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
   (B)   No license shall be granted for a building within 500 feet of any
school.
   (C)   No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any premises
on which taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the city are
delinquent and unpaid.
(Prior Code, § 83.04)
§ 115.59 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Every license is subject to the conditions in the following
subdivisions and all other provisions of this subchapter and of any other
applicable ordinance, state law and regulation.
   (B)   Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of its place of business
and the condition of sobriety and order in it. The act of any employee on the
licensed premises authorized to sell intoxicating liquor there is deemed the
act of the licensee as well, and the licensee shall be liable to all penalties
provided by this subchapter and the law equally with the employee.
   (C)   The license shall not be transferable as to the premises without the
approval of the City Council.
   (D)   The sale of intoxicating liquor under a club license is restricted to
card-carrying members of the licensed club, bona fide guests of members, guests
of an event sponsored by the licensee, or guests of an event held at the
licensee’s building, pursuant to a rental agreement, with the licensee.
   (E)   Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, Health Officer or
properly designated officer or employee of the city to enter, inspect and
search the premises of the licensee during business tours without a warrant.
   (F)   The licensee shall not permit access to intoxicating or 3.2% malt
liquor by any person during hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited.
   (G)   No licensee shall possess a federal wholesale liquor dealers special
tax stamp or a federal gambling stamp.
(Prior Code, § 83.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 116: CANNABINOID PRODUCTS
Section
Edible Cannabinoid Products
   
116.01   Findings and purpose
   
116.02   Definitions and interpretations
   
116.03   License required; application, issuance; fee; term
   
116.04   License denial
   
116.05   License display
   
116.06   Prohibited and illegal acts
   
116.07   Responsibility
   
116.08   Compliance checks and inspections
   
116.09   Exceptions and defenses
 
   
116.99   Penalty
EDIBLE CANNABINOID PRODUCTS
§ 116.01 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the subchapter is to regulate the sale of edible cannabinoid
products, as that term is defined in M.S. § 151.72, as it may be amended from
time to time, that contain tetrahydrocannabinol (“THC”) for the following
reasons.
   (A)   M.S. § 151.72, as it may be amended from time to time, expressly
allows the sale of certain products that are intended to be eaten or consumed
as a beverage by humans and which contain a cannabinoid in combination with
food ingredients (“edible cannabinoid products”), including edible cannabinoid
products which contain tetrahydrocannabinol (“THC”).
   (B)   2023 Session Law Chapter 63 (the “Cannabis Act”) both amended
regulations for edible cannabinoid products and established a framework for
adult-use cannabis in the state. The Cannabis Act established the Office of
Cannabis Management (“OCM”) effective 7-1-2023, and the OCM will eventually
issue licenses for all cannabis products and edible hemp products, such as
edible cannabinoid products, but does not currently require a business to
obtain a license to sell edible cannabinoid products.
   (C)   The city enacted Ord. 2022-07, an interim ordinance establishing a
temporary prohibition on the sale of edible cannabinoid products, which will
expire on 8-11-2023, thereby leaving a regulatory gap between when businesses
can begin selling edible cannabinoid products in the city and when businesses
will be required to obtain a state-level license to sell edible hemp products.
   (D)   The city recognizes that, based on the most reliable and up-to-date
scientific evidence, the introduction of edible cannabinoid products containing
THC presents a potential threat to the public health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the city and has determined the establishing a licensing framework
for edible cannabinoid products is in the best interest of the city and its
residents.
   (E)   State law does not preempt municipalities from adopting and enforcing
local ordinances to regulate retailers of edible cannabinoid products
including, but not limited to, establishing business licensing requirements.
The Cannabis Act directs the OCM to draft administrative rules and model
ordinances related to cannabis and hemp products, which may address edible
cannabinoid products, but the timing and details of those regulations are
uncertain. Therefore, the City Council determines it is appropriate to adopt
the regulations in this subchapter without delay.
   (F)   In making these findings and enacting this ordinance, it is the intent
of the city to facilitate responsible retail activities associated with edible
cannabinoid products by allowing legal sale and access without promoting
increases in use, and to discourage violations of edible cannabinoid product-
related laws, especially those which prohibit or discourage the marketing, sale
or distribution of edible cannabinoid products to persons under the age of 21
years.
(Ord. 2023-05, passed 7-31-2023)
§ 116.02 DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   COMPLIANCE CHECKS. The system the city uses to investigate and ensure that
those authorized to sell Edible Cannabinoid Products are following and
complying with the requirements of this section. COMPLIANCE CHECKS shall
involve the use of persons under the age of 21 as authorized by this section.
COMPLIANCE CHECKS shall also mean the use of persons under the age of 21 who
attempt to purchase edible cannabinoid products for educational, research and
training purposes as authorized by state and federal laws. COMPLIANCE CHECKS
may also be conducted by other units of government for the purpose of enforcing
appropriate federal, state or local laws and regulations relating to edible
cannabinoid products.
   EDIBLE CANNABINOID PRODUCT. Has the same meaning as provided in M.S. §
151.72, subd. 1(e), as it may be amended from time to time.
   EDIBLE CANNABINOID PRODUCTS LICENSE. The license issued by the city that
allows a business to sell edible cannabinoid products.
   MOVEABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any form of business operated out of a truck,
van, automobile or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and not a
fixed address store front or other permanent type of structure authorized for
sales transactions.
   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Any place of business where edible cannabinoid
products are available for sale to the general public. The sale of edible
cannabinoid products is limited to establishments that are also licensed to
sell tobacco or off-sale liquor. RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS shall not include home
occupations.
   SALE. Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter or other consideration.
   SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING. Open displays of edible cannabinoid products in
any manner where any person shall have access to the edible cannabinoid product
without the assistance or intervention of the licensee or the licensee’s
employee. The assistance or intervention shall entail the actual physical
exchange of the edible cannabinoid product between the customer and the
licensee or employee.
   VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electric, electronic or other type of
device that dispenses edible cannabinoid products upon the insertion of money,
tokens or other forms of payment directly into the machine by the person
seeking to purchase the edible cannabinoid product.
   YOUTH ORIENTED FACILITY. A public or private elementary, middle or high
school, a state-licensed child or day care program with more than ten children
and any city park.
(Ord. 2023-05, passed 7-31-2023)
§ 116.03 LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION, ISSUANCE; FEE; TERM.
   (A)   No person shall directly, by coin machine, or otherwise, keep for
retail sale, sell at retail or otherwise furnishing, any edible cannabinoid
products at any place in the city unless they have obtained an edible
cannabinoid products license.
   (B)   Application for the license shall be made to the City Clerk/Treasurer
and shall state the full name and address of the applicant, the location of the
building to be occupied by the applicant in the conduct of the business, the
kind of business to be conducted, and such other information as the City Clerk/
Treasurer may require. The application shall be presented to the City Council
for its consideration and, if granted by the Council, a license will be issued
by the City Clerk/Treasurer upon payment of the required fee.
   (C)   The fee for a license is set by the city’s fee schedule.
   (D)   All licenses issued under this subchapter shall be valid until 3-1-
2025, or until the office of Cannabis Management assumes licensing of edible
cannabinoid products.
(Ord. 2023-05, passed 7-31-2023)
§ 116.04 LICENSE DENIAL.
   (A)   Grounds for denying the issuance of a license include, but are not
limited to, the following:
      (1)   The applicant is under 21 years of age;
      (2)   The applicant has been convicted within the past five years of any
violation of a federal, state or local law, ordinance provision or other
regulation relating to edible cannabinoid products;
      (3)   The applicant has had a license to sell edible cannabinoid products
suspended or revoked within the preceding 12 months of the date of application;
      (4)   The applicant fails to provide any information required on the
application or provides false or misleading information;
      (5)   The applicant is prohibited by federal, state or other local law,
ordinance or other regulation from holding a license;
      (6)   Applicant is acting as an agent or pass through for another person
or entity whose prior acts violated divisions (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3) or (A)(4)
above or who is otherwise prohibited from holding a license under any
applicable rule or law;
      (7)   The applicant does not also have a license for the sale of tobacco
or an off-sale liquor license;
      (8)   The applicant is not located with the B-1 Central Business District
or B-2 Highway Business District;
      (9)   The proposed business is a movable place of business. Only fixed-
location businesses are eligible to be licensed and separate licenses are
required for each location; and
      (10)   The location of the business is within 500 feet of a youth-
oriented facility, as measured from the principal building on the business
parcel to the principal structure or building on the youth-oriented facility
parcel.
   (B)   However, except as may otherwise be provided by law, the existence of
any particular ground for denial does not mean that the city must deny the
license.
   (C)   If a license is mistakenly issued to a person, it may be revoked upon
the discovery that the person was ineligible for the license under this
subchapter. Notice of the revocation will be given to the person along with
information on the right to appeal.
(Ord. 2023-05, passed 7-31-2023)
§ 116.05 LICENSE DISPLAY.
   The license must be kept conspicuously posted on the premises for which the
license is issued and must be exhibited to any person upon request.
(Ord. 2023-05, passed 7-31-2023)
§ 116.06 PROHIBITED AND ILLEGAL ACTS.
   (A)   (1)   In general.
         (a)   No person shall sell or offer to sell any edible cannabinoid
product:
            1.   By means of any type of vending machine;
            2.   By means of self-service merchandising; and
            3.   By any other means, to any other person, on in any other
manner or form prohibited by state or other local law, ordinance provision or
other regulation.
         (b)   No person shall sell or offer for sale a product containing THC
that does not meet all the requirements of M.S. § 151.72, as it may be amended
from time to time, except sales pursuant to a license issued by the Office of
Cannabis Management.
      (2)   Legal age. No person shall sell any edible cannabinoid product to
any person under the age of 21.
         (a)   Age verification. Licensees shall verify by means of government
issued photographic identification that the purchaser is at least 21 years of
age as required in M.S. § 151.72, as it may be amended from time to time.
         (b)   Signage. Notice of the legal sales age and age verification
requirement must be posted prominently and in plain view at all times at each
location where edible cannabinoid products are offered for sale. The required
signage, which will be provided to the licensee by the city, must be posted in
a manner that is clearly visible to anyone who is or is considering making a
purchase.
      (3)   Samples prohibited. No person shall distribute samples of any
edible cannabinoid product free of charge or at a nominal cost.
   (B)   (1)   Illegal procurement. It shall be a violation of this section for
any person 21 years of age or older to purchase or otherwise obtain edible
cannabinoid products on behalf of a person under the age of 21.
      (2)   Use of false identification. It shall be a violation of this
section for any person to attempt to disguise their true age by the use of a
false form of identification, whether the identification is that of another
person or one on which the age of the person has been modified or tampered with
to represent an age older than the actual age of the person.
      (3)   Violations of M.S. § 151.72, as it may be amended from time to
time. Any violation of M.S. § 151.72, as it may be amended from time to time,
shall also be considered a violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2023-05, passed 7-31-2023) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.07 RESPONSIBILITY.
   All licensees are responsible for the actions of their employees in regard
to the sale, offer to sell and furnishing of edible cannabinoid products on the
licensed premises. The sale, offer to sell or furnishing of any edible
cannabinoid product by an employee shall be considered an act of the licensee.
Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the city from also
subjecting the employee to any civil penalties that the city deems to be
appropriate under this subchapter, state or federal law or other applicable law
or regulation.
(Ord. 2023-05, passed 7-31-2023)
§ 116.08 COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   All premises licensed under this subchapter shall be open to
inspection by the city during regular business hours. From time to time, the
city may conduct compliance checks.
   (B)   No person used in compliance checks shall attempt to use a false
identification misrepresenting their age. All persons lawfully engaged in a
compliance check shall answer all questions about their age asked by the
licensee or their employee, and produce any identification, if any exists, for
which they are asked. The city will conduct a compliance check that involves
the participation of a person at least 18 years of age, but under the age of 21
to enter the licensed premises to attempt to purchase the edible cannabinoid
products. Persons used for the purpose of compliance checks shall be supervised
by law enforcement or other designated personnel. Nothing in this subchapter
shall prohibit compliance checks authorized by state or federal laws for
educational, research or training purposes, or required for the enforcement of
a particular state or federal law.
   (C)   Additionally, from time to time, the city will conduct inspections to
determine compliance with any or all other aspects of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2023-05, passed 7-31-2023)
§ 116.09 EXCEPTIONS AND DEFENSES.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall prevent the providing of an edible
cannabinoid product to a person under the age of 21 as part of a lawfully
recognized religious, spiritual or cultural ceremony. It shall be an
affirmative defense to the violation of this subchapter for a person to have
reasonably relied upon proof of age.
(Ord. 2023-05, passed 7-31-2023)
§ 116.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Administrative civil penalties - individuals. If a person who is
not a licensee is found to have violated §§
116.01 through
116.09 of this chapter, the person shall be charged an administrative penalty
as follows.
         (a)   First violation: the Council shall impose a civil fine not to
exceed $50.
         (b)   Second violation within the license term: the Council shall
impose a civil fine not to exceed $100.
         (c)   Third violation within the license term: the Council shall
impose a civil fine not to exceed $150.
      (2)   Administrative civil penalties - licensee. If a licensee or an
employee of a licensee is found to have violated §§
116.01 through
116.09 of this chapter, the licensee shall be charged an administrative penalty
as follows.
         (a)   First violation: the Council shall impose a civil fine of $500
and suspend the license for not less than one day.
         (b)   Second violation within the license term: the Council shall
impose a civil fine of $1,000 and suspend the license for not less than three
consecutive days.
         (c)   Third violation within the license term: the Council shall
impose a civil fine of $2,000 and suspend the license for not less than ten
consecutive days.
         (d)   Fourth violation within the license term: the Council shall
revoke the license for at least one year.
      (3)   Administrative penalty procedures. Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary in this division (B):
         (a)   Any of the administrative civil penalties set forth in this
section that may be imposed by the Council may, in the alternative, be imposed
by an administrative citation; and
         (b)   If one of the foregoing penalties is imposed by an action of the
Council, no penalty shall take effect until the licensee or person has received
notice (served personally or by mail) of the alleged violation and of the
opportunity for a hearing before the Council, and the notice must be in writing
and must provide that a right to a hearing before the Council must be requested
within ten business days of receipt of the notice or the right shall terminate.
      (4)   Misdemeanor prosecution. Nothing in this division (B) shall
prohibit the city from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any alleged
violation of §§
116.01 through
116.09 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2023-05, passed 7-31-2023)
CHAPTER 117: MASSAGE BUSINESSES AND SERVICES
Section
   
117.01   Purpose and applicability
   
117.02   Definitions
   
117.03   License required
   
117.04   Exceptions
   
117.05   License application
   
117.06   License fee
   
117.07   Investigation and verification
   
117.08   License issuance
   
117.09   License term and renewals
   
117.10   License ineligibility
   
117.11   License conditions
   
117.12   License non-renewal, suspension and revocation
 
   
117.99   Penalty
§ 117.01 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit massage businesses and services
in the city except those licensed by the city as therapeutic massage
enterprises and message therapists pursuant to this chapter. The license
regulations prescribed herein are necessary in order to protect businesses that
are operating legitimate enterprises, to prevent criminal activity, and to
protect the health and welfare of the community. The purpose of this chapter is
not to impose restrictions or limitations on protected speech or expression
under the First Amendment of the United States Constitution.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 9-8-2025)
§ 117.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCREDITED INSTITUTION. An educational institution holding accredited status
with the United States Department of Education or which has been licensed or
registered by the State Office of Higher Education or similar agency of another
state or a regional accrediting agency approved by the U.S. Department of
Education.
   ACCREDITED PROGRAM. A professional massage program accredited by the
Commission on Massage Therapy Accreditation (COMTA).
   CITY. The City of Montrose, Minnesota.
   CLEAN. The absence of dirt, grease, rubbish, garbage and other offensive,
unsightly or extraneous matter.
   GOOD REPAIR. Free of corrosion, breaks, cracks, chips, pitting, excessive
wear and tear, leaks, obstructions and similar defects so as to constitute a
good and sound condition.
   HEALTHCARE FACILITY OR PROVIDER. Any person providing medical, surgical,
dental, chiropractic or osteopathic services, or physical therapy services
pursuant to a prescription therefor, wherein practitioners are licensed by the
state, such as, but not limited to, a hospital, sanitarium, rest home, nursing
home, boarding home, or other institution for the hospitalization or care of
human beings duly licensed under the provisions of M.S. §§ 144.50 to 144.69.
   MASSAGE. Any method of pressure on, or friction against, or the rubbing,
stroking, kneading, tapping, pounding, vibrating, stimulating or rolling of the
external parts of the human body with the hands or arms with the aid of any
mechanical or electrical apparatus, or other appliances or devices, with or
without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil,
powder, cream, lotion, ointment or other similar preparations.
   MASSAGE BUSINESS. The offering of massage services to the general public,
regardless of whether the offer is limited only to select invitees or
organizational members.
   MASSAGE THERAPIST. An individual who practices or administers massage to the
public who can demonstrate to the city that they:
      (1)   Have current insurance of $500,000 for professional liability in
the practice of massage;
      (2)   Are affiliated with, employed by or owns a therapeutic massage
enterprise licensed by the city; and
      (3)   Have completed 500 hours of certified therapeutic massage training
with content that includes the subjects of anatomy, physiology, hygiene,
ethics, massage theory and research and massage practice from an accredited
program or accredited institution that has been approved by the city. These
training hours must be authenticated by a single provider through a certified
copy of the transcript of academic record from the school issuing the training,
degree or diploma.
   OPERATE. To own, manage or conduct.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, limited
liability company, joint venture or other combination of individuals.
   SANITARY. Free from pathogenic microorganisms
   THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE ENTERPRISE. A person who operates a business or other
operation which hires only licensed massage therapists to provide massage to
the public. The owner/operator of a therapeutic massage enterprise need not be
licensed as a massage therapist if they do not at any time practice or
administer massage to the public.
   WITHIN THE CITY. Includes physical presence as well as telephone referrals
such as phone-a-massage operations in which the business premises, although not
physically located within the city, serve as a point of assignment of employees
who respond to requests for services from within the city.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 9-8-2025)
§ 117.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, engage in, provide,
practice, administer or carry out any massage services to the public for
consideration within the city without first having obtained a massage business
or service license from the city pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply retroactively. Existing
therapeutic massage enterprises or massage therapists shall have until January
31, 2026, to submit the required license application and fees and conform to
the requirements herein.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 9-8-2025)
§ 117.04 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   A massage business or service license is not required for the
following persons and places:
      (1)   Persons duly licensed as a doctor by this state to practice
medicine, surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic, physical therapy or podiatry,
provided the massage is administered in the regular course of the medical
business as it prepares the patient for a medical procedure or complements a
medical procedure previously performed on the patient and not provided as part
of a separate and distinct massage business. Any duly licensed doctor that
offers any form of massage without a direct link to a medical procedure must
obtain a massage therapist license.
      (2)   Persons working solely under the direction and control of a duly
licensed medical professional licensed under M.S. Chapters 147, 147A through
147F, 148 or dental professional licensed under M.S. Chapter 150A, provided the
massage is administered on the premise of the medical business.
      (3)   Places duly licensed or operating as a hospital, nursing home,
hospice, sanitarium or group home established for the hospitalization or care
of human beings provided the massage is administered only to the residents or
patients of the facility as part of their care and not provided as a part of a
separate service.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 9-8-2025)
§ 117.05 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   An application shall be made on a form as prescribed by the city. Any
falsification of information on the application shall be cause for denial,
suspension, or revocation of the license. A complete application is considered
an application that includes all required information, any additional
information deemed necessary by the city, and a fully paid application fee.
   (B)   If the applicant is a natural person, the application must be signed
and sworn to by the person; if a corporation, by an officer authorized to sing;
if a partnership, by all general partners.
   (C)   It is unlawful to knowingly make a false statement in the license
application. In addition to other penalties, the license may be subsequently
revoked by the City Council for a violation of this section.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 9-8-2025)
§ 117.06 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual license fee for massage businesses and services shall be
established by the City Council.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 9-8-2025)
§ 117.07 INVESTIGATION AND VERIFICATION.
   The city and/or the County Sheriff’s Office are hereby authorized to conduct
all investigations deemed necessary by the city to verify the information on
the application, including ordering a computerized criminal history inquiry on
the applicant. If the city deems an investigation necessary for the
application, they shall include a written report to be forwarded to the City
Council when the license is being considered.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 9-8-2025)
§ 117.08 LICENSE ISSUANCE.
   (A)   All applications for massage businesses and services shall be
presented to the City Council for their consideration. After review of the
license application and any included investigation report, the Council may
grant or deny the application for a new or renewal of a massage business and
services license.
   (B)   If denied, the city will send notice to the applicant by regular mail
informing the applicant of the denial and the right to appeal to the City
Council within 20 days. If an appeal is properly made, the matter shall be
placed on the next available City Council agenda.
   (C)   Licenses issued will be effective only for the applicant or for the
business premises as described in the application. Licenses are not
transferable to any other person, partnership, corporation or premises.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 9-8-2025)
§ 117.09 LICENSE TERM AND RENEWALS.
   (A)   Initial licenses will be effective on the date of issue and will
expire on December 31 at midnight of the year of issue. Renewals shall be for
one-year periods commencing on January 1 with expiration on December 31 at
midnight.
   (B)   An application for the renewal of an existing license shall be made at
least 30 days prior to the expiration date of the license and shall be made on
such form as the city requires.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 9-8-2025)
§ 117.10 LICENSE INELIGIBILITY.
   No massage business or services license shall be issued to a person who:
   (A)   Is an individual and is not 18 years of age or older at the time the
application is submitted to the city;
   (B)   Has been convicted of any crime deemed by the city to be directly
related to the massage business in accordance with the criteria set forth in
M.S. § 364.03, subd. 2, and who the city has determined has not shown, in
accordance with the criteria set forth in M.S. § 364.03, subd. 3, competent
evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to engage in the
massage business;
   (C)   Has had an interest in, as an individual or as an owner of a
corporation, member of a limited liability company, partnership, association,
enterprise, business or firm, a massage license that was revoked or suspended
within the last five years of the date the license application is submitted to
the city;
   (D)   The applicant is not legally authorized to work in the United States;
   (E)   Has knowingly misrepresented or falsified information on the license
application or failed to provide all information required by the application
form;
   (F)   Does not meet the definition of therapeutic massage enterprise or
massage therapist in this chapter;
   (G)   Owes property taxes or assessments to the city that are due and
delinquent;
   (H)   Is an individual whose massage-related license has been suspended or
revoked in the past five years.; and
   (I)   No license shall be issued a therapeutic massage enterprise if the
location of such enterprise has not obtained a conditional use permit or other
required land use approval as outlined in the City Code.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 9-8-2025)
§ 117.11 LICENSE CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Compliance required. No license shall be issued, renewed or allowed to
continue in effect unless there is compliance with the requirements of this
chapter and any other applicable section of the City Code, including but not
limited to Chapter 90, Health and Sanitation; Safety. Failure to maintain
compliance shall be cause for denial, suspension or revocation of the license.
   (B)   License posted. A massage business or services license issued by the
city must be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises at which the massage
business is conducted. A person licensed as a massage therapist shall also post
their business or services license, with color photo, in a conspicuous place on
the premises at which the massage therapist is associated.
   (C)   No physical contact. While on the licensed premises, no person shall
place their hand or hands upon, touch with any part of their body or fondle in
any manner a sexual or genital part of any other person.
   (D)   Minimum age. No person under 18 years of age shall be permitted at any
time on the licensed premises as a customer or guest unless accompanied by a
parent or guardian.
   (E)   Alcohol prohibited. Alcoholic beverages shall not be allowed on any
licensed premises at any time.
   (F)   Insurance. Each applicant for a business license shall file with the
city a commercial general liability insurance policy which shall insure the
applicant against all loss arising out of the use, operation or maintenance of
the place of business. The insurance policy shall be in limits of not less than
$100,000 for injury or loss to one person, $300,000 for each occurrence and
$25,000 for property damage. Notice of the cancellation of any policy must be
given in writing to the city at least 30 days prior to the cancellation.
Failure to keep in force and effect the required insurance shall be grounds for
revocation of the license.
   (G)   Premises. A massage business or service license is only effective for
a massage business conducted at the compact and contiguous space specified in
the approved license application. If the premises at which the massage business
is conducted is changed, enlarged, altered or extended, the licensee shall
inform the city within ten business days of such event.
   (H)   Hours of operation. No therapeutic massage enterprise shall be open
for business, nor shall any massage therapist offer massage services before 6:
00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. any day of the week.
   (I)   Illegal activities. Advertising by a licensee of any unlawful or
erotic conduct or massage service is prohibited. A licensee under this chapter
shall be strictly responsible for the conduct of the massage business and shall
take all action necessary to ensure such massage business is being operated in
compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances.
   (J)   Inspections. In light of the high risk of involvement with illegal
conduct a massage business poses to the general public and in the interests of
public safety, the City Building Inspector and Fire Marshal, and the County
Sheriffs Office shall have the right to enter, inspect and search the premises
at which the massage services are being provided.
      (1)   Inspections may occur during the hours in which the massage
services are being provided to ensure compliance with all provisions of this
chapter and any other applicable sections of the City Code and State Building
Code.
      (2)   If the massage business refuses to consent or grant entrance for an
inspection, the city may pursue a search warrant for the premises. Massage
business and service licenses shall be granted only to provide massages at
premises which meet the safety and sanitary requirements of the city and of the
building code regulations of the city and state.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 9-8-2025)
§ 117.12 LICENSE NON-RENEWAL, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   Any license granted under this chapter shall be subject to the non-renewal,
suspension or revocation provisions and procedures as set forth in § 10.21.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 9-8-2025)
§ 117.99 PENALTY.
   Any person or entity that violates the provisions of this chapter is guilty
of a misdemeanor under Minnesota law, and shall be punished by a fine or
imprisonment, or both, together with the costs of prosecution. Each violation
of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction for a violation
of this chapter, while not required, may be grounds for the suspension or
revocation of any license issued under this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 9-8-2025)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   PROHIBITED BEHAVIOR
CHAPTER 130: PROHIBITED BEHAVIOR
Section
   
130.01   Weapons and firearms
   
130.02   Curfew
   
130.03   Lurking, loitering and prowling
   
130.04   Public drinking
   
130.05   Smoking in public places
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 WEAPONS AND FIREARMS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Recklessly handle or use a gun or other dangerous weapon or
explosive so as to endanger the safety of another;
      (2)   Intentionally point a gun of any kind, capable of injuring or
killing a human being and whether loaded or unloaded, at or toward another;
      (3)   Manufacture or use for any unlawful purpose any weapon known as a
sling-shot or sand club;
      (4)   Manufacture, transfer or possess metal knuckles or a switch blade
knife opening automatically;
      (5)   Possess any other dangerous article or substance for the purpose of
being used unlawfully as a weapon against another; and/or
      (6)   Sell or have in his or her possession any device designated to
silence or muffle the discharge of a firearm.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall, without the parent’s or guardian’s consent,
furnish a child under 14 years of age a firearm or airgun of any kind or any
ammunition or explosive.
      (2)   No parent or guardian shall permit a child under 14 years of age to
handle or use, outside of the parent’s or guardian’s presence, a firearm or
airgun of any kind or any ammunition or explosive.
      (3)   No person shall furnish a minor under 18 years of age with a
firearm, airgun, ammunition or explosive without the written consent of his or
her parent or guardian or of the Chief of Police.
   (C)   No person shall shoot or discharge any firearm, air rifle, pellet gun
or any other weapon within the city, nor shall any person cause any projectile
to be fired from outside the city into the city, except as follows:
      (1)   Persons duly authorized to act as law enforcement officers or
members of the military forces of the country or the state in the discharge of
their duties;
      (2)   Persons engaged in target, trap or skeet shooting at a target,
trap, skeet range for which a permit has been issued by the Council. Prior to
issuing a permit, the Council shall direct the designated law enforcement
agency to investigate and report to the Council on the safety of the proposed
range; or
      (3)   By any person participating in a special hunting season, which
season may not conflict with state law or regulations, established by the City
Council for the purpose of wildlife management. The season shall be established
by City Council resolution when, based upon competent evidence, a season is
needed to reduce animal population.
(Prior Code, § 63.01) (Ord. 2016-09, passed 8-8-2016; Ord. 2019-04, passed 4-
29-2019) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 CURFEW.
   (A)   Purpose. The curfew for minors established by this section is
maintained for four primary reasons:
      (1)   To protect the public from illegal acts of minors committed during
the curfew hours;
      (2)   To protect minors from improper influences that prevail during the
curfew hours, including involvement with gangs;
      (3)   To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs during the
curfew hours; and
      (4)   To help parents control their minor children.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      EMERGENCY ERRAND. A task that if not completed promptly threatens the
health, safety or comfort of the minor or a member of the minor’s household.
The term shall include, but shall not be limited to, seeking urgent medical
treatment, seeking urgent assistance from law enforcement or Fire Department
personnel, and seeking shelter from the elements or urgent assistance from a
utility company due to a natural or human-made calamity.
      OFFICIAL CITY TIME. The time of day as determined by reference to the
master clock used by the Police Department.
      PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT OR REFRESHMENT. Those places that
include, but are not limited to, movie theaters, pinball arcades, shopping
malls, nightclubs catering to minors, restaurants and pool halls.
      PRIMARY CARE or PRIMARY CUSTODY. The person who is responsible for
providing food, clothing, shelter, and other basic necessities to the minor.
The person providing PRIMARY CARE or CUSTODY to the minor shall not be another
minor.
      SCHOOL ACTIVITY. An event which has been placed on a school calendar by
public or parochial school authorities as a school sanctioned event.
   (C)   Hours.
      (1)   Minors under the age of 16 years. No minor under the age of 16
years shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or
other public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor in or upon places of
amusement, entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any vacant lot, between
the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the following day, official city time.
      (2)   Minors ages 16 years to 18 years. No minor of the ages of 16 or 17
years shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or
other public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor in or upon places of
amusement, entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any vacant lot, between
the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. the following day, official city
time.
   (D)   Effect on control by adult responsible for minor. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to give a minor the right to stay out until the
curfew hours designated in this section if otherwise directed by a parent,
guardian or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the
minor; nor shall this section be construed to diminish or impair the control of
the adult person having the primary care or custody of the minor.
   (E)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply in the
following situations:
      (1)   To a minor accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or other
adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor;
      (2)   To a minor who is upon an emergency errand at the direction of his
or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and
custody of the minor;
      (3)   To a minor who is in any of the places described in this section if
in connection with or as required by an employer engaged in a lawful business,
trade, profession or occupation; or to a minor traveling directly to or from
the location of the business, trade, profession or occupation and the minor’s
residence. Minors who fall within the scope of this exception shall carry
written proof of employment and proof of the hours the employer requires the
minor’s presence at work;
      (4)   To a minor who is participating in or traveling directly to or from
an event which has been officially designated as a school activity by public or
parochial school authorities; or who is participating in or traveling directly
to or from an official activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city,
a civic organization, school, religious institution or similar entity that
takes responsibility for the minor and with the permission of the minor’s
parent, guardian or other adult person having the primary care and custody of
the minor;
      (5)   To a minor who is passing through the city in the course of
interstate travel during the hours of curfew;
      (6)   To a minor who is attending or traveling directly to or from an
activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech,
freedom of assembly or freedom of religion;
      (7)   To minors on the sidewalk abutting his or her residence or abutting
the residence of a nextdoor neighbor if the neighbor does not complain to the
city’s designated law enforcement provider about the minor’s presence; or
      (8)   To a minor who is married or has been married, or is otherwise
legally emancipated.
   (F)   Duties of person legally responsible for minor. No parent, guardian or
other adult having the primary care or custody of any minor shall permit any
violation of the requirements of this section by the minor.
   (G)   Duties of other persons. No person operating or in charge of any place
of amusement, entertainment or refreshment shall permit any minor to enter or
remain in his or her place of business during the hours prohibited by this
section unless the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other
adult person having primary care or custody of the minor, or unless one of the
exceptions to this section applies.
   (H)   Defense. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that
the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the
city’s designated law enforcement provider that a minor was present on the
premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
(Prior Code, § 63.02) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 LURKING, LOITERING AND PROWLING.
   (A)   Purpose and applicability. To prohibit the lurking, loitering and
prowling in the city or to create circumstances to cause alarm.
   (B)   Prohibition. A person must not lurk, loiter or prowl in any place, at
a time or in a manner not usual for law abiding individuals, under
circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the
vicinity.
   (C)   Loitering; intent to commit crime. A person must not in any public or
private place lurk, loiter, prowl, lie in wait or be concealed with intent to
commit any act prohibited by law.
   (D)   Circumstances causing alarm. Among the circumstances that may be
considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the
person or persons take flight upon the appearance of a deputy, refuse to
identify themselves, endeavors to conceal himself or herself or an object, that
damage to persons or property have occurred in the past in the area where the
person or persons are lurking loitering or prowling, or whether the persons
have been previously advised by a deputy not to lurk, loiter or prowl at the
same location under similar circumstances.
   (E)   Authority to detain. A police officer may stop and briefly detain a
person suspected of violating division (A) above if the person’s behavior
reasonably causes suspicion of criminal activity. The deputy’s reasonable
suspicion must be based on objective, articulatable facts and reasonable
inferences drawn from all the circumstances surrounding the person’s behavior.
   (F)   Opportunity to dispel alarm. Unless flight by the person or other
circumstances make it impracticable, a police officer must, prior to any arrest
or issuing of a citation for a violation of division (A) above, allow the
person to dispel any alarm which otherwise be warranted by requesting him or
her to identify himself or herself and explain his or her presence and conduct.
An explanation of the person’s presence and conduct will be sufficient to
dispel alarm if it shows that the person was engaging in lawful activity
consistent with his or her actions and all of the circumstances surrounding his
or her behavior and that the explanation is reasonable and believable to the
Deputy based upon his experience with the persons or location in question.
   (G)   Requisites for conviction. A person may not be convicted of violating
this section if:
      (1)   No deputy gave the person the opportunity provided in division (D)
above to dispel the alarm created by his or her actions; or
      (2)   The finder-of-fact determines that the deputy should have accepted
the person’s explanation as sufficient to dispel alarm.
(Prior Code, § 63.03) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.04 PUBLIC DRINKING.
   (A)   No person shall consume intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor on any
public sidewalk or street or in a vehicle upon a public street.
   (B)   No person shall have, in his or her possession, intoxicating liquor or
3.2% malt liquor in an open container on any public sidewalk or street or in a
vehicle upon a public street.
(Prior Code, § 63.04) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.05 SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly requires a different
meaning.
      CANNABIS FLOWER, CANNABIS PRODUCTS and HEMP-DERIVED CONSUMER PRODUCTS.
Have the meanings given to them in M.S. § 342.01, as it may be amended from
time to time.
      PUBLIC PLACE. The following locations when owned or operated by the city:
         (a)   Places where smoking is prohibited under the state’s Indoor
Clean Air Act, M.S. §§ 144.411 to 144.417, as they may be amended from time to
time; and
         (b)   Parks.
      TOBACCO, TOBACCO-RELATED DEVICES and ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICES. Have
the meanings given to them in M.S. § 609.685, subd. 1, as it may be amended
from time to time.
   (B)   Prohibition. No person shall consume by means of smoking, vaporizing
or otherwise consuming smoke or vapor produced by heating or igniting tobacco,
tobacco-related devices, electronic delivery devices, cannabis flower, cannabis
products or hemp-derived consumer products in a public place.
(Ord. 2024-04, passed 11-12-2024) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other penalty provision in the city code, a
violation of §
130.05 of this chapter shall be considered a petty misdemeanor punishable by a
maximum fine of $100.
(Ord. 2024-04, passed 11-12-2024)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
      
152.   CARTWAYS
      
153.   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
      
154.   PHOSPHOROUS FERTILIZER
      
155.   MANUFACTURED HOMES AND HOME PARKS
      
156.   SUBDIVISIONS AND ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
   
150.01   State Building Code adopted
   
150.02   Hazardous Building Law adopted
§ 150.01 STATE BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.
   The Minnesota State Building Code is hereby adopted by reference and shall
govern the construction, improvement and occupancy of buildings within the city
in accordance with its terms. Permit fees shall be as set forth in the 1997
Uniform Building Code and all later amendments or revisions thereto.
(Prior Code, § 90.01)
§ 150.02 HAZARDOUS BUILDING LAW ADOPTED.
   The Hazardous Building Law, M.S. §§ 463.15 through 463.261, as they may be
amended from time to time, is adopted by reference. Any hazardous building or
dangerous excavation may be abated in accordance with the provisions of that
law.
(Prior Code, § 90.02)
CHAPTER 151: RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Findings, purpose and intent
   
151.02   Election to manage the public rights-of-way
   
151.03   Adoption of rules by reference
   
151.04   Definitions
   
151.05   Administration
   
151.06   Mapping data
   
151.07   Location and relocation of facilities
   
151.08   Pre-excavation facilities location
   
151.09   Damage to other facilities
   
151.10   Right-of-way vacation
   
151.11   Indemnification and liability
   
151.12   Abandoned and unuseable facilities
Registration and Permit Requirements
   
151.25   Registration and right-of-way occupancy
   
151.26   Registration information
   
151.27   Permit requirement
   
151.28   Permit applications
   
151.29   Issuance of permit; conditions
   
151.30   Permit fees
   
151.31   Right-of-way patching and restoration
   
151.32   Joint trench applications
   
151.33   Supplementary applications
   
151.34   Other obligations
   
151.35   Denial of permit
   
151.36   Installation requirements
   
151.37   Inspection
   
151.38   Work done without a permit
   
151.39   Supplementary notification
   
151.40   Revocation of permits
   
151.41   Appeal
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 FINDINGS; PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   To provide for the health, safety and welfare of its citizens, and to
ensure the integrity of its streets and the appropriate use of the rights-of-
way, the city strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state of good repair and
free from unnecessary encumbrances.
   (B)   (1)   This chapter imposes reasonable regulation on the placement and
maintenance of facilities and equipment currently within its rights-of-way or
to be placed therein at some future time.
      (2)   It is intended to complement the regulatory roles of state and
federal agencies.
      (3)   Under this chapter, persons excavating and obstructing the rights-
of-way will bear financial responsibility for their work.
      (4)   Finally, this chapter provides for recovery of out-of-pocket and
projected costs from persons using the public rights-of-way.
   (C)   (1)   This chapter shall be interpreted consistently with 1997 Session
Laws, Chapter 123, substantially codified in M.S. §§ 237.16, 237.162, 237.163,
237.79, 237.81 and 238.086 (the “Act”), as they may be amended from time to
time, and the other laws governing applicable rights of the city and users of
the right-of-way.
      (2)   This chapter shall also be interpreted consistent with Minn. Rules
parts 7819.0050 to 7819.9930 where possible.
      (3)   To the extent any provision of this chapter cannot be interpreted
consistently with the Minnesota Rules, that interpretation most consistent with
the Act and other applicable statutory and case law is intended.
      (4)   This chapter shall not be interpreted to limit the regulatory and
police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.
(Prior Code, § 36.01)
§ 151.02 ELECTION TO MANAGE THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   Pursuant to the authority, granted to the city under state and federal
statutory, administrative and common law, the city hereby elects, pursuant to
M.S. § 237.163, subd. 2(b), as it may be amended from time to time, to manage
rights-of-way within its jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 36.02)
§ 151.03 ADOPTION OF RULES BY REFERENCE.
   Minn. Rules Chapter 7819, as it may be amended from time to time, is hereby
adopted by reference and is incorporated into this code as if set out in full.
(Prior Code, § 36.03)
§ 151.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED FACILITY. A facility no longer in service or physically
disconnected from a portion of the operating facility or from any other
facility, that is in use or still carries service.
   APPLICANT. Any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a right-
of-way.
   CITY. The City of Montrose, Minnesota. CITY also means its elected
officials, officers, employees and agents.
   COMMISSION. The state’s Public Utilities Commission.
   CONGESTED RIGHT-OF-WAY. A crowded condition in the subsurface of the public
right-of-way that occurs when the maximum lateral spacing between existing
underground facilities does not allow for construction of new underground
facilities without using hand digging to expose the existing lateral facilities
in conformance with M.S. § 216D.04, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to
time, over a continuous length in excess of 500 feet.
   CONSTRUCTION PERFORMANCE BOND. Any of the following forms of security
provided at the permittee’s option:
      (1)   Individual project bond;
      (2)   Cash deposit;
      (3)   Letter of credit in a form acceptable to the city; and
      (4)   A blanket bond for projects within the city, or other form of
construction bond, for a time specified and in a form acceptable to the city.
   DEGRADATION. A decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused by
excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to
reconstruct the right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation
or disturbance did not occur.
   DEGRADATION COST. Subject to Minn. Rules part 7819.1100, means the cost to
achieve a level of restoration, as determined by the city at the time the
permit is issued, not to exceed the maximum restoration shown in plates 1 to
13, set forth in Minn. Rules parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950.
   DEGRADATION FEE. The estimated fee established at the time of permitting by
the city to recover costs associated with the decrease in the useful life of
the right-of-way caused by the excavation, and which equals the degradation
cost. This fee is in addition to the permittee’s obligation to fully restore
the right-of-way.
   DELAY PENALTY. The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays in
right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching or restoration as established by
permit.
   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Public Works of the city.
   DEPARTMENT INSPECTOR. Any person authorized by the city to carry out
inspections related to the provisions of this chapter.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Department of Public Works of the city, or his
or her designee.
   EMERGENCY. A condition that poses a danger to life or health or of a
significant loss of property, or requires immediate repair or replacement of
facilities in order to restore service to a customer.
   EQUIPMENT. Any tangible asset used to install, repair or maintain facilities
in any right-of-way.
   EXCAVATE. To dig into, directionally bore or in any way remove or physically
disturb or penetrate any part of a right-of-way.
   FACILITY or FACILITIES. Any tangible asset in the right-of-way required to
provide utility service.
   FIVE-YEAR PROJECT PLAN. Projects adopted by the city for construction within
the next five years.
   HIGH DENSITY CORRIDOR. A designated portion of the public-right-of-way
within which telecommunications right-of-way users having multiple and
competing facilities may be required to build and install facilities in a
common conduit system or other common structure.
   HOLE. An excavation in the pavement with the excavation having a length less
than the width of the pavement.
   LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE. A local person or persons or designee of the person or
persons authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make decisions for
that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this chapter.
   MANAGEMENT COSTS. The actual costs the city incurs in managing its rights-
of-way, including such costs, if incurred, as those associated with registering
applicants; issuing, processing and verifying right-of-way permit applications;
inspecting job sites and restoration projects; maintaining, supporting,
protecting or moving user facilities during right-of-way work; determining the
adequacy of right-of-way restoration; restoring work inadequately performed
after providing notice and the opportunity to correct the work; and revoking
right-of-way permits. MANAGEMENT COSTS do not include payment by a
telecommunications right-of-way user for the use of the right-of-way, the fees
and costs of litigation relating to the interpretation of: Minnesota Session
Laws 1997, Chapter 123; M.S. §§ 237.162 or 237.163, as they may be amended from
time to time; or any ordinance enacted under those sections, or the city fees
and costs related to appeals taken pursuant to this chapter.
   OBSTRUCT. To place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to hinder
free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.
   PATCH or PATCHING. A method of pavement replacement that is temporary in
nature. A PATCH consists of the compaction of the sub-base and aggregate base
and the replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement for a minimum of two
feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all directions.
   PAVEMENT. Any type of improved surface that is within the public right-of-
way and that is paved or otherwise constructed with bituminous, concrete,
aggregate or gravel.
   PERMIT. The meaning given “right-of-way permit” in M.S. § 237.162, as it may
be amended from time to time.
   PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a right-of-
way has been granted by the city under this chapter.
   PERSON. An individual or entity subject to the laws and rules of this state,
however organized, whether public or private, whether domestic or foreign,
whether for profit or non-profit, and whether natural, corporate or political.
   PROBATION. The status of a person that has not complied with the conditions
of this chapter.
   PROBATIONARY PERIOD. One year from the date that a person has been notified
in writing that they have been put on probation.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below or above a public roadway, highway,
street, cartway, bicycle lane or public sidewalk in which the city has an
interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way, for travel purposes and
utility easements of the city. A RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include the airwaves
above a right-of-way with regard to cellular or other non-wire
telecommunications or broadcast service. PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY includes outlots
or parks and drainage and utility easements that are dedicated to and/or owned
by the city.
   REGISTRANT. Any person who has or seeks to have its equipment or facilities
located in any right-of-way or in any way occupies, uses or seeks to occupy or
use the right-of-way or place its facilities or equipment in the right-of-way.
   RESTORATION COST. The amount of money paid to the city by a permittee to
achieve the level of restoration according to plates 1 to 13 of the state’s
Public Commission rules.
   RESTORE or RESTORATION. The process by which an excavated right-of-way and
surrounding area, including pavement, foundation, sidewalk, turf and trail is
returned to the same condition and life expectancy that existed before
excavation.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY USER. A telecommunications right-of-way user as defined by M.S.
§ 237.162, subd. 4, as it may be amended from time to time, or person owning or
controlling a facility in the right- of-way that is used or intended to be used
for providing utility service, and who has a right under law, franchise or
ordinance to use the public right-of- way.
   SERVICE or UTILITY SERVICE.
      (1)   Those services provided by a public utility as defined in M.S. §
216B.02, subd. 4 and 6, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (2)   Services of a telecommunications right-of-way user, including
transporting of voice or data information;
      (3)   Services of a cable communications systems as defined in M.S.
Chapter 238, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (4)   Natural gas or electric energy or telecommunications services
provided by the city;
      (5)   Services provided by a cooperative electric association organized
under M.S. Chapter 308A, as it may be amended from time to time; and
      (6)   Water and sewer, including service laterals, steam, cooling or
heating services.
   SERVICE LATERAL. An underground facility that is used to transmit,
distribute or furnish gas, electricity, communications or water from a common
source to an end-use customer. A SERVICE LATERAL is also an underground
facility that is used in the removal of wastewater from a customer’s premises.
   SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION. An application made to excavate or obstruct more
of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit that had already
been issued.
   TELECOMMUNICATION RIGHT-OF-WAY USER. A person owning or controlling a
facility in the right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a facility in the
right-of-way that is used or is intended to be used for transporting
telecommunication or other voice or data information. For purposes of this
chapter, a cable communication system defined and regulated under M.S. Chapter
238, as it may be amended from time to time, and telecommunication activities
related to providing natural gas or electric energy services whether provided
by a public utility as defined in M.S. § 216B.02, as it may be amended from
time to time, a municipality, a municipal gas or power agency organized under
M.S. Chapters 453 and 453A, as they may be amended from time to time, or a
cooperative electric association organized under M.S. Chapter 308A, as it may
be amended from time to time, are not TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHT-OF-WAY USERS for
purposes of this chapter.
   TEMPORARY SURFACE. The compaction of sub-base and aggregate base and
replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement only to the edges of the
excavation.
   TRENCH. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length
equal to or greater than the width of the pavement.
(Prior Code, § 36.04)
§ 151.05 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Director is the principal city official responsible for the
administration of the rights-of-way, right-of-way permits, and the ordinances
related thereto. The Director may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 36.05)
§ 151.06 MAPPING DATA.
   (A)   Information required. Each registrant and permittee shall provide
mapping information required by the city in accordance with Minn. Rules parts
7819.4000 and 7819.4100. Within 90 days following completion of any work
pursuant to a permit, the permittee shall provide the Director accurate maps
and drawings certifying the “as-built” location of all equipment installed,
owned and maintained by the permittee. The maps and drawings shall include the
horizontal and vertical location of all facilities and equipment and shall be
provided consistent with the city’s electronic mapping system, when practical
or as a condition imposed by the Director. Failure to provide maps and drawings
pursuant to this division (A) shall be grounds for revoking the permit holder’s
registration.
   (B)   Service laterals. All permits issued for the installation or repair of
service laterals, other than minor repairs as defined in Minn. Rules part
7560.0150, subpart 2, shall require the permittee’s use of appropriate means of
establishing the horizontal locations of installed service laterals, and the
service lateral vertical locations in those cases where the Director reasonably
requires it. Permittees or their subcontractors shall submit to the Director
evidence satisfactory to the Director of the installed service lateral
locations. Compliance with this division (B) and with applicable Gopher State
One Call Law and Minnesota Rules governing service laterals install after 12-
31-2005 shall be a condition of any city approval necessary for payments to
contractors working on a public improvement project, including those under M.S.
Chapter 429, as it may be amended from time to time, and city approval of
performance under development agreements, or other subdivision or site plan
approval under M.S. Chapter 462, as it may be amended from time to time. The
Director shall reasonably determine the appropriate method of providing the
information to the city. Failure to provide prompt and accurate information on
the service lateral installed may result in the revocation of the permit issued
for the work or for future permits to the offending permittee or its
subcontractors.
   (C)   Sewer service lateral information. All gas pipeline operators shall
protect all sanitary sewer service laterals from damage and inadvertent
puncture in accordance with the state’s Office of Pipeline Safety requirements.
All information on existing sewer service laterals obtained by the gas pipeline
operator or its contractors during this process shall be forwarded to the
Public Works Director.
(Prior Code, § 36.20)
§ 151.07 LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   Placement. Placement, location and relocation of facilities shall
comply with the Act, with other applicable law, and with Minn. Rules parts
7819.3100, 7819.5000 and 7819.5100, to the extent the rules do not limit
authority otherwise available to cities.
   (B)   Corridors. The city may assign a specific area within the right-of-
way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of
facilities that is or pursuant to current technology, the city expects will
someday be located within the right-of-way. All excavation or other permits
issued by the city involving the installation or replacement of facilities
shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue. Any registrant
who has facilities in the right-of-way in a position at variance with the
corridors established by the city shall, no later than at the time of the next
reconstruction or excavation of the area where the facilities are located, move
the facilities to the assigned position within the right-of-way, unless this
requirement is waived by the city for good cause shown, upon consideration of
such factors as the remaining economic life of the facilities, public safety,
customer service needs and hardship to the registrant.
   (C)   Nuisance.
      (1)   One year after the passage of this chapter, any facilities found in
a right-of-way that have not been registered shall be deemed to be a nuisance.
      (2)   The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in
equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance or taking
possession of the facilities and restoring the right-of-way to a useable
condition.
   (D)   Limitation of space.
      (1)   To protect health, safety and welfare, or when necessary to protect
the right-of-way and its current use, the city shall have the power to prohibit
or limit the placement of new or additional facilities within the right-of-way.
      (2)   In making the decisions, the city shall strive to the extent
possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the right-of-way,
but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public interest, the
public’s needs for the particular utility service, the condition of the right-
of-way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the protection of
existing facilities in the right-of-way and future city plans for public
improvements and development projects which have been determined to be in the
public interest.
      (3)   The city may require joint trenching in the event there are
multiple right-of-way applications or permits in a specific location.
(Prior Code, § 36.23)
§ 151.08 PRE-EXCAVATION FACILITIES LOCATION.
   In addition to complying with the requirements of M.S. §§ 216D.01 through
216D.09 (“One Call Excavation Notice System”), as they may be amended from time
to time, before the start date of any right-of-way excavation, each registrant
who has facilities or equipment in the area to be excavated shall mark the
horizontal and vertical placement of all said facilities. Any registrant whose
facilities are less than 20 inches below a concrete or asphalt surface shall
notify and work closely with the excavation contractor to establish the exact
location of its facilities and the best procedure for excavation.
(Prior Code, § 36.24)
§ 151.09 DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES.
   When the city does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to
maintain, support or move a registrant’s facilities to protect it, the city
shall notify the local representative as early as is reasonably possible. If
the registrant does not maintain support or move the facilities at the city’s
request, and the city maintains, supports or moves the facilities, the costs
associated therewith will be billed to that registrant and shall be paid within
30 days from the date of billing. Each registrant shall be responsible for the
cost of repairing any facilities in the right-of-way which it or its facilities
damage. Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any
damage to the facilities of another registrant caused during the city’s
response to an emergency occasioned by that registrant’s facilities.
(Prior Code, § 36.25)
§ 151.10 RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.
   If the city vacates a right-of-way that contains the facilities of a
registrant, the registrant’s rights in the vacated right-of-way are governed by
Minn. Rules part 7819.3200.
(Prior Code, § 36.26)
§ 151.11 INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.
   By registering with the city, or by accepting a permit under this chapter, a
registrant or permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the city in accordance
with the provisions of Minn. Rules part 7819.1250.
(Prior Code, § 36.27)
§ 151.12 ABANDONED AND UNUSEABLE FACILITIES.
   (A)   Discontinued operations. A registrant who has determined to
discontinue all or a portion of its operations in the city shall provide
information satisfactory to the city that the registrant’s obligations for its
facilities in the right-of-way under this chapter have been lawfully assumed by
another registrant.
   (B)   Removal. Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-
way shall remove it from that right-of-way if required in conjunction with
other right-of-way repair, excavation or construction, unless this requirement
is waived by the city.
(Prior Code, § 36.28)
REGISTRATION AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
§ 151.25 REGISTRATION AND RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Registration. Each person who occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or
use the right-of-way or place any equipment or facilities in or on the right-
of-way, including persons with installation and maintenance responsibilities by
lease, sublease or assignment, shall register with the city. Registration will
consist of providing application information and paying a registration fee.
   (B)   Registration prior to work. No person may construct, install, repair,
remove, relocate or perform any other work on, or use any facilities or any
part thereof, in any right-of-way without first being registered with the city.
   (C)   Exceptions. Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or amend the
city provisions concerning boulevard plantings or gardens in the area of the
right-of-way between their property and the street curb. However, nothing
herein relieves a person from complying with the provisions of the M.S. Chapter
216D, Gopher One Call Law, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 36.06) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.26 REGISTRATION INFORMATION.
   (A)   Information required. The information provided to the city at the time
of registration shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Each registrant’s name, Gopher One Call registration certificate
number, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile
numbers;
      (2)   The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone
and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local representative or
designee shall be available at all times. Current information regarding how to
contact the local representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time
of registration;
      (3)   A certificate of insurance:
         (a)   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the
registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state and
acceptable to the city;
         (b)   Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for
personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising
out of the use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the registrant, its
officers, agents, employees and permittees, and placement and use of facilities
and equipment in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents,
employees and permittees, including, but not limited to, protection against
liability arising from completed operations, damage of underground facilities
and collapse of property;
         (c)   Naming the city and its engineering consultants as an additional
insured as to whom the coverages required herein are in force and applicable
and for whom defense will be provided as to all such coverages;
         (d)   Requiring that the city be notified 30 days in advance of
cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term; and
         (e)   Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile
liability coverage, workers compensation and umbrella coverage. The limits of
the coverage shall not be less than $1,000,000.
      (4)   The city will require a copy of the actual insurance policies;
      (5)   If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate is
required to be filed under M.S. § 300.06, as it may be amended from time to
time, as recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State;
      (6)   The registrant shall submit a construction performance bond, cash
deposit, letter of credit or blanket bond in the amount of $10,000 to the city.
The security is to insure compliance with the approved plan; and
      (7)   A copy of the person’s order granting a certificate of authority
from the state’s Public Utilities Commission or other applicable state or
federal agency, where the person lawfully required to have the certificate from
said Commission or other state or federal agency.
   (B)   Notice of changes. The registrant shall keep all of the information
listed above current at all times by providing to the city information as to
changes within 15 days following the date on which the registrant has knowledge
of any change.
(Prior Code, § 36.07)
§ 151.27 PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no
person may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way without first having obtained
the appropriate right-of-way permit from the city to do so. A permit is
required by a registrant to excavate or directionally bore that part of the
right-of- way described in the permit and to hinder free and open passage over
the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing facilities described
therein, to the extent and for the duration specified therein.
   (B)   Permit extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-way
beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless the person makes a
supplementary application for another right-of-way permit before the expiration
of the initial permit, and a new permit or permit extension is granted.
   (C)   Delay penalty. In accordance with Minn. Rules part 7819.1000, subpart
3, and notwithstanding division (B) above, the city shall establish and impose
a delay penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation,
obstruction, patching or restoration. The delay penalty shall be established
from time to time by City Council resolution.
   (D)   Permit display. Permits issued under this chapter shall be
conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated
work site and shall be available for inspection by the city.
(Prior Code, § 36.08)
§ 151.28 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Application for a permit is made to the city.
   (B)   Right-of-way permit applications shall contain, and will be considered
complete only upon compliance with the requirements of the following
provisions:
      (1)   Registration with the city pursuant to this chapter;
      (2)   Submission of a completed permit application form, including all
required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the
proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed
facilities;
      (3)   Payment of money due the city for:
         (a)   Permit fees, estimated restoration costs and other management
costs;
         (b)   Prior obstructions or excavations;
         (c)   Any undisputed loss, damage or expense suffered by the city
because of applicant’s prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way
or any emergency actions taken by the city; and
         (d)   Franchise fees or other charges, if applicable.
      (4)   Payment of disputed amounts due the city by posting security or
depositing in an escrow account an amount equal to at least 110% of the amount
owing; and
      (5)   Posting an additional or larger construction performance bond for
additional facilities when applicant requests an excavation permit to install
additional facilities and the city deems the existing construction performance
bond inadequate under applicable standards.
(Prior Code, § 36.09)
§ 151.29 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Permit issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of
this chapter, the city shall issue a permit.
   (B)   Conditions. The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the
issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to
protect the health, safety and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-
of-way and its current use.
(Prior Code, § 36.10)
§ 151.30 PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Permit fee. The city shall establish a permit fee in an amount
sufficient to recover the following costs:
      (1)   The city management costs;
      (2)   Degradation costs, if applicable; and
      (3)   City labor and engineering costs.
   (B)   Payment of permit fees. No permit shall be issued without full payment
of the permit fees.
   (C)   Non-refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the city
has revoked for are not refundable.
   (D)   Application to franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise,
management costs may be charged separately from, and in addition to, the
franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise.
(Prior Code, § 36.11)
§ 151.31 RIGHT-OF-WAY PATCHING AND RESTORATION.
   (A)   Timing. The work to be done under the permit, and the patching and
restoration of the right- of-way as required herein, shall be completed within
the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days as work could not
be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the permittee.
   (B)   Patch and restoration. The permittee shall patch and restore its own
work. The city may choose to restore the right-of-way itself if the work is not
completed in accordance with the deadlines outlined in the permit.
      (1)   City restoration. If the city restores the right-of-way, the
permittee shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing. If, following
the restoration, the pavement settles due to the permittee’s improper
backfilling, the permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing,
all costs associated with correcting the defective work.
      (2)   Permittee restoration. If the permittee restores the right-of-way
itself, it shall, at the time of application for an excavation permit, post a
construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions of Minn. Rules
part 7819.3000.
   (C)   Standards. The permittee shall perform excavation, backfilling,
patching and restoration according to the standards and with the materials
specified by the city and shall comply with Minn. Rules part 7819.1100.
   (D)   Duty to correct defects. The permittee shall correct defects in
patching or restoration performed by the permittee or its agents. The permittee
upon notification from the city, shall correct all restoration work to the
extent necessary, using the method required by the city. Said work shall be
completed within five calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the city,
not including days during which work cannot be done because of circumstances
constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonable or
unreasonable.
   (E)   Failure to restore. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way
in the manner and to the condition required by the city, or fails to
satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the city, the
city, at its option, may do the work. In that event the permittee shall pay to
the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-way. If
permittee fails to pay as required, the city may exercise its rights under the
construction performance bond.
(Prior Code, § 36.12)
§ 151.32 JOINT TRENCH APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Joint application. Registrants may jointly apply for permits to
excavate or obstruct the right-of- way at the same place and time.
   (B)   Shared fees. Registrants who apply for permits for the same
excavation, which the city does not perform, may share in the payment of the
permit fee. In order to obtain a joint permit, registrants shall agree among
themselves as to the portion each will pay and indicate the same on their
applications.
   (C)   With city projects. Registrants who join in a scheduled excavation
performed by the city, whether or not it is a joint application by two or more
registrants or a single application, are not required to the permit fee, but a
permit would still be required.
(Prior Code, § 36.13)
§ 151.33 SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Limitation on area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area
of the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work
outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any
permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the
permit must be obstructed or excavated shall before working in that greater
area make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees
required thereby, and be granted a new permit or permit extension.
   (B)   Limitation on dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates
specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the permit
start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the end date.
If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it shall apply
for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new permit
or an extension of the old permit before working after the end date of the
previous permit. This supplementary application shall be submitted before the
permit end date.
(Prior Code, § 36.14)
§ 151.34 OTHER OBLIGATIONS.
   (A)   Compliance with other laws. Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not
relieve the permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits,
licenses and authority and to pay all fees required by the city or other
applicable rule, law or regulation. A permittee shall comply with all
requirements of local, state and federal laws, including, but not limited to,
M.S. §§ 216D.01 through 216D.09 (Gopher One Call Excavation Notice System), as
it may be amended from time to time, and Minn. Rules Chapter 7560. A permittee
shall perform all work in conformance with all applicable codes and established
rules and regulations, and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way
pursuant to its permit, regardless of who does the work.
   (B)   Prohibited work. Except in an emergency, and with the approval of the
city, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be done when seasonally
prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for the work.
   (C)   Interference with right-of-way. A permittee shall not so obstruct a
right-of-way that the natural free and clear passage of water through the
gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with. Private vehicles of those
doing work in the right-of-way may not be parked within or next to a permit
area unless parked in conformance with city parking regulations. The loading or
unloading of trucks shall be done solely within the defined permit area unless
specifically authorized by the permit.
   (D)   Trenchless excavation. As a condition of all applicable permits,
permitees employing trenchless excavation methods, including but not limited to
horizontal directional drilling, shall follow all requirements set forth in
M.S. Chapter 16D, as it may be amended from time to time, and Minn. Rules
Chapter 7560, and shall require potholing or open cutting over existing,
underground utilities before excavating.
   (E)   Compliance with erosion and sediment control requirements. A permitee
must comply with all erosion and sediment control requirements found in this
code and in any other state, county or local law.
(Prior Code, § 36.15)
§ 151.35 DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and
conditions of this chapter or if work is not completed on a previous permit
issued to the same applicant, or if the city determines that the denial is
necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare or when necessary to
protect the right-of- way and its current use.
(Prior Code, § 36.16)
§ 151.36 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other work
performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with Minn. Rules
parts 7819.1100 and 7819.5000 and other applicable local requirements, in so
far as they are not inconsistent with the M.S. §§ 237.162 and 237.163, as they
may be amended from time to time. Installation of service laterals shall be
performed in accordance with Minn. Rules Chapter 7560. Service lateral
installation is further subject to those requirements and conditions set forth
by the city in the applicable permits and all requirements and conditions set
forth in this code.
(Prior Code, § 36.17)
§ 151.37 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Notice of completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is
completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in accordance
with Minn. Rules part 7819.1300.
   (B)   Site inspection. The permittee shall make the work-site available to
the city and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all
reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the work.
   (C)   Authority of Director.
      (1)   At the time of inspection, the Director may order the immediate
cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety
or well-being of the public.
      (2)   The Director may issue an order to the permittee for any work that
does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards,
conditions or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the
violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten days after
issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the Director that
the violation has been corrected. If the proof has not been presented within
the required time, the Director may revoke the permit.
(Prior Code, § 36.18)
§ 151.38 WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.
   (A)   Emergency situations. Each registrant shall immediately notify the
Director of any event regarding its facilities that it considers to be an
emergency. The registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to
respond to the emergency. Excavators’ notification to Gopher State One Call
regarding an emergency situation does not fulfill this requirement. Within two
business days after the occurrence of the emergency, the registrant shall apply
for the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith and fulfill the
rest of the requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this
chapter for the actions it took in response to the emergency. If the city
becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant’s facilities, the city
will attempt to contact the local representative of each registrant affected,
or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event, the city may take
whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost of
which shall be borne by the registrant whose facilities occasioned the
emergency.
   (B)   Non-emergency situations. Except in an emergency, any person who,
without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a
right-of-way shall subsequently obtain a permit and, as a penalty, pay double
the normal fee for said permit, pay double all the other fees required by the
city, deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct any damage to the
right-of-way, and comply with all of the requirements of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 36.19)
§ 151.39 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.
   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends
sooner than the date given on the permit, the permittee shall notify the city
of the accurate information as soon as this information is known.
(Prior Code, § 36.20)
§ 151.40 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Substantial breach. The city reserves its right, as provided herein,
to revoke any right-of-way permit without a fee refund, if there is a
substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule
or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial breach by
a permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to the following:
      (1)   The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
      (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-
of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit
upon the city or its citizens;
      (3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a
right-of-way permit;
      (4)   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner, unless a
permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to
reasons beyond the permittee’s control; and/or
      (5)   The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not
conform to a condition indicated on an order issued by the city.
   (B)   Written notice of breach. If the city determines that the permittee
has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute,
ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit, the city shall make
a written demand upon the permittee to remedy the violation. The demand shall
state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit. A
substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city, at its discretion, to
place additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate and remedy the
breach.
   (C)   Response to notice of breach. Within 24 hours of receiving
notification of the breach, the permittee shall provide the city with a plan,
acceptable to the city, that will cure the breach. The permittee’s failure to
so contact the city, or the permittee’s failure to timely submit an acceptable
plan, or the permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan,
shall be cause for immediate revocation of the permit. Further, the permittee’s
failure to so contact the city, or the permittee’s failure to submit an
acceptable plan, or the permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the
approved plan, shall automatically place the permittee on probation for one
full year.
   (D)   Cause for probation. From time to time, the city may establish a list
of conditions of the permit, which if breached will automatically place the
permittee on probation for one full year, such as, but not limited to, working
out of the allotted time period or working on right-of-way grossly outside of
the permit authorization.
   (E)   Automatic revocation. If a permittee, while on probation, commits a
breach as outlined above, the permittee’s permit will automatically be revoked
and the permittee will not be allowed further permits for one full year, except
for emergency repairs.
   (F)   Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee
shall also reimburse the city for the city’s reasonable costs, including
restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorneys’ fees
incurred in connection with the revocation.
(Prior Code, § 36.21)
§ 151.41 APPEAL.
   A right-of-way user that has been denied registration, has been denied a
permit, has had a permit revoked, believes that the fees imposed are not in
conformity with M.S. § 237.163, subd. 6, as it may be amended from time to
time, or has been accused of breaching the conditions or requirements of a
permit or of this code may have the denial, revocation, fee imposition or
decision reviewed, upon written request to by the City Council. The City
Council shall act on a timely written request at its next regularly scheduled
meeting; provided, the right-of-way user has submitted its appeal with
sufficient time to include the appeal as a regular agenda item. A decision by
the City Council affirming the denial, revocation or fee imposition will be in
writing and supported by written findings establishing the reasonableness of
the decision.
(Prior Code, § 36.29)
CHAPTER 152: CARTWAYS
Section
   
152.01   Scope
   
152.02   Definitions
   
152.03   Procedure establishment
   
152.04   Surveys
   
152.05   Expenditure of city funds
   
152.06   Cartways as private driveway
   
152.07   Maintenance costs
   
152.08   Appeals to District Court
§ 152.01 SCOPE.
   Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, the method of establishing
cartways, as provided herein, shall apply to all property located within the
city. The city has determined that it is in the best interests of the city that
all cartway petitions be submitted to and determined by the city in a manner
which is consistent with state law, as amended.
(Prior Code, § 91.01)
§ 152.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Montrose.
   DAMAGES. The monetary value, if any, of the damages that the establishment
of a cartway will cause to the owners in question, based upon the fair value of
the land that is subject to the cartway, and the economic affect of the cartway
on the land that is not subject to the cartway, less the monetary value of the
benefit, if any, that the establishment of the cartway will confer on the
property owners in question. DAMAGES also include the costs of the city
associated with the cartway proceeding.
(Prior Code, § 91.02)
§ 152.03 PROCEDURE ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   Within the city, a property owner who owns a tract of land containing
at least five acres, who has no access thereto, except over a navigable
waterway or over the lands of others, or whose access thereto is less than two
rods in width, may present a petition for the establishment of a cartway to the
City Council.
   (B)   The petition must be signed by the owner of the tract of land
requesting a cartway. The petition must contain the following:
      (1)   A clear statement requesting a cartway;
      (2)   The size and description, including legal description, of the land
to be served;
      (3)   A statement identifying the necessity or the request for a cartway;
      (4)   The name and address of the property owner(s) of the property over
which the cartway is proposed to be crossed; and
      (5)   A survey of the parcel that will be using the cartway as access,
showing, at a minimum:
         (a)   All structures located on the parcel;
         (b)   The width of cartway desired;
         (c)   The desired route for the cartway;
         (d)   The legal description of the tract of land over which the
proposed cartway shall cross, including its point of beginning, general course
and termination;
         (e)   All parcels of property within 500 feet of the proposed cartway;
and
         (f)   The location of all structures, roads or driveways located on
parcels of property within 500 feet of the proposed cartway.
   (C)   The petitioning party is required to pay all costs related to the
establishment of the cartway, including any damages that must be paid to the
owner of the land upon which the cartway is established, together with the
costs of all of the city’s professional and other services, hearing costs,
administrative costs, recording costs and other costs and expenses that the
city may incur in connection with the proceeding for the establishment of the
cartway.
   (D)   The City Administrator shall determine whether the petition is
sufficient, and the City Administrator, with the assistance of other members of
city staff, shall recommend the amount of the bond which is necessary to be
filed by the petitioner. The Council may pass a resolution directing a bond to
be filed by the petitioner for the amount of damages, as provided above, before
proceeding further.
   (E)   The petitioning party shall post a bond or other security acceptable
to the city for the total estimated damages, plus all costs to be incurred by
the city before the Council will take action upon the petition.
   (F)   The City Council will set a date for a public hearing regarding the
establishment of the cartway. Prior to the public hearing, the City Council may
refer the matter to the city’s Planning Commission for further study, input
and/or recommendations. The public hearing(s) may be held at the Montrose
Community Center Hall, or the other place as the Council deems appropriate, and
the Council or Planning Commission may review the property to determine if the
proposed location of the cartway is adequate, or if an alternative route other
than that petitioned for is deemed by the city to be less disruptive and
damaging to the affected land owners and in the public’s best interest.
   (G)   The City Council may appoint one or more of its members to meet with
the affected parties to determine if a resolution and agreement can be reached
regarding the damages issues.
   (H)   Notice of the hearing regarding the cartway shall be posted by
petitioner at least ten days prior to the hearing on the cartway. This notice
is to be posted at City Hall. Further, notice of the cartway hearing shall be
served by the petitioner, or his or her agents, personally, upon all affected
parties, including the owner of the land over which the cartway is proposed, as
well as all property owners who own land adjacent to the proposed cartway. The
petitioner shall provide an affidavit of the service and posting showing that
this has been accomplished. The notice to be provided to parties shall include
the following:
      (1)   Notice of the time, date and place of the hearing upon the cartway
petition;
      (2)   A description, as near as practicable, of the cartway proposed to
be established and each tract of land through which it is proposed to pass; and
      (3)   Summary of the cartway proceeding to date.
   (I)   At a hearing regarding the establishment of a cartway, the petitioning
party and the affected land owner may present whatever evidence he or she deems
necessary concerning the request for the petition and the damages, if any, to
be awarded to the land owner over whose land the proposed cartway is to be
established. The City Council shall determine the amount of damages to be
awarded and may choose to retain professionals to assist it with the
determination.
   (J)   Following the hearing described above, the City Council, by
resolution, will determine the appropriate route for the cartway, and the
amount of damages to be paid by the petitioning party, including damages, if
any, awarded to the owner of the land upon which the cartway is established,
together with the costs of professional and other services, hearing costs,
administrative costs, recording costs and other costs and expenses that the
city may occur in connection with the proceeding for the establishment of the
cartway.
(Prior Code, § 91.03)
§ 152.04 SURVEYS.
   The City Council may direct a surveyor to enter the land over which a
cartway is proposed to be located for the purposes of providing a legal
description of the cartway and to mark the location of the cartway.
(Prior Code, § 91.04)
§ 152.05 EXPENDITURE OF CITY FUNDS.
   The city may not expend street or bridge funds on the cartway unless the
City Council, by resolution, determines that an expenditure is in the public
interest. If no resolution is adopted to that affect, all grading or other
construction work and the maintenance of the cartway is the responsibility of
the petitioner.
(Prior Code, § 91.05)
§ 152.06 CARTWAYS AS PRIVATE DRIVEWAY.
   After a cartway has been constructed, the City Council may, by resolution,
designate the cartway as a private driveway with the written consent of the
affected land owners, in which case from the effective date of the resolution,
no city road or bridge funds may be expended for the maintenance of the
cartway.
(Prior Code, § 91.06)
§ 152.07 MAINTENANCE COSTS.
   (A)   When a cartway is not maintained by the city, one or more of the
private property owners who own land adjacent to a cartway, or one or more of
the private property owners who have no access to the owners land, except by
way of the cartway, may maintain the cartway.
   (B)   The cost of maintenance is to be equitably divided among all of the
private property owners who:
      (1)   Own land adjacent to the cartway; and
      (2)   Have no access to their land, except by way of the cartway.
   (C)   Proper cost of the maintenance and the proper allocation of the cost
is a matter to be determined by and between the parties involved and not by the
city; however, the City Council may determine the maintenance cost to be
apportioned to each private property owner if the private property owners
cannot agree on the division of the costs.
   (D)   If the Council decides the issue of maintenance costs, the Council’s
decision may be appealed within 30 days to the County District Court.
   (E)   Private property owners who pay the cost of maintenance have a civil
cause of action against any of the private property owners who refuse to pay
their share of the maintenance costs.
(Prior Code, § 91.07)
§ 152.08 APPEALS TO DISTRICT COURT.
   The petitioner or any affected property owner may appeal the City Council’s
decision to the County District Court, within 40 days after the filing of the
award of damages by filing a notice of appeal with the County Administrator.
The owner or occupant of the land over which the cartway is to be established
must file the notice of appeal within ten days in order to delay the opening,
construction, alteration, change or other improvement in or on the road. A copy
of the notice of appeal shall be mailed by registered or certified mail to the
city’s Clerk-Treasurer and the petitioner. The notice of appeal shall specify
the award or failure to award appealed from the land to which it relates, the
nature and amount of the claim of the appellant and the grounds of the appeal.
The appeal shall proceed in County District Court.
(Prior Code, § 91.08)
CHAPTER 153: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section
   
153.01   Purpose
   
153.02   District
   
153.03   Permit requirements
   
153.04   Definitions
   
153.05   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
153.06   Storm water drainage rules and regulations
   
153.07   General policy
   
153.08   Storm water pollution prevention and grading plan
   
153.09   Inspection of measures
   
153.10   Minimum requirements
   
153.11   Plan criteria
   
153.12   Control measures and related inspections
   
153.13   Pollution controls
   
153.14   Wet detention facilities
   
153.15   Minimum protection for natural wetlands
   
153.16   Vegetative buffer; rivers, streams and wetlands
   
153.17   Additional requirements
   
153.18   Models, methodologies and computations
   
153.19   Review; permit required
   
153.20   Modification of plan
   
153.21   Notification of failure of plan
   
153.22   Waiver
   
153.23   Right of entry and inspection
§ 153.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to control or eliminate storm water pollution
along with soil erosion and sedimentation within the city. It establishes
standards and specifications for conservation practices and planning
activities, which minimize storm water pollution, soil erosion and
sedimentation.
(Prior Code, § 34.01)
§ 153.02 DISTRICT.
   (A)   Authority. The City Council is authorized by M.S. Chapter 444, as it
may be amended from time to time, to establish by ordinance a Storm Sewer Tax
Improvement District within which the Council may acquire, construct,
reconstruct, extend, maintain and otherwise improve storm sewer drainage
systems and related facilities within the district and finance the cost of the
improvements, including maintenance and the payment of principal and interest
on obligations issued in making the improvements.
   (B)   Establishment of district. There is hereby established a Storm Sewer
Improvement Tax District encompassing the entire geographical area of the city.
(Prior Code, § 34.02)
§ 153.03 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   Except where a variance is granted, any person, firm, sole proprietorship,
partnership, corporation, state agency or political subdivision proposing a
land-disturbance activity within the city shall apply to the city for the
approval of a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP.) No land shall be
disturbed until the plan is approved by the city and conforms to the standards
set forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 34.03)
§ 153.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. Any person or entity that applies for a building permit,
subdivision approval or a permit to allow land-disturbing activities. APPLICANT
also means that person’s agents, employees and others acting under the person’s
direction.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPs. Erosion and sediment control and water
quality management practices that are the most effective and practicable means
of controlling, preventing and minimizing degradation of surface water,
including construction phasing, minimizing the length of time soil areas are
exposed, prohibitions and other management practices published by state or
designated area-wide planning agencies. Examples of BMPs can be found in the
current versions of the State Pollution Control Agency’s publications,
“Minnesota Storm Water Manual”, “Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas”, and
“Storm Water and Wetlands: Planning and Evaluation Guidelines for Addressing
Potential Impacts of Urban Storm Water and Snow-Melt Runoff on Wetlands”, the
United States Environmental Protection Agency’s “Developing Your Storm water
Pollution Prevention Plan: A Guide for Construction Sites” (as a reference for
BMPs) and the State Department of Transportation’s “Drainage Design & Erosion
Control Design Manual”.
   BUFFER. A protective vegetated zone located adjacent to a natural resource,
such as a water of the state, that is subject to direct or indirect human
alteration. The width of a BUFFER STRIP is the width along each bank of a
stream. Therefore, a 30-foot wide stream with 100-foot buffer strips has a
total width of 230 feet. Acceptable BUFFER VEGETATION includes preserving
existing pre-development vegetation and/or planting locally distributed native
state trees, shrubs and grassy vegetation. Alteration of the areas is strictly
limited. BUFFER AREAS are designated with permanent signs and protected by
easements or located in outlots. As a plant species selection guide of what
species not to plant, the State Department of Natural Resources’ Minn. Rules
Chapter 6216, as it may be amended from time to time, contains a list of exotic
prohibited, regulated, unlisted and unregulated plant species.
   DEVELOPER. A person, firm, corporation, sole proprietorship, partnership,
state agency or political subdivision thereof engaged in a land-disturbance
activity.
   DISCHARGE. The conveyance, channeling, runoff or drainage of storm water,
including snowmelt, from a construction site.
   ENERGY DISSIPATION. This refers to methods employed at pipe outlets to
prevent erosion. Examples include, but are not limited to, aprons, riprap,
splash pads and gabions that are designed to prevent erosion.
   EROSION. Any process that wears away the surface of the land by the action
of water, wind, ice or gravity. EROSION can be accelerated by the activities of
people and nature.
   EROSION AND SEDIMENT PRACTICE SPECIFICATIONS OR PRACTICE. The management
procedures, techniques and methods to control soil erosion and sedimentation as
officially adopted by either the city, county, state or local watershed group,
whichever is more stringent.
   EROSION CONTROL. Methods employed to prevent erosion. Examples include soil
stabilization practices, horizontal slope grading, temporary or permanent cover
and construction phasing.
   EXPOSED SOIL AREAS. All areas of the construction site where the vegetation
(trees, shrubs, brush and the like) has been removed. This includes topsoil
stockpile areas, borrow areas and disposal areas within the construction site.
It does not include stockpiles or surcharge areas of sand, gravel, concrete or
bituminous.
   FILTER STRIPS. A vegetated section of land designed to treat runoff as
overland sheet flow. They may be designed in any natural vegetated form from a
grassy meadow to a small forest. Their dense vegetated cover facilitates
pollutant removal and infiltration.
   FINAL STABILIZATION. All soil disturbing activities at the site have been
completed, and that a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of 75%
of the cover for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures
has been established or equivalent permanent stabilization measures have been
employed. Examples of vegetative cover practices can be found in the current
version of the State Department of Transportation’s publication “Supplemental
Specifications to the (Year) Standard Specifications for Construction”. Simply
sowing grass seed is not considered STABILIZATION.
   HYDRIC SOILS. Soils that are saturated, flooded or ponded long enough during
the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part.
   HYDROPHYTIC VEGETATION. Macrophytic, large enough to be observed by the
naked eye, plant life growing in water, soil or on a substrate that is at least
periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of excessive water content.
   INFILTRATION/FILTRATION BASIN. A permanent man-made structure for the
infiltration or filtration of runoff into the ground. No permanent standing
pool of water is present. If only FILTRATION is desired, an underdrain system
is installed underneath the basin. If both FILTRATION AND INFILTRATION is
desired, the underdrain system will be placed closer to the ground surface. If
only INFILTRATION is desired, no underdrain system is installed.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE.
      (1)   A constructed hard surface that either prevents or retards the
entry of water into the soil and causes water to runoff the surface in greater
quantities and at an increased rate of flow than existed prior to development.
      (2)   Examples include rooftops, sidewalks, patios, driveways, parking
lots, storage areas and concrete, asphalt or gravel roads.
   LAND-DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY. Any land change that may result in soil erosion
from water or wind and the movement of sediments into or upon waters or lands
within the government’s jurisdiction, including clearing and grubbing, grading,
excavating, transporting and filling of land. Within the context of this rule,
LAND-DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY does not mean:
      (1)   Minor land-disturbance activities such as home gardens and an
individual’s home landscaping, repairs and maintenance work;
      (2)   Construction, installation and maintenance of electric, telephone
and cable television, utility lines or individual service connection to these
utilities, which result in creating under 5,000 square feet of exposed soil;
      (3)   Tilling, planting or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural or
silvicultural crops;
      (4)   Installation of fence, sign, telephone and electric poles and other
kinds of posts or poles which result in creating under 5,000 square feet of
exposed soil; and/or
      (5)   Emergency work to protect life, limb or property and emergency
repairs unless the LAND- DISTURBING ACTIVITY would have otherwise required an
approved erosion and sediment control plan, except for the emergency. If such a
plan would have been required, then the disturbed land area shall be shaped and
stabilized in accordance with the city’s requirements as soon as possible.
   ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK.
      (1)   This is generally the boundary elevation where the vegetation
changes from predominately aquatic to terrestrial. This elevation delineates
the highest water level, which has been maintained for a sufficient period of
time to leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly that point where the
natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly
terrestrial. Water often reaches this elevation in spring. For rivers and
streams, the ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK is usually the top of the bank. It is
less well defined for lakes and wetlands.
      (2)   The definition in M.S. § 103G.005(14), as it may be amended from
time to time, says that the “...ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL means the boundary of
water basins, watercourses, public waters and public waters wetlands, and: (i)
The ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL is an elevation delineating the highest water
level that has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave
evidence upon the landscape, commonly the point where the natural vegetation
changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial; (ii) For
watercourses, the ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL is the elevation of the top of the
bank of the channel; and (iii) For reservoirs and flowages, the ORDINARY HIGH
WATER LEVEL is the operating elevation of the normal summer pool”.
      (3)   The term ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK is further defined in Minn. Rules
part 6120.2500(11), as it may be amended from time to time. ORDINARY HIGH WATER
MARKS are determined by the state’s Department of Natural Resources Area
Hydrologist.
   PAVED SURFACE. A constructed hard, smooth surface made of asphalt, concrete
or other pavement material. Examples include, but are not limited to roads,
sidewalks, driveways and parking lots.
   PERMANENT COVER. Final stabilization. Examples include grass, gravel,
asphalt and concrete.
   RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENT FACTOR (REF). The ratio of the average volume of run-
off generated by one acre of typical single-family residential land, during a
standard two-year rainfall event.
   RUNOFF COEFFICIENT. The average annual fraction of total precipitation that
is not infiltrated into or otherwise retained by the soil, concrete, asphalt or
other surface upon which it falls that will appear at the conveyance as runoff.
   SEDIMENT. The product of an erosion process; solid material both mineral and
organic, that is in suspension, is being transported or has been moved by
water, air or ice, and has come to rest on the earth’s surface either above or
below water level.
   SEDIMENTATION. The process or action of depositing sediment caused by
erosion.
   SEDIMENT CONTROL. The methods employed to prevent sediment from leaving the
development site. SEDIMENT CONTROL PRACTICES include silt fences, sediment
traps, earth dikes, drainage swales, check dams, subsurface drains, pipe slope
drains, storm drain inlet protection and temporary or permanent sedimentation
basins.
   SOIL. The unconsolidated mineral and organic material on the immediate
surface of the earth. For the purposes hereof, stockpiles of sand, gravel,
aggregate, concrete or bituminous materials are not considered SOIL STOCKPILES.
   STABILIZED. The exposed ground surface after it has been covered by sod,
erosion control blanket, riprap or other material that prevents erosion from
occurring. Simply sowing grass seed is not considered STABILIZATION.
   STORM WATER. Under Minn. Rules part 7077.0105(41b), STORM WATER means
precipitation runoff, storm water runoff, snow melt runoff and any other
surface runoff and drainage. According to 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(13), STORM
WATER means storm water runoff, snow melt runoff and surface and drainage.
STORM WATER does not include construction site dewatering.
   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN. A joint storm water and erosion and
sediment prevention plan that is a document containing the requirements of this
chapter, that when implemented will decrease soil erosion on a parcel of land
and off-site non-point pollution.
   STRUCTURE. Anything manufactured, constructed or erected which is normally
attached to or positioned on land, including portable structures, earthen
structures, roads, parking lots and paved storage areas.
   SUBDIVISION.
      (1)   Any tract of land divided into building lots for private, public,
commercial, industrial and the like development.
      (2)   Minn. Rules part 6120.2500(17), as it may be amended from time to
time, defines SUBDIVISION as “land that is divided for the purpose of sale,
rent or lease, including planned unit development”.
   TEMPORARY PROTECTION. Short-term methods employed to prevent erosion.
Examples of such protection include straw, mulch, erosion control blankets,
wood chips and erosion netting.
   URBAN. Of, relating to, characteristic of and constituting a city.
   VEGETATED OR GRASSED SWALES.
      (1)   A vegetated earthen channel that conveys storm water, while
treating the storm water by biofiltration.
      (2)   Swales remove pollutants by both filtration and infiltration.
   WATERS OF THE STATE. As defined in M.S. § 115.01(22), as it may be amended
from time to time, all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways,
wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and
all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or
artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or
border upon the state or any portion thereof. According to Minn. Rules part
7050.0130(A), as it may be amended from time to time, disposal systems or
treatment works operated under either a state pollution control agency permit
or an agency certificate of compliance are not considered WATERS OF THE STATE.
Under Minn. Rules part 7050.0130(F), as it may be amended from time to time,
constructed wetlands designed for wastewater treatment are not WATERS OF THE
STATE. Also see the definition of “wetlands”.
   WET SEDIMENTATION FACILITY. A permanent human-made structure for the storage
of runoff that contains a permanent pool of water.
   WETLANDS. As defined in Minn. Rules part 7050.0130(F), as they may be
amended from time to time, those areas that are inundated or saturated by
surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. WETLANDS
generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. CONSTRUCTED WETLANDS
designed for wastewater treatment are not waters of the state. WETLANDS must
have the following attributes:
      (1)   A predominance of hydric soils;
      (2)   Inundated or saturated by surface water or ground water at a
frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic
vegetation typically adapted for life in a saturated soil condition; and
      (3)   Under normal circumstances, support a prevalence of the vegetation.
Two quick references of what is an existing identified wetland are the national
wetlands inventory maps distributed by the U.S. Department of the Interior’s
Fish and Wildlife Service and the State Department of Natural Resources’ maps
of protected waters and wetlands.
(Prior Code, § 34.04)
§ 153.05 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes
greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
   (B)   All other ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby
repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
(Prior Code, § 34.05)
§ 153.06 STORM WATER DRAINAGE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General. The municipal storm water drainage system shall be operated
as a public utility pursuant to M.S. § 444.075, as it may be amended from time
to time, from which revenue shall be derived subject to the provisions of this
section and state statutes.
   (B)   Storm water drainage fees. Storm water drainage fees for parcels of
land shall be determined by multiplying the REF for a parcel’s land use by the
fee established by the city.
      (1)   All parcels containing single-family residential dwellings shall
have an REF value of “1” multiplied by the parcel’s acreage (in acres). All
parcels containing single-family residential dwellings shall have a minimum REF
value of “1”. (Example 1: a two-acre lot with a single-family dwelling would
have an REF = 2. Example 2: a one-half-acre lot with a single-family dwelling
would have an REF = 1.)
      (2)   All duplexes and townhomes shall have an REF value of one per unit.
      (3)   All mobile home parks, commercial and industrial parcels shall have
an REF value of three multiplied by the parcel’s acreage (in acres). All mobile
home parks, commercial and industrial parcels shall have a minimum REF value of
three.
      (4)   All parcels containing multi-family or condo residential dwellings
shall have an REF value of three multiplied by the parcel’s acreage (in acres).
All parcels containing multifamily or condo residential dwellings shall have a
minimum REF value of three.
   (C)   Fee exemptions. Public right-of-ways, public parks, city facilities,
urban reserve and agricultural land are exempt from storm water drainage fees.
   (D)   Recalculation of fees. Property owners may request recalculation of
the charge by written request to the City Council. Requests must be received
within 60 days of the billing.
   (E)   Violations. Any person violating any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction, be punished by the penalties applicable to a misdemeanor as
set forth by state statute and as later amended.
(Prior Code, § 34.06) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.07 GENERAL POLICY.
   (A)   Plan and approval.
      (1)   Every applicant for a building permit, subdivision approval or a
permit to allow land- disturbing activities must submit a storm water pollution
prevention plan to the City Engineer.
      (2)   No building permit, subdivision approval or permit to allow land-
disturbing activities shall be issued until the city approves this plan.
      (3)   At a minimum, these pollution abatement control practices must
conform to those in the current version of the State Pollution Control Agency’s
publication “Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas” and the State Pollution
Control Agency’s NPDES construction storm water permit.
   (B)   Rates and erosion.
      (1)   For all sites, storm water discharge rates must not increase over
the pre-development two-year, ten-year and 100-year peak storm discharge rates,
based on the last ten years of how that land was used. Calculations shall be
based on criteria established in the city’s Storm Water Management Plan.
      (2)   Also, accelerated channel erosion must not occur as a result of the
proposed activity.
      (3)   For wetlands, volume control is generally more important. The
wetland must not be deprived of water, nor flooded to the point where the
functional class of wetland would be changed.
      (4)   Volume control shall be accomplished by methods outlined in the
city’s Storm Water Management Plan or as otherwise approved by the City
Engineer.
      (5)   Low impact development (LID) practices shall be used whenever
possible and deemed practical by the City Engineer. Further LID practices are
outlined in the city’s Storm Water Management Plan.
(Prior Code, § 34.07)
§ 153.08 STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION AND GRADING PLAN.
   The Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan’s measures, the limit of disturbed
surface and the location of buffer areas shall be marked on the approved
grading plan and identified with flags, stakes, signs and the like on the
development site before work begins.
(Prior Code, § 34.08)
§ 153.09 INSPECTION OF MEASURES.
   At a minimum, inspections shall be done weekly and after every storm event
that is large enough to result in runoff from the site by the NPDES applicant
or designated representative. The city may also complete inspections, but the
inspections shall not take the place of the applicant’s required inspections.
(Prior Code, § 34.09)
§ 153.10 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   The following shall be minimum requirements:
   (A)   The name and address of the applicant and the location of the
activity;
   (B)   Project description; the nature and purpose of the land-disturbing
activity and the amount of grading, utilities and building construction
involved;
   (C)   Phasing of construction; time frames and schedules for the project’s
various aspects;
   (D)   A map of the existing site conditions; existing topography, property
information, steep slopes, existing drainage systems/patterns, type of soils,
waterways, wetlands, vegetative cover, 100-year flood plain boundaries,
locations of existing and future buffer strips and labeling the portions of the
site that are within trout stream or outstanding resource value water
watersheds;
   (E)   A site construction plan that includes the location of the proposed
land-disturbing activities, stockpile locations, erosion and sediment control
plan, construction schedule and the plan for the maintenance and inspections of
the storm water pollution prevention measures;
   (F)   Adjacent areas; neighboring streams, lakes, residential areas, roads
and the like, which might be affected by the land-disturbing activity;
   (G)   Designate the site’s areas that have the potential for serious erosion
problems;
   (H)   Erosion and sediment control measures; the methods that will be used
to control erosion and sedimentation on the site, both during and after the
construction process;
   (I)   Permanent stabilization; how the site will be stabilized after
construction is completed, including specifications, time frames or schedules;
and
   (J)   Calculations that were made for the design of the items as sediment
basins, wet detention basins, diversions, waterways, infiltration zones and
other applicable practices.
(Prior Code, § 34.10)
§ 153.11 PLAN CRITERIA.
   The plan shall address the following:
   (A)   Stabilizing all exposed soils and soil stockpiles and the related time
frame or schedule;
   (B)   Establishing permanent vegetation and the related time frame or
schedule;
   (C)   Preventing sediment damage to adjacent properties and other designated
areas such as streams, wetlands, lakes and unique vegetation (e.g., oak groves,
rare and endangered species habitats);
   (D)   Scheduling for erosion and sediment control practices;
   (E)   Where permanent and temporary sedimentation basins will be located;
   (F)   Engineering the construction and stabilization of steep slopes;
   (G)   Measures for controlling the quality and quantity of storm water
leaving a site;
   (H)   Stabilizing all waterways and outlets;
   (I)   Protecting storm sewers from the entrance of sediment;
   (J)   What precautions will be taken to contain sediment when working in or
crossing waterbodies;
   (K)   Re-stabilizing utility construction areas as soon as possible;
   (L)   Protecting paved roads from sediment and mud brought in from access
routes;
   (M)   Disposing of temporary erosion and sediment control measures;
   (N)   How the temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control practices
will be maintained; and
   (O)   How collected sediment and floating debris will be disposed of.
(Prior Code, § 34.11)
§ 153.12 CONTROL MEASURES AND RELATED INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   These minimum control measures are required where bare soil is
exposed. Due to the diversity of individual construction sites, each site will
be individually evaluated. Where additional control measures are needed, they
will be specified at the discretion of the City Engineer. The city will
determine what action is necessary to prevent excessive erosion from occurring
on the site.
   (B)   All grading plans and building site surveys must be reviewed by the
city for effectiveness of erosion control measures in the context of the site
topography and drainage.
   (C)   (1)   Sediment control measures must be properly installed by the
builder before construction activity begins. The structures may be adjusted
during dry weather to accommodate short-term activities, such as those that
require the passage of very large vehicles.
      (2)   As soon as this activity is finished or before rainfall, the
erosion and sediment control structures must be returned to the configuration
specified by the city.
      (3)   A sediment control inspection must then be scheduled, and passed
before a footing inspection will be done.
   (D)   Diversion of channeled runoff around disturbed areas, if practical, or
the protection of the channel.
   (E)   If a storm water management plan involves directing some or all of the
site’s runoff, the applicant or his or her designated representative shall
obtain from adjacent property owners any necessary easements or other property
interests concerning the flowing of the water.
   (F)   The scheduling of the site’s activities to lessen their impact on
erosion and sediment creation, so as to minimize the amount of exposed soil.
   (G)   Control runoff by one of the following:
      (1)   Unless precluded by moderate or heavy snow cover, mulching can take
place if a light snow cover is present, stabilize all exposed inactive
disturbed soil areas within 100 feet of any water of the state or within 100
feet any conveyance, curb, gutter, storm sewer inlet, drainage ditch and the
like, to a water of the state with sod, seed or weed free mulch. This must be
done, if the developer will not work the area for seven days;
      (2)   For disturbed areas greater than one acre, prepare a storm water
pollution prevention plan. If more than one acre of new impervious surface is
being added, permanent storm water management such as an on-site sedimentation
basin, an infiltration/filtration basin, or a regional sedimentation basin is
required. Sedimentation basins must be constructed in accordance with accepted
design specifications including access for operations and maintenance. The
“Minnesota Storm Water Manual” provides guidance on proper design of storm
water management practices. Basin discharge rates must also be controlled to
prevent erosion in the discharge channel. The applicant is required to obtain a
NPDES/SDS construction storm water permit from the state’s Pollution Control
Agency for any project that disturbs one acre or more of land; and/or
      (3)   For disturbed areas less than one acre with less than one acre of
new impervious surface, sedimentation basins are encouraged, but not required,
unless specifically required by the City Engineer. The applicant shall install
erosion and sediment controls at locations directed by the city. Minimum
requirements include silt fences, rock construction entrances, inlet
protection, rock check dams, erosion control blanket or other equivalent
control measures along slopes. Silt fences are required along channel edges to
reduce sediment reaching channel. Silt fences, rock check dams and the like
must be regularly inspected and maintained.
   (H)   (1)   Sediment basins related to impervious surface area. Where a
project’s ultimate development replaces surface vegetation with one or more
acres of new cumulative impervious surface, and all runoff has not been
accounted for in a local unit of government’s existing storm water management
plan or practice, the runoff must be discharged to a wet sedimentation basin or
infiltration/filtration basin prior to entering waters of the state.
      (2)   At a minimum the work must conform with the current version of the
State Pollution Control Agency’s publication, “Minnesota Storm Water Manual”
and “Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas”, and the current requirements
found in the same agency’s NPDES/SDS permits for storm water associated with
construction activities.
   (I)   Generally, sufficient silt fence will be required to hold all sheet
flow runoff generated at an individual site, until it can either infiltrate or
seep through silt fence’s pores.
   (J)   Temporary stockpiling of 50 or more cubic yards of excess soil on any
lot or other vacant area will not be allowed without issuance of a grading
permit for the earth moving activity in question.
   (K)   (1)   For soil stockpiles greater than ten cubic yards the toe of the
pile must be more than 25 feet from a road, drainage channel or storm water
inlet. If stockpiles will be left for more than seven days, they must be
stabilized with mulch, vegetation, tarps or other means.
      (2)   If left for less than seven days, erosion from stockpiles must be
controlled with silt fences or rock check dams.
      (3)   If for any reason a soil stockpile of any size is located closer
than 25 feet from a road, drainage channel or storm water inlet, and will be
left for more than seven days, it must be covered with tarps or controlled in
some other manner.
   (L)   All sand, gravel or other mining operations taking place on the
development site shall have a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
general storm water permit for industrial activities and all required State
Department of Natural Resources permits.
   (M)   Temporary rock construction entrances may be required wherever
vehicles enter and exit a site.
   (N)   Parking is prohibited on all bare lots and all temporary construction
entrances, except where street parking is not available. Gravel entrances are
to be used for deliveries only as per the development contract.
   (O)   Streets must be cleaned and swept whenever tracking of sediments
occurs and before sites are left idle for weekends and holidays. Establishment
of a regular sweeping schedule is encouraged.
   (P)   Water, impacted by the construction activity, removed from the site by
pumping must be treated by temporary sedimentation basins, geotextile filters,
grit chambers, sand filters, up-flow chambers, hydro-cyclones, swirl
concentrators or other appropriate controls. The water shall not be discharged
in a manner that causes erosion or flooding of the site, receiving channels,
adjacent property or a wetland.
   (Q)   All storm drain inlets must be protected during construction until
control measures are in place with inlet protection devices as required in the
“City of Montrose Development Standards” and as approved by the City Engineer.
   (R)   All newly constructed and reconstructed buildings must route roof
drain leaders to pervious areas, not natural wetlands, where the runoff can
infiltrate. The discharge rate shall be controlled so that no erosion occurs in
the pervious areas.
   (S)   (1)   Follow-up inspections may be performed by the city on a regular
basis to ensure that erosion and sediment control measures are properly
installed and maintained. In all cases, the inspectors will attempt to work
with the developer and/or builder to maintain proper erosion and sediment
control at all sites.
      (2)   In cases where cooperation is withheld, construction stop orders
may be issued by the city, until erosion and sediment control measures meet
specifications. A second erosion and sediment control/grading inspection must
then be scheduled and passed before the next building inspection will be
completed.
   (T)   Removal of more than one acre of topsoil shall not be done, unless
written permission is given by the City Engineer. Excessive removal of topsoil
can cause significant soil erosion problems.
   (U)   All storm water pollution prevention management facilities must be
designed to minimize the need of maintenance, to provide easy vehicle and
personnel access for maintenance purposes and be structurally sound. These
facilities must have a plan of operation and maintenance that ensures continued
effective removal of the pollutants carried in storm water runoff. It shall be
the responsibility of the applicant to obtain any necessary easements or other
property interests to allow access to the storm water management facilities for
inspection and maintenance purpose.
(Prior Code, § 34.12)
§ 153.13 POLLUTION CONTROLS.
   (A)   The applicant shall either install, construct or pay the city fees for
all storm water management facilities necessary to manage increased runoff, so
that the discharge rates from storm water treatment basins do not exceed the
pre-development two-year, ten-year and 100-year peak storm discharge rates.
These pre-development rates shall be based on the last ten years of how that
land was used. Accelerated channel erosion must not occur as a result of the
proposed land-disturbing or development activity. An applicant may also make an
in-kind or a monetary contribution to the development and maintenance of
community storm water management facilities designed to serve multiple land-
disturbing and development activities undertaken by one or more persons,
including the applicant. The city shall make the determination if the applicant
shall construct the necessary facility or pay a fee to utilize regional
facilities to meet these requirements.
   (B)   All calculations and information used in determining these peak storm
discharge rates shall be submitted along with the storm water pollution
prevention plan.
   (C)   The applicant shall consider reducing the need for storm water
management facilities by incorporating the use of natural topography and land
cover such as natural swales and depressions as they exist before development
to the degree that they can accommodate the additional flow of treated (e.g.,
settled) water without compromising the integrity or quality of the wetland or
pond. The sensitivity of a wetland to degradation varies with the type of
vegetation. Sedge meadows, open bogs and swamps, coniferous bogs, calcareous
fens, low prairies, lowland hardwood swamps and seasonally flooded basins are
highly sensitive to degradation. Floodplain forests, reed canary grass meadows,
shallow (reed canary grass, cattail, giant reed or purple loosestrife) marshes
are only slightly sensitive to degradation.
   (D)   The following storm water management practices must be investigated in
developing the storm water management part of the storm water pollution
prevention plan in the following descending order of preference:
      (1)   Protect and preserve as much natural or vegetated area on the site
as possible, minimizing impervious surfaces and directing runoff to vegetated
areas rather than to adjoining streets, storm sewers and ditches;
      (2)   Flow attenuation of treated storm water by use of open vegetated
swales and natural depressions;
      (3)   Storm water wet detention facilities, including percolation
facilities; and
      (4)   A combination of successive practices may be used to achieve the
applicable minimum control requirements specified in division (A) above. The
applicant shall provide justification for the method selected.
(Prior Code, § 34.13)
§ 153.14 WET DETENTION FACILITIES.
   (A)   At a minimum, these facilities must conform to the most current
technology as reflected in the current version of the State Pollution Control
Agency’s publication “Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas” and the current
requirements found in the same agency’s NPDES permits for storm water
associated with construction activities. All facilities must also meet
requirements in the city’s Storm Water Management Plan.
   (B)   Regional storm water ponds are required whenever possible. Detention
facilities and storm sewer facilities shall be designed to accommodate regional
ponds as outlined in the city’s Storm Water Management Plan.
(Prior Code, § 34.14)
§ 153.15 MINIMUM PROTECTION FOR NATURAL WETLANDS.
   (A)   Runoff must not be discharged directly into wetlands without
appropriate quality (i.e., treated) and quantity runoff control, depending on
the individual wetland’s vegetation sensitivity. The sensitivity of a wetland
to degradation varies with vegetation type. Sedge meadows, open bogs and
swamps, coniferous bogs, calcareous fens, low prairies, lowland hardwood swamps
and seasonally-flooded basins are highly sensitive to degradation, while
floodplain forests, reed canary grass meadows, shallow (reed canary grass,
cattail, giant reed or purple loosestrife) marshes are only slightly sensitive
to degradation).
   (B)   Wetlands must not be drained or filled, wholly or partially, unless
replaced by either restoring or creating wetland areas of at least equal public
value. Compensating for the impact by replacing or providing substitute wetland
resources or environments with those of at least equal public value.
Compensation, including the replacement ratio and quality of replacement should
be consistent with the requirements outlined in the rules adopted by the Board
of Water and Soil Resources to implement the Wetland Conservation Act of 1991,
being M.S. §§ 103A.201 et seq., including any and all amendments to it.
   (C)   Work in and around wetlands must be guided by the following principles
in descending order of priority:
      (1)   Avoid both the direct and indirect impact of the activity that may
destroy or diminish the wetland;
      (2)   Minimize the impact by limiting the degree or magnitude of the
wetland-related activity and its implementation;
      (3)   Rectify the impact by repairing, rehabilitating or restoring the
affected wetland environment with one of at least equal public value; and
      (4)   Reduce or eliminate the adverse impact over time by preservation
and maintenance operations during the life of the activity.
(Prior Code, § 34.15)
§ 153.16 VEGETATIVE BUFFER; RIVERS, STREAMS AND WETLANDS.
   (A)   At the minimum, a 30-foot wide protective buffer strip of, if possible
pre-development vegetation shall be left along each bank, providing a tree
canopy in the buffer zone closest to the channel. When new buffer vegetation is
planted, native vegetation is preferred, since some non-native plant species
can out-compete native species and create an undesirable mono-culture of
decreased environmental value. Useful references are the State Pollution
Control Agency’s publication, “Minnesota Storm Water Manual”.
      (1)   Detailed buffer design is usually site-specific. Therefore, the
City Engineer can require a larger buffer than the minimum.
      (2)   (a)   For newly constructed buffer sites, the design criteria
should follow common principles and the example of nearby natural areas. The
site should be examined for existing buffer zones and mimic the slope structure
and vegetation as much as possible. Buffer design and protection during
construction should do any or all of the following: slow water runoff, trap
sediment, enhance water infiltration, trap fertilizers, pesticides, pathogens,
heavy metals, trap blowing snow and soil and act as corridors for wildlife.
         (b)   How much stress is put on these functions will determine the
buffer zone’s final configuration. Native state plant species have root systems
and growth characteristics that are well-suited to buffer functions, root
systems and growth characteristics. By way of comparison, deep-rooted native
grasses have a root system that is about ten times greater that soy beans or
corn. Useful guides for starting the species selection includes the State
Department of Transportation’s “Seeding Manual”, and its “Plant Selection
Matrix” cd rom.
         (c)   Good plant species design stresses diversity and allows plant
succession and zoning of species from wet soil preference to drier upland
species. Useful guides for starting the plant selection include State
Department of Transportation’s “Seeding Manual” and its “Plant Selection
Matrix” cd rom.
         (d)   The state’s Department of Natural Resources requires permits
when vegetation is introduced downgrade of a water’s ordinary high water mark.
The State Department of Natural Resources’ Area Hydrologist defines the
ordinary high water mark. Planting permits are obtained from the State
Department of Natural Resources’ Regional Fisheries Office.
      (3)   The applicant and/or developer shall maintain the buffer strip for
the first year or until the buffer strip is well established whichever comes
later. After that the city, or a party designated by the city, shall maintain
the buffer strip. Even after a buffer strip is established, it will require
periodic inspection and possibly maintenance to ensure that it is functioning
properly. Otherwise, siltation and channeling may short-circuit the strip’s
function.
      (4)   Drain tiles will short-circuit the benefits of vegetated buffer
strips. Therefore, drain tiles on the development site should be identified and
rendered inoperable.
      (5)   Buffer strips shall be contained within an outlot owned by the
city.
      (6)   Buffer strips shall be marked as such with permanent signs.
   (B)   Watercourses used solely for drainage, such as roadside ditches, are
exempt from this provision.
(Prior Code, § 34.16)
§ 153.17 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Trout streams.
      (1)   For discharges directly to or to tributaries directly to state’s
Department of Natural Resources’ designated trout streams and State Pollution
Control Agency designated outstanding resource value waters there shall be no
increase in either the volume or rate of discharge from any design storm with a
statistical recurrence interval of less than ten years (i.e., for the two-year,
five-year and the like storm events), unless diversion is not practical and/or
the soil is not suitable for storm water infiltration techniques. This pertains
to discharges directly to or upstream of the waters.
      (2)   The intent is to encourage either storm water infiltration or
diversion, since urban trout streams are a unique resource and therefore
deserve special consideration.
      (3)   Residential development increases the total volume of runoff
resulting from a given storm. Since there is a larger volume of water to deal
with, limiting the rate of storm runoff to pre-development rates means that
high flows (and therefore scouring velocities) will persist for longer periods
of time than during pre-development conditions. This increases channel erosion.
      (4)   Infiltration or diversion deals with this increased scouting
problem by lessening the volume of runoff and therefore the duration of the
scouring velocities. In the case of trout streams, increasing the inputs of
warm storm water increases the impact of thermal shocks. Since trout are
temperature sensitive, increasing thermal shocks adversely impacts trout
habitat.
         (a)   The phrase, tributaries directly to, refers to tributaries
within at least one State Department of Natural Resources’ Division of Waters
minor watershed of the designated water. At its discretion, the city may extend
this area of protection.
         (b)   The phrase, soil not suitable for storm water infiltration
techniques, means soils with permeability values less that Group C soils (less
than two and one-half inches per hour), as defined by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture’s Natural Resources Conservation Service, and a seasonally high
groundwater table is not present within three feet of the bottom of the
infiltration facility. Infiltration basins should not be placed within a
wellhead protection area or within 50 feet of a well.
   (B)   Temporary sedimentation basins. During construction, temporary
sedimentation basins are required for disturbed areas over one acre.
   (C)   Treatment devices. Storm water treatment devices that remove oil and
floatable material (e.g., basin outlets with submerged entrances) must be part
of BMP systems.
   (D)   Pervious surfaces. Lightly-used vehicle traffic areas, such as
overflow parking lots, should use pervious surfaces where feasible.
   (E)   Channel modifications. If the proposed project site includes a
tributary that currently experiences erosion and/or sedimentation problems, the
applicant shall work with the city to include channel modifications in the
project that will also address the existing erosion and/or sedimentation
problem.
   (F)   Permanent vegetative cover. Permanent buildings erected on sites that
border directly on and all tributaries to a State Department of Natural
Resources’ designated trout stream and/or a State Pollution Control Agency
designated outstanding resource value water must not be occupied until the
permanent vegetative cover has been established. The cover must meet this
permit’s definition of final stabilization.
   (G)   Reduce impervious surface.
      (1)   The applicant shall consider methods for reducing the amount of
impervious surface on the site. A useful publication is “Better Site Design: A
Handbook for Changing Development Rules in Your Community”, available from the
Center for Watershed Protection in Ellicott City, Maryland.
      (2)   Suggestions include:
         (a)   Disking in compost or in some other manner increasing the
porosity of the soil that will become covered by lawn; (The movement of heavy
vehicles associated with construction activities compacts the soil, and thus
decreases its ability to absorb water. This is true even for some types of
sandy soils. The common grasses chosen for lawns do not have a deep enough root
system to overcome construction vehicle related soil compaction problems.)
         (b)   Reduced road widths;
         (c)   Reducing sidewalk widths;
         (d)   Allowing and providing for shared parking;
         (e)   Installing semi-permeable/permeable or porous paving;
         (f)   Vegetated swales instead of curb and gutter;
         (g)   Filter strips; and
         (h)   Green vegetated roofs.
(Prior Code, § 34.17)
§ 153.18 MODELS, METHODOLOGIES AND COMPUTATIONS.
   (A)   Hydrological models and design methodologies used for the determining
runoff characteristics and analyzing storm water management structures must be
approved by the City Engineer.
   (B)   Plans, specifications and computations for storm water management
facilities submitted for review must be sealed and signed by a registered
professional engineer.
   (C)   All computations must appear in the plans submitted for review, unless
otherwise approved by the City Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 34.18)
§ 153.19 REVIEW; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   The City Engineer shall review the storm water pollution prevention
plan.
   (B)   If the city determines that the storm water pollution prevention plan
meets the requirements of this chapter, the city shall issue a permit valid for
a specified period of time that authorizes the land- disturbance activity
contingent on the implementation and completion of this plan.
   (C)   If the city determines that the storm water pollution prevention plan
does not meet the requirements of this chapter, the city shall not issue a
permit for the land-disturbance activity.
   (D)   All land use and building permits for the site in question must be
suspended until the developer has an approved Storm Water Pollution Prevention
Plan.
   (E)   A permit shall not be issued until the storm water plan fee as set by
the City Council has been paid.
(Prior Code, § 34.19)
§ 153.20 MODIFICATION OF PLAN.
   An approved storm water pollution prevention plan may be modified on
submission of a written application for modification to the city, and after
written approval by the City Engineer. In reviewing an application, the City
Engineer may require additional reports and data.
(Prior Code, § 34.20)
§ 153.21 NOTIFICATION OF FAILURE OF PLAN.
   (A)   The city shall notify the developer, when the city is going to act on
the financial securities part of this chapter.
   (B)   The initial contact will be to a party or parties listed on the
application and/or the storm water pollution prevention plan. Forty-eight hours
after notification by the city, or 72 hours after the failure of erosion
control measures, whichever is less the city, at its discretion, may begin
corrective work. The notification should be in writing, but if it is verbal, a
written notification should follow as quickly as practical.
   (C)   If erosion breaches the perimeter of the site, the applicant shall
immediately develop a cleanup and restoration plan, obtain the right-of-entry
from the adjoining property owner and implement the cleanup and restoration
plan within 48 hours of obtaining the adjoining property owner’s permission. In
no case, unless written approval is received from the city, shall more than
seven calendar days go by without corrective action being taken. If, in the
discretion of the city, the applicant does not repair the damage caused by the
erosion, the city may do the remedial work required and charge the cost to the
applicant.
   (D)   (1)   If eroded soils, including tracked soils from construction
activities, enter or appear likely to enter streets, wetlands or other water
bodies, prevention strategies, cleanup and repair must be immediate.
      (2)   The applicant shall provide all traffic control and flagging
required to protect the traveling public during the cleanup operations.
   (E)   When an applicant fails to conform to any provision of this policy
within the time stipulated, the city may take the following actions:
      (1)   Withhold the scheduling of inspections and/or the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy;
      (2)   Revoke any permit issued by the city to the applicant for the site
in question or any other of the applicant’s sites within the city’s
jurisdiction;
      (3)   Direct the correction of the deficiency by city forces or by a
separate contract; (The issuance of a permit constitutes a right-of-entry for
the city or its contractor to enter upon the construction site for the purpose
of correcting deficiencies in erosion control.)
      (4)   All costs incurred by the city in correcting storm water pollution
control deficiencies must be reimbursed by the applicant; and/or
      (5)   If there is an insufficient financial amount, in the applicant’s
financial securities as described herein, to cover the costs incurred by the
city, then the city may assess the remaining amount against the property. As a
condition of the permit, the owner shall waive notice of any assessment hearing
to be conducted by the city, concur that the benefit to the property exceeds
the amount of the assessment, and waive all rights by virtue of M.S. § 429.081,
as it may be amended from time to time, to challenge the amount or validity of
assessment.
(Prior Code, § 34.21)
§ 153.22 WAIVER.
   (A)   In any case where, upon application of the responsible person or
persons, the city finds that, by reason of exceptional circumstances, strict
conformity with this chapter would be unreasonable, impractical or not feasible
under the circumstances, the city, in its discretion, may grant a waiver
therefrom upon the conditions as it may prescribe for prevention, control or
abatement of pollution in harmony with the general purposes of this chapter.
   (B)   The waiver request must be in writing.
   (C)   The waiver response must be in writing, and include the justification
for either granting or denying the requested variance.
   (D)   The waiver shall become void one year after being granted, unless
used.
   (E)   If any of the waiver’s conditions are violated, the city may revoke
the waiver.
(Prior Code, § 34.22)
§ 153.23 RIGHT OF ENTRY AND INSPECTION.
   The applicant shall allow the city and its authorized representatives, upon
presentation of credentials, to:
   (A)   Enter upon the permitted site for the purpose of obtaining
information, examination of records, conducting investigations, surveys or
investigations;
   (B)   Bring the equipment upon the permitted development as is necessary to
conduct the surveys and investigations;
   (C)   Examine and copy any books, papers, records or memoranda pertaining to
activities or records required to be kept under the terms and conditions of
this permitted site;
   (D)   Inspect the storm water pollution prevention measures required by the
city; and
   (E)   Sample and monitor any items or activities pertaining to permits
issued by the city.
(Prior Code, § 34.23)
CHAPTER 154: PHOSPHOROUS FERTILIZER
Section
   
154.01   Authority
   
154.02   Definitions
   
154.03   Phosphorous use restrictions
   
154.04   Impervious surfaces
§ 154.01 AUTHORITY.
   Based on the authority granted to local units of government in M.S. §
18C.60, subd. 2(b), as it may be amended from time to time, the city elects to
adopt the restrictions on the use of phosphorous fertilizer on turf as set
forth in M.S. § 18C.60, subd. 2(a), as it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 35.01)
§ 154.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   FERTILIZER. A substance containing one or more recognized plant nutrients
that is used for its plant nutrient content and designed for use or claimed to
have value for promoting plant growth. FERTILIZER does not include animal and
vegetable manures that are not manipulated, marl, lime, limestone and other
products exempted by rule by the state’s Commissioner of Agriculture.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. A highway, street, sidewalk, parking lot, driveway or
other material that prevents infiltration of water into the soil.
   MANIPULATED. Fertilizers that are manufactured, blended or mixed, or animal
or vegetable manures that have been treated in any manner, including mechanical
drying, grinding, pelleting and any other means or by adding other chemicals or
substances.
   TURF. Non-crop land planted in closely mowed, managed grasses including, but
not limited to, residential and commercial residential property, private golf
courses and property owned by federal, state or local unit of government,
including parks, recreation areas and public golf courses. TURF does not mean
pasture, hayland, hay, turf grown on turf farms or any other form of
agricultural production.
(Prior Code, § 35.02)
§ 154.03 PHOSPHOROUS USE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   A person may not apply a fertilizer containing the plant nutrient
phosphorous to turf located within the city limits unless:
      (1)   A tissue, soil, or other test by a laboratory or method approved by
the state’s Commissioner of the Agriculture and performed within the last three
years indicates that the levels of available phosphorous in the soil are
insufficient to support healthy turf growth; or
      (2)   The property owner or agent of the property owner is first
establishing turf via seed or sod procedures and only during the first growing
season.
   (B)   The application of fertilizer authorized under this section must not
exceed rates recommended by the University of Minnesota and approved by the
state’s Commissioner of Agriculture.
(Prior Code, § 35.03)
§ 154.04 IMPERVIOUS SURFACES.
   A person may not apply a fertilizer to an impervious surface. Fertilizer
released on an impervious surface must be immediately contained and either
legally applied to turf or any other legal site or returned to the original or
other appropriate container.
(Prior Code, § 35.04)
CHAPTER 155: MANUFACTURED HOMES AND HOME PARKS
Section
General Provisions
   
155.01   Purposes
   
155.02   Definition
   
155.03   Location of homes and home parks
   
155.04   Conditional use permit; application
   
155.05   Design standards
   
155.06   Annual inspection fees
   
155.07   Administration
Operation Requirements
   
155.20   General
   
155.21   Lot regulations
   
155.22   Lot display
   
155.23   Street system; maintenance, walkways and regulations
   
155.24   Fire and police protection
   
155.25   Storm protection
   
155.26   Refuse handling
   
155.27   Sewer and water
   
155.28   Insect and rodent control
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.01 PURPOSES.
   The purposes of this chapter are to promote health, safety, order,
convenience and general welfare by enforcing minimum standards for manufactured
home parks, the location and use of mobile homes and the design, construction,
alteration and arrangement of homes on the lots, authorizing the inspection of
manufactured home parks, the licensing of operators and fixing penalties for
violations.
(Prior Code, § 92.01)
§ 155.02 DEFINITION.
   A MANUFACTURED HOME is a structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body
feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet,
and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
systems contained in it, and which complies with the Manufactured Home Building
Code established by M.S. § 327.31, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to
time.
(Prior Code, § 92.02)
§ 155.03 LOCATION OF HOMES AND HOME PARKS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful within the city for any person to park any
manufactured home on any street, alley, highway, other public place or on any
tract of land owned by any person, occupied or unoccupied, except as provided
in this section.
   (B)   Emergency or temporary stopping or parking is permitted on any street,
alley or highway for not longer than three hours subject to any other and
further prohibitions, regulations or limitations imposed by the traffic and
parking regulations or ordinances for that street, alley or highway.
   (C)   (1)   Temporary special permits may be issued by the Council for use
of a trailer as an office or residence by persons directly connected with new
construction in the city; provided that, the person has obtained a building
permit for the construction and is proceeding with the work.
      (2)   The temporary special permits shall be limited to periods of not
more than ten days following completion of the project or for 12 months,
whichever is less.
   (D)   No person shall construct, locate, operate or maintain a manufactured
home or manufactured home park within the city without first obtain a
conditional use permit, and all other permits and licenses as shall be required
and described herein.
   (E)   No person shall construct, locate, operate or maintain a manufactured
home or manufactured home park in the city unless the proposed area is served
by a public, municipal sanitary sewer, municipal water and the property is
zoned for residential manufactured home park.
   (F)   No person shall park or occupy any manufactured home on either the
premises of any dwelling or on any lot which is situated outside an approved
manufactured home park unless the owner or person complies with applicable
provisions of the zoning regulations adopted by reference in §
156.02 of this code of ordinances, including housing performance standards.
   (G)   Manufactured homes within an approved manufactured home park shall not
be required to comply with housing performance standards, but shall be subject
to the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 92.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.04 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT; APPLICATION.
   Required conditional use permits may be applied for pursuant to the terns of
applicable city ordinances and shall be issued if all requirements in the
ordinances are met and all fees established by applicable city ordinances have
been paid.
(Prior Code, § 92.04)
§ 155.05 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   All manufactured home parks shall conform to the standards, and
requirements of M.S. §§ 327.14 through 327.29, as they may be amended from time
to time, and State Board of Health regulations governing manufactured home
parks and recreational camping areas, all of the provisions being incorporated
herein by reference, being made a part of this chapter as if set out in full.
   (B)   All lots in the manufactured park are subject to the following
regulations.
      (1)   Every manufactured home lot shall have a base of at least four
inches of compacted gravel or aggregate on the site where the home is to be
parked, in addition to whatever foundation structures are necessary to secure
the manufactured home anchors and tiedowns.
      (2)   Every manufactured here park staff have a warning device for
providing tornado or serious wind storm warning to its residents. This
requirement may be waived if the device is located outside the park, but is
found to be servicing the park area.
   (C)   Each manufactured home park shall have one or more service buildings
to provide space for the park office, sanitation facilities and recreational
space.
      (1)   Every manufactured home park shall have a central office manager or
caretaker of the park.
      (2)   Setbacks from internal streets for all service buildings shall
conform to city and state residential setback requirements.
      (3)   A minimum of 500 square feet per open space shall be provided for
definable play areas and open space within the manufactured home park. The
areas of open space and play area shall not be areas included within any
setback, nor shall they include any areas of less than 20 feet in length or
width.
   (D)   (1)   All manufactured home parks and the lots thereof shall be
connected to the municipal water system.
      (2)   All manufactured home parks shall have a sanitary sewer system
connection to either a public municipal sewer system, or an appropriate public
regional sewer system. The design and specifications of the sewer system shall
meet the approval of the City Engineer and the State Department of Health.
      (3)   All sewer and water system lines shall be underground.
   (E)   (1)   All utility lines for electricity, telephone and television
cable must be underground. There shall be no overhead wires or supporting
poles, except poles for street lights or other lighting purposes.
      (2)   All fuel supply and storage systems shall be and maintained in
accordance with applicable state codes and regulations governing the systems.
      (3)   The manufactured home park shall provide overhead lights to
adequately illuminate the streets and thoroughfare sidewalks of the park and
all service building parking areas and entrances. The lighting will be shielded
to prevent any light to be directed at traffic, nearby manufactured homes or
neighboring residential property in the brilliance as to constitute a danger or
a nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 92.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.06 ANNUAL INSPECTION FEES.
   (A)   (1)   All manufactured home parks shall be inspected annually by the
city’s Building Inspector to ascertain that all provisions of this chapter, all
other applicable city ordinances, and the provisions of any conditional use
permit are being observed.
      (2)   All manufactured home parks shall be inspected annually by the
city’s Building Inspector to ascertain that no fire hazards are present, to
ascertain that fire hydrants and fire extinguishing equipment are in working
order and to ascertain that all provisions of this chapter and other applicable
codes and ordinances pertaining to fire protection and prevention are being
observed.
      (3)   All manufactured home parks shall have the water system inspected
annually by a designated city inspector to ensure that all hydrants and other
water facilities are in proper working order.
   (B)   City inspectors may make more frequent inspections as they may deem
necessary.
(Prior Code, § 92.06)
§ 155.07 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided herein, this chapter shall be
altered and enforced by the Building Inspector, who is hereby designated as
enforcing officer.
      (2)   The Building Inspector may institute in the name of the city any
appropriate actions or proceedings against a violator as provided by law.
   (B)   The park management shall notify park occupants of all provisions of
this chapter and inform them of their duties and responsibilities under this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 92.08)
OPERATION REQUIREMENTS
§ 155.20 GENERAL.
   (A)   Every manufactured home park shall have an adult manager or caretaker
on duty in or about the park at all times, 24 hours per day, to keep the park,
its facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition and to
be available in case of emergencies. The manager or caretaker shall be
answerable with the owner for the violations of any provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Each manufactured home park shall maintain a central office for the
use of the owner or manager, distinctly marked “OFFICE”.
   (C)   A map of the park, with all lots clearly numbered, shall be displayed
at the park office. The lots themselves shall also be numbered in a manner
visible from the frontage street. The park shall be open at reasonable times to
the visiting public and a directory shall be readily available to visitors.
   (D)   The park grounds shall be lighted as approved by the city at all hours
of darkness.
   (E)   No public address or loud speaker systems shall be permitted.
   (F)   Each park shall adopt a set of rules and regulations for orderly
operation of the park in conformance with this chapter. These rules shall be
made available to the residents of the park.
   (G)   No domestic animals or house pets of park occupants shall allowed to
run at large or commit any nuisances within the limits of the park.
   (H)   No exterior clothes drying shall be permitted upon any lot or any
other area of the park, except in areas specifically provided, and in those
areas where resident individual home owners regularly dried their clothes prior
to 7-1-1985.
   (I)   The use of any lot or other area within the park or tent sites, camper
trailers, pickup campers or other transient occupancy use is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 92.07) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.21 LOT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No more than one unit shall be parked upon any lot.
   (B)   No home may be inhabited by a greater number of occupants than that
for which it was designed.
   (C)   (1)   The base of all manufactured hones shall be enclosed with
skirting, the skirting to be installed within 30 days from the date of
installation of the unit.
      (2)   The enclosure must be accessible for inspection and no obstruction
shall be permitted that impedes the inspection of the manufactured house,
plumbing, electrical facilities and related equipment.
      (3)   No storage shall be permitted beneath the manufactured home.
   (D)   (1)   All lots shall be used for residential purposes only.
      (2)   No commercial activity or signage will be permitted unless
otherwise permitted by zoning ordinances other than this section.
(Prior Code, § 92.07) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.22 LOT DISPLAY.
   (A)   No homeowner or prospective homeowner shall be required to purchase a
home from the owner or operator of the park in which the owner desires to
locate or from someone designated by the owner of the park.
   (B)   This provision, however, shall not prevent the owner of the park from
establishing certain minimal standards and conditions of quality and design as
to homes permitted in a park owned by him or her.
(Prior Code, § 92.07) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.23 STREET SYSTEM; MAINTENANCE, WALKWAYS AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All manufactured have parks shall be provided with safe and convenient
vehicular access from abutting public streets or roads to each manufactured
home lot. The access shall be provided by streets, driveways or other means.
   (B)   Entrances to manufactured home parks shall be designed to minimize
congestion and hazards and allow free movement of traffic on adjacent streets.
No parking shall be permitted on the park entrance street for a distance of 100
feet from its point of beginning.
   (C)   The park operator shall remove snow from all streets, guest parking
areas and public sidewalk areas within the park after each snowfall and these
areas shall be kept sanded and/or free of ice and snow.
   (D)   All streets within the park shall be kept clean and free of litter.
   (E)   Dead-end streets shall be limited in length to 500 feet and shall be
provided at the closed end with a cul-de-sac having an outside roadway dieter
of at least 80 feet or a T-shaped alternative design. All dead-end streets
shall be marked with approved signs at the entrance to the dead-end street.
   (F)   A speed limit of ten mph shall be maintained within the park limits
and signs shall be posted accordingly. The operator may use raised bumps or
ridges across the road surfaces to assure compliance with the posted limits.
   (G)   All parks shall be provided with safe, convenient, all season
pedestrian access of adequate width for intended use, durable and convenient to
maintain, between individual manufactured homes, the park streets and all
community facilities provided for park residents. Sudden changes in alignment
and gradient shall be avoided.
   (H)   A common walk system shall be provided and maintained between
locations where pedestrian traffic is concentrated. The common walks shall have
a minimum width of two and one-half feet.
   (I)   All manufactured homes shall be connected to common walks, to paved
streets or to paved driveways or parking spaces connecting to a paved street.
The individual walks shall have a minimum width of two feet.
   (J)   A minimum of one tree per, lot is required. In open area and park
area, a minimum of 20 trees per acre is required.
   (K)   No more than two automobiles may be parked on any home lot.
(Prior Code, § 92.07) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.24 FIRE AND POLICE PROTECTION.
   (A)   Every home occupied in the park shall be equipped with a fire
extinguisher in usable condition. The occupant of the home shall be responsible
for providing the extinguisher for his or her home.
   (B)   Portable fire extinguishers rated for Classes B and C fires, with a
capacity of ten pounds’ dry powder, shall be kept visible in service buildings
and at other locations as approved or required by the Fire Chief, for
convenient access by all of the occupants of the park. The fire extinguishers
shall be maintained in good operating condition.
   (C)   No fire shall be kindled or maintained, except in a stove, fireplace,
barbecue pit, incinerator or other equipment intended for that purpose. No fire
shall be left unattended. No fuel shall be used and no material burned which
emits, dense smoke or objectionable odors, open burning is prohibited.
   (D)   Storage of flammable liquids or materials or gases within or under the
home is forbidden.
   (E)   All areas of the park sere kept free glitter, rubbish and other
flammable material.
   (F)   The park shall be open to fire, police and other emergency vehicles
and personnel at all times, and the law enforcement officers and the Fire
Department shall be provided with a current directory showing the lot numbers
and addresses.
(Prior Code, § 92.07) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.25 STORM PROTECTION.
   (A)   The storm warning device required for the park shall be kept in good
operating condition and tested once a month at a designated time in a manner
approved by the city.
   (B)   The park manager shall be responsible for obtaining weather warning
information from the appropriate media, and for alerting residents to the
hazards of a storm via the warning device when any storm with damaging winds is
eminent.
(Prior Code, § 92.07) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.26 REFUSE HANDLING.
   (A)   The park shall provide for the collection disposal of all refuse and
garbage generated within the park. The park may contract with private garbage
haulers or provide the service itself.
   (B)   All refuse handling must adhere to the following standards.
      (1)   The storage, collection and disposal or use in the park shall be so
conducted so as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding,
accident or fire hazards or air pollution.
      (2)   Garbage and refuse shall be collected and disposed of as frequently
as may be necessary to insure that garbage receptacles shall not overflow.
(Prior Code, § 92.07) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.27 SEWER AND WATER.
   (A)   All sewer and water systems within the park shall be kept in good
operating condition in conformance with regulations of the state’s Department
of Health and the city. Any maintenance of water and sewer systems within the
park shall be at the owner’s expense, but shall be under the supervision of an
official designated by the city, who shall have authority to initiate necessary
repairs.
   (B)   If the city deems it necessary, auxiliary pumps to boost water
pressure shall be installed at the expense of the park owner to maintain needed
pressure for fire protection.
   (C)   For sewer service and water service, when available, the city will
charge the service rates as established by City Council resolution.
(Prior Code, § 92.07) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.28 INSECT AND RODENT CONTROL.
   (A)   Where the potential for insect and rodent infestation exists, all
exterior openings in or beneath any structure shall be appropriately screened
with wire mesh or other suitable materials.
   (B)   The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled to prevent
harborage of ticks, chiggers and other noxious insects. Parks shall be so
maintained as to prevent the growth of ragweed, poison ivy, poison oak, poison
sumac and other noxious weeks considered detrimental to health.
   (C)   Open areas shall be maintained free of wild undergrowth of any
description.
(Prior Code, § 92.07) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 156: SUBDIVISIONS AND ZONING
Section
   
156.01   Subdivision regulations adopted by reference
   
156.02   Zoning regulations adopted by reference
§ 156.01 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The city’s subdivision regulations, and any and all amendments thereto, are
hereby adopted by reference and incorporated fully as if set out herein.
(Prior Code, § 93.02)
§ 156.02 ZONING REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The city’s zoning regulations, and any and all amendments thereto, are
hereby adopted by reference and incorporated fully as if set out herein.
(Prior Code, § 93.01)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ANNEXATIONS AND DETACHMENTS
      
II.   FRANCHISES AND AGREEMENTS
      
III.   MORATORIUMS
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS AND DETACHMENTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
-        - -         Detaching certain property
-        - -         Detaching certain property
-        - -         Detaching certain property
-        - -         Detaching certain property
-        - -         Detaching certain property
601      7-12-1960   Annexing certain property
2000-02  6-26-2000   Annexing certain property
2001-01  3-12-2001   Annexing certain property
2001-02  6-11-2001   Annexing certain property
2001-03  6-26-2001   Annexing certain property
2001-05  12-10-2001  Annexing certain property
2002-02  4-4-2002    Annexing certain property
2002-04  6-10-2002   Annexing certain property
                    
 
TABLE II: FRANCHISES AND AGREEMENTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
1984-4   7-9-1984    Granting a cable television franchise to Rolling
                     Rebuilding, Inc.
1024     1-13-1992   Granting a gas distribution franchise to Western Gas
                     Utilities, Inc.
1023     4-13-1992   Granting an electric distribution franchise to Northern
                     States Power Company
94-01    7-11-1994   Amendment; granting a cable television franchise to
                     Minnesota Cable Properties, Inc.
98-01    8-18-1998   Amendment; granting a cable television franchise to
                     Minnesota Cable Properties, Inc.
2005-02  8-22-2005   Granting a cable television franchise to Lakedale
                     Telephone Company
2012-04  9-10-2012   Granting an electric franchise to Northern States Power
                     Company
2016-08  8-8-2016    Granting a gas franchise to Northern States Power Company
                    
 
TABLE III: MORATORIUMS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
2022-07  8-8-2022    Imposing a moratorium on the sale of cannabis products;
                     authorizing study
2023-06  7-31-2023   Imposing a moratorium on the operation of cannabis
                     businesses within the city; authorizing study
                    
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Minnesota Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES
M.S. Cite Code Section
M.S. Cite                    Code Section
13                           30.17
13D                          30.16
16D                          151.34
18C.60, subd. 2(a)           154.01
18C.60, subd. 2(b)           154.01
35.67                        91.08
35.68                        91.08
35.69                        91.08
84.81—84.928               73.01
84.92, subd. 8               73.02
88.16 to 88.22               95.06
103A.201 et seq.             51.01
103G.005(14)                 153.04
103G.291                     50.06;
                             52.13
115.01(22)                   153.04
115A.03                      51.01
116.07                       90.25
128A                         110.01
144.411—144.417            130.05
144.50 to 144.69             117.02
147                          117.04
147A—F                     117.04
148                          117.04
150A                         117.04
151.72                       116.01;
                             116.06
151.72, subd. 1(e)           116.02
152.02, Schedules I—V      90.41
157                          110.01
161.242                      90.16
168                          71.07
168B                         34.02;
                             90.15
168B.035                     90.18
168B.09, subd. 2             90.15
168.10                       90.16
168B.11                      90.17
169                          70.03;
                             70.99
169.011                      70.01;
                             90.16
169.011, subd. 42, 44 and 52 72.09
169.34                       72.09
169.69                       90.03;
                             90.04
169.693                      90.03;
                             90.04
171                          71.08
176.182                      34.04
204B.06                      34.01
216B.02                      151.04
216B.02, subd. 4 and 6       151.04
216B.097                     50.08
216B.098                     50.07
216B.098, subd. 3            50.07
216D                         151.25
216D.01—216D.09            151.08;
                             151.34
216D.04, subd. 3             151.04
237.16                       151.01
237.79                       151.01
237.81                       151.01
                             151.01;
237.162                      151.04;
                             151.36
237.162, subd. 4             151.04
                             151.01;
237.163                      151.04;
                             151.36
237.163, subd. 2(b)          151.02
237.163, subd. 6             151.41
238                          151.04
238.086                      151.01
300.06                       151.26
308A                         151.04
325F.73                      112.22
327.31, subd. 3              155.02
327.14—327.29              155.05
329                          110.02
340A                         115.01;
                             115.55
340A.301                     115.26
340A.404                     115.56
340A.409                     115.03;
                             115.56
340A.414                     115.09;
                             115.43
340A.415                     34.05
342.01                       130.05
347.50—347.565             91.07
347.51                       91.07
347.515                      91.07
347.52                       91.07
347.52(a) and (c)            91.07
                             111.20;
349                          111.21;
                             111.31
349.12                       111.23
349.166, subd. 1             111.24
349.166, subd. 2             111.24
349.213                      111.21
                             111.25;
349.11—349.23              111.26;
                             111.99
364.03, subd. 2              117.10
364.03, subd. 3              117.10
366.011                      90.01
366.012                      90.01
412.581                      30.01
412.925                      90.63
415.01                       90.01
429                          90.01;
                             151.06
429.021                      52.01;
                             53.03
429.061                      92.10
429.081                      153.21
429.101                      10.37;
                             92.10
443.015                      51.10
444                          50.05;
                             153.02
                             50.06;
                             50.07;
444.075                      52.01;
                             53.03;
                             153.06
453                          151.04
453A                         151.04
462                          151.06
462.353                      34.03
462.357                      113.01
463.15—463.261             90.01;
                             150.02
463.17                       92.09
471.87                       30.16
471.87—471.89              30.16
471.88                       30.16
471.195                      90.03
471.895                      30.16
514.67                       10.37;
                             90.01
609.205(4)                   91.07
609.226, subd. d             91.07
609.685, subd. 1             130.05
609.75—609.763             111.25;
                             111.99
624.20                       95.21
626.862                      10.20
                             
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code 2025 Code
Prior Code 2025 Code
10.20      10.99
10.21      34.05
10.22      34.06
20.01      30.01
21.01      31.01
21.02      31.02
21.03      31.03
21.04      31.04
21.05      31.05
21.06      31.06
21.07      31.07
21.08      31.08
21.09      31.09
22.01      33.01
22.02      33.02
22.03      33.03
22.04      33.04
22.05      33.05
22.06      33.06
22.07      33.07
22.08      33.08
22.09      33.09
23.01      32.01
23.02      32.02
23.03      32.03
24.01      34.01
24.02      34.02
24.03      34.03
24.04      34.04
26.01      30.15
26.02      30.16
26.03      30.17
30.01      50.01
30.02      50.02
30.03      50.03
30.04      50.04
30.05      50.05
30.06      50.06
30.07      50.07
30.08      50.08
30.09      50.09
30.10      50.10
30.11      50.11
30.12      50.12
30.13      50.13
31.01      51.01
31.02      51.02
31.03      51.03
31.04      51.04
31.05      51.05
31.06      51.06
31.07      51.07
32.01      52.01
32.02      52.02
32.03      52.03
32.04      52.04
32.05      52.05
32.06      52.06
32.07      52.07
32.08      52.08
32.09      52.09
32.10      52.10
32.11      52.11
32.12      52.12
32.13      52.13;
           52.99
33.01      53.01
33.02      53.02
33.03      53.03
33.04      53.04
33.05      53.05
33.06      53.06
33.07      53.07
33.08      53.08
33.09      53.09
33.10      53.10
33.11      53.11
33.12      53.12
33.13      53.13
33.14      53.14
33.15      53.15
33.16      53.16
33.17      53.17
33.18      53.18
34.01      153.01
34.02      153.02
34.03      153.03
34.04      153.04
34.05      153.05
34.06      153.06
34.07      153.07
34.08      153.08
34.09      153.09
34.10      153.10
34.11      153.11
34.12      153.12
34.13      153.13
34.14      153.14
34.15      153.15
34.16      153.16
34.17      153.17
34.18      153.18
34.19      153.19
34.20      153.20
34.21      153.21
34.22      153.22
34.23      153.23
35.01      154.01
35.02      154.02
35.03      154.03
35.04      154.04
36.01      151.01
36.02      151.02
36.03      151.03
36.04      151.04
36.05      151.05
36.06      151.25
36.07      151.26
36.08      151.27
36.09      151.28
36.10      151.29
36.11      151.30
36.12      151.31
36.13      151.32
36.14      151.33
36.15      151.34
36.16      151.35
36.17      151.36
36.18      151.37
36.19      151.38
36.20      151.06;
           151.39
36.21      151.40
36.23      151.07
36.24      151.08
36.25      151.09
36.26      151.10
36.27      151.11
36.28      151.12
36.29      151.41
40.01      70.01
40.02      70.02
41.01      71.01
41.02      71.02
41.03      71.03
41.04      71.04
41.05      71.05
41.06      71.06
42.01      72.01
42.02      72.02
42.03      72.03
42.04      72.04
42.05      72.05
42.06      72.06
42.07      72.07
42.08      72.08
43.01      73.01;
           73.07
43.02      73.02
43.03      73.03
43.04      73.04
43.05      73.05
43.06      73.06
50.01      90.01
50.02      90.02
50.03      90.03
51.01      90.15
51.02      90.16
51.03      90.17
51.04      90.18
51.05      90.19
51.06      90.20
51.07      90.21
51.08      90.22
51.09      90.23
51.10      90.24
51.11      90.25
52.01      91.01
52.02      91.02
52.03      90.03
52.04      90.04
52.06      91.20
52.07      91.21
52.08      91.22
52.09      91.23
52.10      91.24
52.11      91.05
52.12      91.06
52.13      91.07
52.14      91.08
53.01      90.40
53.02      90.41
53.03      90.42
53.04      90.43
53.05      90.43
53.06      90.44
53.07      90.45
53.08      90.46
53.09      90.47
53.10      90.48
53.11      90.49
54.01      90.04
54.02      90.04
54.03      90.04
55.01      92.01
55.02      92.02
55.03      92.03
55.04      92.04
55.05      92.05
56.01      90.60
56.02      90.61
56.03      90.62
56.04      90.63
60.01      93.01
60.02      93.02
60.03      93.03
60.04      93.04
61.01      94.01
61.02      94.02
61.03      94.03
61.04      94.04
61.05      94.05
61.06      94.06
61.07      94.07
61.08      94.08
62.01      95.01
62.02      95.02
62.03      95.03
62.04      95.04
62.05      95.03
62.06      95.03
62.07      95.03
62.08      95.03
62.09      95.03
62.10      95.05
62.11      95.06
63.01      130.01
63.02      130.02
63.03      130.03
63.04      130.04
71.01      111.01;
           111.09
71.02      111.02
71.03      111.03
71.04      111.04
71.05      111.05
71.06      111.06
71.07      111.07
71.08      111.08
71.09      111.09
72.01      112.01
72.02      112.02
72.03      112.03
72.04      112.04
72.05      112.05
72.06      112.06
74.01      113.01
74.02      113.02
74.03      113.03
74.04      113.04
74.05      113.05
74.06      113.06
74.07      113.07
75.01      112.20
75.02      112.21
75.03      112.22
75.04      112.23
75.05      112.24
75.06      112.25
75.07      112.26
75.08      112.22
75.09      112.22
75.10      112.22
75.11      112.22
75.12      112.22
75.13      112.22
75.14      112.27
75.15      112.28
75.16      112.29
75.17      112.30
75.18      112.31
75.19      112.32
75.20      112.33
75.21      112.34
75.22      112.35
75.23      112.36
75.24      112.37
76.01      114.01
77.01      95.20
77.02      95.21
77.03      95.22
77.04      95.23
77.05      95.24
80.01      115.01
80.02      115.02
80.03      115.03
80.04      115.04
80.05      115.05
80.06      115.06
80.07      115.07
80.08      115.08
80.09      115.09
81.01      115.20
81.02      115.21
81.03      115.22
81.04      115.23
81.05      115.24
81.06      115.25
81.07      115.26
81.08      115.27
81.09      115.28
82.01      115.40
82.02      115.41
82.03      115.42
82.04      115.43
82.05      115.44
83.01      115.55
83.02      115.56
83.03      115.57
83.04      115.58
83.05      115.59
90.01      150.01
90.02      150.02
91.01      152.01
91.02      152.02
91.03      152.03
91.04      152.04
91.05      152.05
91.06      152.06
91.07      152.07
91.08      152.08
92.01      155.01
92.02      155.02
92.03      155.03
92.04      155.04
92.05      155.05
92.06      155.06
92.07      155.20—
           155.28
92.08      155.07
93.01      156.02
93.02      156.01
           
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
-        - -         TSO Table I
-        - -         TSO Table I
-        - -         TSO Table I
-        - -         TSO Table I
-        - -         TSO Table I
601      7-12-1960   TSO Table I
1984-4   7-9-1984    TSO Table II
1024     1-13-1992   TSO Table II
1023     4-13-1992   TSO Table II
94-01    7-11-1994   TSO Table II
98-01    8-18-1998   TSO Table II
2000-02  6-26-2000   TSO Table I
2001-01  3-12-2001   TSO Table I
2001-02  6-11-2001   TSO Table I
2001-03  6-26-2001   TSO Table I
2001-05  12-10-2001  TSO Table I
2002-02  4-4-2002    TSO Table I
2002-04  6-10-2002   TSO Table I
2005-02  8-22-2005   TSO Table II
2012-04  9-10-2012   TSO Table II
2013-03  5-13-2013   50.07
2013-04  5-13-2013   32.01;
                     32.02
2013-07  10-14-2013  52.10
2013-08  10-28-2013  115.02
2015-01  1-12-2015   50.06
2015-02  1-12-2015   31.01
2016-08  8-8-2016    TSO Table II
2016-09  8-8-2016    130.01
2017-04  6-12-2017   115.02
2018-02  2-12-2018   31.06
2018-03  2-12-2018   53.18
2018-14  10-8-2018   31.08
2019-04  4-29-2019   130.01
                     10.35—
2020-03  3-9-2020    10.39;
                     10.99;
                     34.06
2020-04  8-10-2020   110.01—
                     110.07
                     50.01;
2021-02  7-12-2021   51.08—
                     51.10
2021-05  10-11-2021  32.02
2022-02  2-14-2022   90.01
                     111.20—
2022-03  3-14-2022   111.31;
                     111.99
2022-05  8-8-2022    111.30
2022-07  8-8-2022    TSO Table III
                     70.03;
                     70.99;
2023-04  7-10-2023   71.06—
                     71.08;
                     72.05;
                     72.09
                     116.01—
2023-05  7-31-2023   116.09;
                     116.99
2023-06  7-31-2023   TSO Table III
2024-04  11-12-2024  130.05;
                     130.99
                     90.02;
                     90.17;
                     90.26;
                     91.24;
2025-    - -         91.06;
                     91.07;
                     92.03—
                     92.05;
                     90.60—
                     90.63
2025-02  4-14-2025   32.01
2025-03  9-8-2025    53.19
                     117.01—
2025-04  9-8-2025    117.12;
                     117.99
                    
 
