OSAKIS, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2026 S-12 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 144, passed 10-13-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter
   
10.   GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Rules of interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Official time
   
10.11   Reasonable time
   
10.12   Ordinances repealed
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
   
10.18   Copies of code
   
10.19   Adoption of statutes and rules by reference
   
10.20   Enforcement
   
10.98   Supplemental administrative penalties
   
10.99   General penalty
   
Appendix I: Resolution to adopt a schedule of offenses and voluntary
administrative penalties
   
Appendix II: Notice of code violation
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city, as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“city code,” for which designation “code of ordinances,” “codified ordinances”
or “code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter and section headings do not
constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to the
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “Traffic Code.” Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§
10.01.” Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of
state law.
   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances
of this city shall be by the following rules, unless that construction is
plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of
the same ordinance:
      (1)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” whenever the context requires.
      (2)   Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions or ordinance
requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as
the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the
act by an authorized agent or deputy.
      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
      (4)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CITY. The area within the corporate boundaries of the city as presently
established or as amended by ordinance, annexation or other legal actions at a
future time. The term CITY when used in this code may also be used to refer to
the City Council and its authorized representatives.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This city code as modified by
amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or sections.
      COUNTY. Douglas County and/or Todd County.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED. All terms shall mean a pledge
taken by the person and administered by an individual authorized by state law.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of this city unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Minnesota.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.10 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city
business.
§ 10.11 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
§ 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this
indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.17 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   (A)   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date
of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those
laws.
   (B)   This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties
incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code.
   (C)   The liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments,
penalties or forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not
been enacted. In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize
highway right-of-ways, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the
acceptance, establishment or vacation of any highway, and the election of
corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not
been enacted.
§ 10.18 COPIES OF CODE.
   The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City
Clerk/Treasurer for public inspection. The Clerk/Treasurer shall provide a copy
for sale for a reasonable charge.
§ 10.19 ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES BY REFERENCE.
   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this Minnesota
Basic Code, all future amendments to any state or federal rules and statutes
adopted by reference in this code or referenced in this code are hereby adopted
by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this
code was adopted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the code to the
contrary.
§ 10.20 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any licensed peace officer of the city’s Police Department, or the
County Sheriff, or any Deputy Sheriff shall have the authority to enforce any
provision of this code.
   (B)   As permitted by M.S. § 626.862, as it may be amended from time to
time, the City Clerk/Treasurer shall have the authority to administer and
enforce this code. In addition, under that statutory authority, certain
individuals designated within the code or by the Clerk/Treasurer or City
Council shall have the authority to administer and enforce the provisions
specified. All and any person or persons designated may issue a citation in
lieu of arrest or continued detention to enforce any provision of the code.
   (C)   The City Clerk/Treasurer and any city official or employee designated
by this code who has the responsibility to perform a duty under this code may
with the permission of a licensee of a business or owner of any property or
resident of a dwelling, or other person in control of any premises, inspect or
otherwise enter any property to enforce compliance with this code.
   (D)   If the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of a
premises objects to the inspection of or entrance to the property, the City
Clerk/Treasurer, peace officer or any employee or official charged with the
duty of enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon a showing that probable
cause exists for the issuance of a valid search warrant from a court of
competent jurisdiction, petition and obtain a search warrant before conducting
the inspection or otherwise entering the property. This warrant shall be only
to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the people are being complied with and to enforce these
provisions only, and no criminal charges shall be made as a result of the
warrant. No warrant shall be issued unless there be probable cause to issue the
warrant. Probable cause occurs if the search is reasonable. Probable cause does
not depend on specific knowledge of the condition of a particular property.
   (E)   Every licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of property
within the city shall permit at reasonable times inspections of or entrance to
the property by the City Clerk/Treasurer or any other authorized city officer
or employee only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the people are being complied with
and to enforce these provisions. Unreasonable refusal to permit the inspection
of or entrance to the property shall be grounds for termination of any and all
permits, licenses or city service to the property. Mailed notice shall be given
to the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of the property,
stating the grounds for the termination, and the licensee, owner, resident or
other person in control of the property shall be given an opportunity to appear
before the City Clerk/Treasurer to object to the termination before it occurs,
subject to appeal of the Clerk/Treasurer’s decision to the City Council at a
regularly scheduled or special meeting.
   (F)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of
the city to enter private property in urgent emergency situations where there
is an imminent danger in order to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
§ 10.98 SUPPLEMENTAL ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.
   (A)   In addition to those administrative penalties established in this code
and the enforcement powers granted in §
10.20, the City Council is authorized to create by resolution, adopted by a
majority of the members of the Council, supplemental administrative penalties.
The resolution may be in the form established in
Appendix I of this chapter.
   (B)   These administrative penalty procedures in this section are intended
to provide the public and the city with an informal, cost effective and
expeditious alternative to traditional criminal charges for violations of
certain provisions of this code. While criminal fines and penalties have been
the most frequent enforcement mechanism, there are certain negative
consequences for both the city and the accused. The delay inherent in the
criminal system does not ensure prompt resolution. Citizens resent being
labeled as criminals for violations of administrative regulations. The higher
burden of proof and the potential of incarceration do not appear appropriate
for most administrative violations. The criminal process does not always regard
city code violations as being important. Accordingly, the City Council finds
the use of administrative citations and the imposition of civil penalties is
legitimate and a necessary alternative method of enforcement. This method of
enforcement is in addition to any other legal remedy that may be pursued for
city code violations.
   (C)   Administrative penalties for violations of various provisions of the
code, other than those penalties established in the code or in statutes that
are adopted by reference, may be established from time to time by resolution of
a majority of the members of the City Council. In order to be effective, an
administrative penalty for a particular violation must be established before
the violation occurred.
   (D)   Alternative methods of enforcement. This administrative enforcement
procedure seeks to gain compliance with certain provisions of the city code and
serves as an alternate to any formal criminal or civil court action. The
administrative hearing process provided for in this section shall be in
addition to any other legal or equitable remedy available to the city for city
code violations, except that if a determination is made by the hearing officer
pursuant to the hearing process detailed in this section that a violation did
not occur, the city may not then proceed with criminal prosecution of the same
act or conduct.
   (E)   Authority to issue order to correct/compliance letters and
administrative citations. The following city employees and agents are
authorized to issue compliance letters and administrative citations for
violations of the city code.
      (1)   Licensed peace officers of the city Police Department;
      (2)   City Building Official;
      (3)   City Zoning Administrator;
      (4)   Public Works Director;
      (5)   City Clerk.
   (F)   Administrative offenses; schedule of fines and fees.
      (1)   Except as noted herein or otherwise ordered by the City Council, a
violation of any provision of the city code is an administrative offense which
may be subject to an administrative citation and civil penalties pursuant to
this section. Each day a violation exists constitutes a separate offense.
      (2)   An administrative offense may be subject to a civil penalty not
exceeding $1,000.
      (3)   The City Council shall adopt by resolution a schedule of
recommended civil fines for offenses initiated by administrative citation. The
City Council is not bound by that schedule when a matter is appealed for
administrative review.
      (4)   The City Council may adopt a schedule of fees to be paid to
administrative hearing officers.
   (G)   Order to correct/compliance letters; administrative citations. Upon
the reasonable belief that an administrative offense has occurred, the city
officials listed above may serve the violator an order to correct the violation
(otherwise known as a compliance letter). If compliance is not achieved within
the timeline prescribed in the order to correct letter, the official is
authorized to issue an administrative citation. An administrative citation
shall be presented in person or by first class mail to the person responsible
for the violation. Service shall be deemed complete upon depositing the
citation in the United States Mail, properly addressed to last known address of
the person to be served and postage prepaid. The citation shall state the
following: date, time, and nature of the offense, citing the relevant portion
of the city code that was allegedly violated, the amount of the scheduled civil
fine and the manner for paying the fine, a statement that the city code
violation and the amount of the administrative penalty may be contested to be
heard before an independent hearing officer by notifying the city clerk or
designated representative in writing within ten days of the date of the
citation, and a statement that failure to pay the administrative civil penalty
may result in it being assessed against the property as provided in M.S. Ch.
429. In no circumstances shall the city be required to follow the
administrative citation procedure.
   (H)   Exceptions to issuance of order to correct/compliance letter. For
violations of the following, the city shall not be required to issue a
compliance letter and may proceed directly to the issuance of an administrative
citation as provided in division (G) above.
      (1)   Repeat offender. If the same owner commits a subsequent violation
within 12 months after a compliance letter has been issued for the same or
similar offense.
      (2)   License violations. This constitutes any violation of a city code
license requirement, including not having a license.
   (I)   Reasonable extensions. Following service of the compliance letter, the
city shall attempt to work with the owner to resolve the violation, including
but not limited to responding to reasonable extensions for compliance.
   (J)   Payment of penalty and correction of violation. If the owner pays the
administrative civil penalty and corrects the city code violation, no further
action will be taken against the owner or the owner’s real property for that
same violation. If payment is made but correction is not accomplished, a
subsequent administrative citation may be issued, criminal proceedings may be
initiated, or any other proceedings or remedies available in order to enforce
correction of the violation. If no payment is made, no correction of the
violation is made, and no request for hearing is made in accordance herein, the
city may assess the administrative civil penalty against the property owner
pursuant to M.S. Ch. 429, issue a subsequent administrative citation and
commence a new administrative process, initiate criminal proceedings or
initiate other enforcement action authorized by law or a combination hereof.
   (K)   Request for hearing. An owner or occupant may contest the
administrative citation and the amount of the fine by requesting a hearing, in
writing, within ten days of the date of the citation, to the City Clerk or
designated representative.
   (L)   Administrative hearing procedure.
      (1)   Hearing officers. The City Council will periodically approve a list
of lawyers, from which the City Clerk will select a Hearing Officer to hear and
determine a matter for which the hearing is requested. The person who has
requested the hearing has the right to request, no later than 15 days before
the date of the hearing, that the assigned Hearing Officer be removed from the
case. One such request for each case will be granted by the City Clerk. A
subsequent request must be directed to the assigned Hearing Officer who will
decide whether the Hearing Officer can fairly and objectively review the case.
If such a finding is made, the Hearing Officer shall remove himself or herself
from the case, and the City Clerk shall assign another Hearing Officer. The
Hearing Officer is not a judicial officer, but is a public officer as defined
by M.S. § 609.415. The Hearing Officer shall not be a current employee of the
city, nor shall the Hearing Officer be a representative of the office of the
City Attorney.
      (2)   Notice of hearing. Notice of the hearing must be served in person
or by first class mail to the person responsible for the violation no less than
20 days in advance of the scheduled hearing, unless a shorter time is accepted
by both parties. Service shall be deemed complete upon depositing the notice of
hearing in the United States Mail, properly addressed to last known address of
the person to be served and postage prepaid.
      (3)   Payment for cost of hearing. The cost of the hearing shall be borne
solely by the non-prevailing party. The city shall provide an estimate of the
cost of the hearing at the time of the request for hearing. The City Council
has the authority to reduce the non-prevailing party’s costs where that party
can demonstrate indigence by clear and convincing evidence. Proof of indigence
can be demonstrated by the party’s receipt of means tested governmental
benefits or a demonstrated lack of assets or current income. Such proof shall
be presented to the City Council for determination subsequent to the hearing.
However, the Hearing Officer at the time of the hearing shall make specific
findings as to whether or not the party is indigent with said findings
presented to the City Council. In all cases, where the party requesting the
hearing is unable to attend and fails to request a continuance of the hearing
at least 48 hours in advance of the scheduled hearing, all costs incurred by
the city attributable to the hearing shall be charged to the requesting party.
      (4)   Hearing procedures. At the hearing, the parties shall have the
opportunity to present testimony and question any witnesses, but strict rules
of evidence shall not apply. The Hearing Officer shall record the hearing and
receive testimony and exhibits and the full record of the hearing shall be
kept. The Hearing Officer shall receive and give weight to evidence, including
hearsay evidence of the same probative value commonly accepted by reasonable
and prudent people in the conduct of their affairs.
      (5)   Authority of the hearing officer. The Hearing Officer shall
determine whether a violation did or did not occur. If the Hearing Officer
determines that a violation did not occur then the citation shall be dismissed.
If the Hearing Officer determines that a violation did occur, then the officer
may do any of the following: impose a fine anywhere within or up to, but not
exceeding, the maximum penalty for an administrative offense, stay or waive a
fine either unconditionally or upon compliance with the appropriate conditions.
When imposing a penalty for a violation, the Hearing Officer may consider any
or all of the following.
         (a)   The duration of the violation;
         (b)   The frequency of recurrence of the violation;
         (c)   The seriousness of the violation;
         (d)   The history of the violation;
         (e)   The violator’s conduct after issuance of the notice of hearing;
         (f)   The good faith effort of the violator to comply;
         (g)   The economic impact of the penalty on the violator;
         (h)   The impact of the violation upon the community; and
         (i)   Any other factors appropriate to just result.
      (6)   Fines for continuing violations. The Hearing Officer may exercise
discretion to impose a fine for more than one day of a continuing violation but
only on a finding that the violation caused a serious threat of harm to the
public health, safety or welfare, or the accused intentionally and unreasonably
refused to comply with the code requirement. The Hearing Officer’s decision and
supporting reasons for continuing violations must be in writing.
      (7)   Decision of the Hearing Officer. The Hearing Officer shall issue a
decision in writing to both parties within ten days of the hearing. Any fines
or penalties imposed must be paid no later than 30 days of the date of the
Hearing Officer’s order. If the fine is not paid, the city may assess the civil
penalty against the owner’s property pursuant to M.S. Ch. 429. If the Hearing
Officer determines that no violation occurred, the city may not proceed with
criminal prosecution for the same act or conduct. The decision of the Hearing
Officer is final and may only be appealed to the Minnesota Court of Appeals by
petitioning for a writ of certiorari pursuant to M.S. § 606.01.
   (M)   Payment of fines. Prior to any assessment for unpaid fines, the city
shall seek payment of the fines by notifying the owner of the property in
writing of the fine imposed.
   (N)   Assessment procedure. Unpaid fines, including any administrative
charges for such assessment as indicated in the city’s fee schedule, plus
interest of the total balance will be assessed pursuant to M.S. Ch. 429 against
the property of the owner charged with the violation. For uncorrected or
continued violations, the city may, after notification to the property owner,
correct the violation pursuant to M.S. § 429.101 and assess all charges
incurred for doing so against the property.
(Am. Ord. 135, passed 7-10-2023)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for
any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota Statutes
specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90 days
or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
   (C)   In either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs
of prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
   (D)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
   (E)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section or in §
10.98, if any person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of
this code, the Council or any city official designated by it, may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
APPENDIX I
RESOLUTION FOR ORDINANCE CHANGE #135 AMENDING THE PROVISIONS OF THE MINNESOTA
BASIC CODE 10.98
AND A SCHEDULE OF OFFENSES AND VOLUNTARY ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES
   WHEREAS, the City Council wishes to adopt the provisions of Minnesota Basic
Code §
10.98, establishing a procedure for requesting the voluntary payment of
administrative penalties for certain violations of the code; and
   WHEREAS, the provisions of Minnesota Basic Code §
10.98 authorize the City Council, by a resolution adopted by a majority of its
members, to identify administrative offenses and establish penalties for these
offenses;
   NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by the City Council as follows:
   The City Council hereby adopts the provisions of Minnesota Basic Code §
10.98 and adopts the following administrative penalties:
   Offense Code Section       Amount of Administrative Penalty
   90.19               $50 as set by the Council annually
   90.20               $50 as set by the Council annually
   90.21               $50 as set by the Council annually
   90.39               $50 as set by the Council annually
   93.20               $50 as set by the Council annually
   93.21               $50 as set by the Council annually
   93.22               $50 as set by the Council annually
   Zoning § 153            $50 as set by the Council annually
   Administrative penalty will be per day $50 to a max amount of $1,000.
   All Offenses for which an administrative penalty may be established under
this code, other than those specified below:
   None
   ADOPTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL THIS 10TH DAY OF JULY, 2023
Mayor:                                                          
Attest:                                                           
      City Clerk/Treasurer
(Am. Res. 2023-19, passed 7-10-2023)
APPENDIX II
NOTICE OF CODE VIOLATION
To: (Name and address of person who is alleged to have violated the code)
From: (Name and title of city official giving the notice)
Re: Alleged violation of Section of the City Code, relating to (give title of
section)
Date: (Date of notice)
   I hereby allege that on (date of violation) you violated §                 
of the City Code relating to                                            .
   The City Council has by resolution established an administrative penalty in
the amount of $         for this violation.
   Payment of this administrative penalty is voluntary, but if you do not pay
it the city may initiate criminal proceedings for this alleged violation.
   Payment is due within 14 days of the date of this notice. Before the due
date, you may request an additional 14-day extension of the time to pay the
administrative penalty.
   As an alternative to the payment of this administrative penalty, if the
situation that gave rise to this alleged violation is corrected by
                        (establish date), then the payment of the
administrative penalty will be waived.
   Even if the administrative penalty is paid, the city reserves the right to
institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or
abate the violation.
   Before the due date, you may request to appear before the City Council to
contest the request for payment of the penalty.
   After a hearing before the Council, the Council may determine to withdraw
the request for payment or to renew the request for payment. Because the
payment of the administrative penalty is voluntary, there shall be no appeal
from the decision of the Council.
   If you pay the administrative penalty, the city will not initiate criminal
proceedings for this alleged violation. However, the Council, or any city
official designated by it, may institute appropriate proceedings at law or at
equity to restrain, correct or abate the violation.
   Payment of the administrative penalty may be made by check, cash or money
order to the City Clerk/Treasurer.
Signed:                                                               
   (Name and Title of Person Giving Notice)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
   
30.   CITY COUNCIL
   
31.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
   
32.   FIRE DEPARTMENT
   
33.   OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
   
34.   PLANNING COMMISSION
   
35.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION
   
36.   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
   
37.   VOLUNTEER FIRST RESPONDER SERVICE
   
38.   PERSONNEL POLICY
   
39.   PARK AND RECREATION ADVISORY COMMISSION
CHAPTER 30: CITY COUNCIL
Section
   
30.01   Meetings
   
30.02   Presiding officer
   
30.03   Minutes
   
30.04   Order of business
   
30.05   Quorum and voting
   
30.06   Ordinances, motions and the like
   
30.07   Representatives
   
30.08   Suspension or amendment of rules
   
30.09   Salaries of Mayor and Council members
   
30.10   Petitions
   
30.11   Remarks
   
30.12   Non-members; attendance and speech
   
30.13   City Clerk/Treasurer
§ 30.01 MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings.
      (1)   Regular meetings of the Council shall be held on the second Monday
of each calendar month at 7:00 p.m. Any regular meeting falling upon a holiday
shall be held on the next business day at the same time and place.
      (2)   All meetings will normally be held at City Hall, including special
and adjourned meetings, unless otherwise posted.
   (B)   Special meetings.
      (1)   The Mayor or any 2 members of the Council may call a special
meeting of the Council upon at least 24-hours’ notice prior to the time
specified for the meeting. The Clerk/Treasurer shall mail a notice at least 24
hours before the meeting to all members indicating the time and place of the
meeting and its purpose.
      (2)   The Clerk/Treasurer shall prepare and file in his or her office an
affidavit showing mailing of the notices in the manner here prescribed.
      (3)   Notice shall also be posted on a bulletin board at the City Hall.
   (C)   Initial meeting. At the first regular Council meeting in January of
each year the Council shall:
      (1)   Designate the depositories of city funds;
      (2)   Designate the official newspaper;
      (3)   Choose one of the Council members as acting Mayor, who shall
perform the duties of the Mayor during the disability or absence of the Mayor
from the city or, in case of a vacancy in the office of Mayor, until a
successor has been appointed who qualifies; and
      (4)   Appoint officers and employees and members of boards, commissions
and committees as may be necessary.
   (D)   Public meetings. All Council meetings, including special and adjourned
meetings and meetings of Council committees, shall be open to the public,
except as otherwise permitted by law.
(1986 Code, § 201.01) (Am. Ord. 119, passed 12-3-2018)
§ 30.02 PRESIDING OFFICER.
   (A)   Who presides. The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Council.
In the absence of the Mayor, the acting Mayor shall preside. In the absence of
both, the Clerk/Treasurer shall call the meeting to order and shall preside
until the Council members present at the meeting choose one of their number to
act temporarily as presiding officer.
   (B)   Procedure.
      (1)   The presiding officer shall preserve order, enforce the rules of
procedure herein prescribed, and determine without debate, subject to the final
decision of the Council on appeal, all questions of procedure and order.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided by statute or by these rules, the
proceedings of the Council shall be conducted in accordance with Robert's Rules
of Order, Revised.
   (C)   Appeal procedure. Any member may appeal to the Council from a ruling
of the presiding officer. If the appeal is seconded, the member may speak once
solely on the question involved and the presiding officer may explain his or
her ruling, but no other Council member shall participate in the discussion.
The appeal shall be sustained if it is approved by a majority of the members
present exclusive of the presiding officer.
   (D)   Rights of presiding officer. The presiding officer may make motions,
second motions or speak on any question except that on demand of any Council
member he or she shall vacate the chair and designate a Council member to
preside temporarily.
(1986 Code, § 201.02)
§ 30.03 MINUTES.
   (A)   Who keeps.
      (1)   Minutes of each Council meeting shall be kept by the Clerk/
Treasurer or, in his or her absence, by the Deputy Clerk.
      (2)   In the absence of both, the presiding officer shall appoint a
Secretary.
      (3)   Ordinances, resolutions and claims need not be recorded in full in
the minutes if they appear in other permanent records of the Clerk/Treasurer
and can be accurately identified from the description given in the minutes.
   (B)   Approval.
      (1)   The minutes of each meeting shall be reduced to typewritten form,
shall be signed by the Clerk/Treasurer, and copies thereof shall be delivered
to each Council member as soon as practicable after the meeting.
      (2)   At the next regular Council meeting following the delivery,
approval of the minutes shall be considered by the Council. The minutes need
not be read aloud, but the presiding officer shall call for any additions or
corrections.
      (3)   If there is no objection to a proposed addition or correction, it
may be made without a vote of the Council. If there is an objection, the
Council shall vote upon the addition or correction. If there are no additions
or corrections, the minutes shall stand approved.
(1986 Code, § 201.03)
§ 30.04 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   Order established. Each meeting of the Council shall convene at the
time and place appointed therefor. Council business shall be conducted in the
following order:
      (1)   Call to order;
      (2)   Roll call;
      (3)   Approval of minutes;
      (4)   Public hearings;
      (5)   Petitions, requests and communications;
      (6)   Ordinances and resolutions;
      (7)   Reports of officers, boards and committees;
      (8)   Unfinished business;
      (9)   New business;
      (10)   Miscellaneous; and
      (11)   Adjournment.
   (B)   Varying order. The order of business may be varied by the presiding
officer; but all public hearings shall be held at the time specified in the
notice of hearing.
   (C)   Agenda.
      (1)   The Clerk/Treasurer shall prepare an agenda of business for each
regular Council meeting and file a copy in his or her office no later than 3
days before the meeting.
      (2)   The agenda shall be prepared in accordance with the order of
business and copies thereof shall be delivered to each Council member as far in
advance of the meeting as time for preparation will permit.
      (3)   No item of business shall be considered unless it appears on the
agenda for the meeting or is approved for addition to the agenda by a unanimous
vote of the Council members present.
(1986 Code, § 201.04)
§ 30.05 QUORUM AND VOTING.
   (A)   Quorum. At all Council meetings a majority of all the Council members
elected shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a
smaller number may adjourn from time to time.
   (B)   Voting.
      (1)   The votes of the members on any question may be taken in any manner
which signifies the intention of the individual members, and the votes of the
members on any action taken shall be recorded in the minutes.
      (2)   The vote of each member shall be recorded on each appropriation of
money, except for payments of judgments, claims and amounts fixed by statute.
If any member is present but does not vote, the minutes, as to his or her name,
shall be marked “present-not voting.”
   (C)   Votes required. A majority vote of all members of the Council shall be
necessary for approval of any ordinance unless a larger number is required by
statute. Except as otherwise provided by statute, a majority vote of a quorum
shall prevail in all other cases.
(1986 Code, § 201.05)
§ 30.06 ORDINANCES, MOTIONS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Readings.
      (1)   Every ordinance and resolution shall be presented in writing.
      (2)   Every ordinance shall receive 2 readings before the Council prior
to final adoption, but shall not be read twice at the same meeting unless the
rules are suspended for that purpose.
      (3)   An ordinance or resolution need not be read in full unless a member
of the Council requests a like reading.
   (B)   Signing and publication proof. Every ordinance and resolution passed
by the Council shall be signed by the Mayor, attested by the Clerk/Treasurer
and filed by him or her in the ordinance or resolution book. Proof of
publication of every ordinance shall be attached and filed with the ordinance.
   (C)   Repeals and amendments.
      (1)   Every ordinance or resolution repealing a previous ordinance or
resolution or a section or subdivision thereof shall give the number, if any,
and the title of the ordinance or code number of the ordinance or resolution to
be repealed in whole or in part.
      (2)   Each ordinance or resolution amending an existing ordinance or
resolution or part thereof shall set forth in full each amended section or
division as it will read with the amendment.
   (D)   Motions, petitions and communications.
      (1)   Every motion shall be stated in full before it is submitted to a
vote by the presiding officer and shall be recorded in the minutes.
      (2)   Every petition or other communication addressed to the Council
shall be in writing and shall be read in full upon presentation to the Council
unless the Council dispenses with the reading.
      (3)   Each petition or other communication shall be recorded in the
minutes by title and filed with the minutes in the office of the Clerk/
Treasurer.
(1986 Code, § 201.06)
§ 30.07 REPRESENTATIVES.
   (A)   Representatives designated. There shall be the following standing
representatives:
      (1)   Park and recreation;
      (2)   Street;
      (3)   Water and sewer;
      (4)   Liquor store;
      (5)   Office; and
      (6)   Police representatives shall be appointed by the Mayor at the first
regular Council meeting in January of each year.
   (B)   Referral and reports.
      (1)   Any matter brought before the Council for consideration may be
referred by the presiding officer to the appropriate representative or to a
special committee appointed by him or her for a written report and
recommendation before it is considered by the Council as a whole.
      (2)   Each committee report shall be signed by a majority of the members
and shall be filed with the Clerk/Treasurer prior to the Council meeting at
which it is to be submitted.
      (3)   Each committee shall act promptly and faithfully on any matter
referred to it.
(1986 Code, § 201.07)
§ 30.08 SUSPENSION OR AMENDMENT OF RULES.
   These rules may be suspended only by a 2/3 vote of the members present and
voting.
(1986 Code, § 201.08)
§ 30.09 SALARIES OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   The salary of the Mayor and Council members shall be set annually at the
first meeting of the calendar year by the Council.
(1986 Code, § 201.09)
§ 30.10 PETITIONS.
   Petitions and other papers addressed to the Council shall be read by the
Clerk/Treasurer upon presentation of the same to the Council.
(1986 Code, § 201.10)
§ 30.11 REMARKS.
   No member shall speak more than twice on any question nor more than 5
minutes each time without unanimous consent of the Council.
(1986 Code, § 201.11)
§ 30.12 NON-MEMBERS; ATTENDANCE AND SPEECH.
   No person, other than the Mayor and other members of the Council shall be
admitted within the bar of the Council, except officers. No person other than a
member shall address the Council except with the consent of the members present
or by a vote of the majority of the members present.
(1986 Code, § 201.12)
§ 30.13 CITY CLERK/TREASURER.
   There is hereby created the position of City Clerk/Treasurer. The City
Clerk/Treasurer shall act as Clerk and City Treasurer and provide an annual
city audit. The Clerk/Treasurer shall also perform all functions as directed by
the City Council or this chapter.
(1986 Code, § 201.13)
CHAPTER 31: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
31.01   Establishment
   
31.02   Chief of Police
   
31.03   Duties of police
   
31.04   Uniform and badge
   
31.05   Extra police
§ 31.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   A Police Department is hereby established in the City of Osakis.
   (B)   The head of the Department shall be known as the Chief of Police and
the number of additional members of the Department, together with their ranks
and title, shall be determined by the Council by resolution.
   (C)   The compensation to be paid members of the Police Department shall be
fixed by the Council.
   (D)   Members of the Department shall be appointed by the City Council.
(1986 Code, § 202.01)
§ 31.02 CHIEF OF POLICE.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall have supervision and control of the Police
Department and its members.
   (B)   He or she shall be responsible to the City Council for law enforcement
and for property of the city used by the Department.
   (C)   He or she shall be responsible for the proper training and discipline
of the members of the Department.
   (D)   He or she shall be responsible for the keeping of adequate records and
he or she shall report to the City Council on the needs of the Department and
its work.
   (E)   Every member of the Department subordinate to the Chief shall obey the
instructions of the Chief and any superior officer.
   (F)   The Council shall designate one of the police officers as acting
Chief, who shall have all the powers and duties of the Chief during his or her
absence or disability.
(1986 Code, § 202.02)
§ 31.03 DUTIES OF POLICE.
   (A)   Members of the Police Department shall enforce the ordinances and laws
applicable to the city, bring violators before the court, and make complaints
for offenses coming to their knowledge.
   (B)   Members of the Police Department shall serve processes on behalf of
the city and shall serve notices as may be required by the City Council or
other authority.
   (C)   When the city is not a party to the proceedings involved in the
process or notice, the officer shall collect the same fees as provided by law
for town constables.
   (D)   All these fees shall be paid into the city treasury.
(1986 Code, § 202.03)
§ 31.04 UNIFORM AND BADGE.
   (A)   Each member of the Department shall, while on duty, wear a suitable
badge and uniform, except that officers may from time to time be authorized to
perform specific duties while not in uniform.
   (B)   When a member terminates his or her membership in the Department, he
or she shall immediately deliver to the city his or her badge, and all other
property of the city in his or her possession.
(1986 Code, § 202.04)
§ 31.05 EXTRA POLICE.
   (A)   In case of riot or other law enforcement emergency, the Mayor may
appoint for a specific time as many special police officers as may be necessary
for the maintenance of law and order.
   (B)   During this term of appointment, the special police officers shall
have only those powers and perform only those duties as shall be specifically
assigned by the Chief of Police.
(1986 Code, § 202.05)
CHAPTER 32: FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
32.01   Established
   
32.02   Election of officers
   
32.03   Duties of Fire Marshal
   
32.04   Duties of Chief
   
32.05   Records
   
32.06   Practice drills
   
32.07   Assistant Chief
   
32.08   Firefighters
   
32.09   Loss of membership
   
32.10   Compensation
   
32.11   Minimum pay
   
32.12   Present members
   
32.13   Relief association
   
32.14   Interference with Department
   
32.15   Right-of-way
   
32.16   Following or parking near fire equipment
   
32.17   Driving over fire hose
§ 32.01 ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established in the city a Volunteer Fire Department
consisting of a Chief and 2 Assistant Chiefs and not more than 20 firefighters.
(1986 Code, § 203.01)
§ 32.02 ELECTION OF OFFICERS.
   (A)   The Chief and 2 Assistant Chiefs shall be elected annually by the
members of the Department subject to confirmation by the City Council.
   (B)   Each shall hold office for 1 year and until as successor has been duly
elected, except that he or she may be removed by the City Council for cause
after a public hearing.
   (C)   Firefighters and probationary firefighters shall be appointed by the
members of the Department, subject to confirmation by the City Council.
   (D)   Firefighters shall continue as members of the Department during good
behavior and may be removed by the City Council only for cause after a public
hearing.
(1986 Code, § 203.02)
§ 32.03 DUTIES OF FIRE MARSHAL.
   (A)   The Office of the Fire Marshal shall be held by the Chief.
   (B)   The Fire Marshal shall be charged with the enforcement of all
ordinances aimed at fire prevention.
   (C)   He or she shall have full authority to inspect all premises and to
cause the removal or abatement of all fire hazards.
(1986 Code, § 203.03)
§ 32.04 DUTIES OF CHIEF.
   (A)   The Chief shall have control of all the firefighting apparatus and
shall be solely responsible for its care and condition.
   (B)   He or she shall make a semi-annual report to the City Council at its
meeting in March and September, on the condition of the equipment and needs of
the Fire Department.
   (C)   He or she may submit additional reports and recommendations at any
meeting of the City Council, and he or she shall report each suspension by him
or her of a member of the Fire Department at the first meeting of the City
Council following the suspension.
   (D)   He or she shall be responsible for the proper training and discipline
of the members of the Fire Department, and may suspend any member for refusal
or neglect to obey orders pending final action by the City Council on his or
her discharge or retention.
(1986 Code, § 203.04)
§ 32.05 RECORDS.
   (A)   The Chief shall keep in convenient form a complete record of all
fires.
   (B)   This record shall include the time of the alarm, location of fire,
cause of fire (if known), type of building, name of owner and tenant, purpose
for which occupied, value of building and contents, members of the Department
responding to the alarm, and other information as he or she may deem advisable
or as may be required from time to time by the City Council or State Insurance
Department.
(1986 Code, § 203.05)
§ 32.06 PRACTICE DRILLS.
   The Chief shall, when the weather permits, hold a monthly practice drill of
at least 1-hour’s duration for the Fire Department and shall give or arrange
for instruction to the firefighters in approved methods of firefighting and
fire prevention.
(1986 Code, § 203.06)
§ 32.07 ASSISTANT CHIEF.
   In the absence or disability of the Chief, the First Assistant Chief shall
perform all the functions and exercise all of the authority of the Chief.
(1986 Code, § 203.07)
§ 32.08 FIREFIGHTERS.
   (A)   The Assistant Chief and firefighters shall be able-bodied and not less
than 21 years of age.
   (B)   They shall have a 6-month probationary period, but shall become
members of the Fire Department, effective the first day of service.
   (C)   The City Council may require that each candidate, before he or she may
become a probationary firefighter, must satisfy certain minimum requirements of
height, weight, education and any other qualifications which may be specified
by the City Council; and that he or she must pass satisfactorily a mental and
physical examination.
(1986 Code, § 203.08)
§ 32.09 LOSS OF MEMBERSHIP.
   Absence of any firefighter from 3 consecutive drills or calls unless excused
by the Chief shall be cause for removal from the Department.
(1986 Code, § 203.09)
§ 32.10 COMPENSATION.
   The members and officers of the Fire Department shall receive compensation
as set by City Council resolution from time to time.
(1986 Code, § 203.10)
§ 32.11 MINIMUM PAY.
   In computing compensation for fires 1 hour shall be considered as the
minimum to be paid to any firefighter or officer.
(1986 Code, § 203.11)
§ 32.12 PRESENT MEMBERS.
   No person who is a member of the Fire Department at the time of the adoption
of this chapter shall be required to serve a probationary period before
becoming a firefighter.
(1986 Code, § 203.12)
§ 32.13 RELIEF ASSOCIATION.
   The members and officers of the Fire Department may organize themselves into
a firefighters’ relief association in accordance with law.
(1986 Code, § 203.13)
§ 32.14 INTERFERENCE WITH DEPARTMENT.
   No person shall give or make, or cause to be given or made, a fire alarm
without probable cause, or neglect or refuse to obey any reasonable order of
the Chief at a fire, or interfere with the Fire Department in the discharge of
its duties.
(1986 Code, § 203.14)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 32.15 RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   All fire apparatus belonging to or operated by the Fire Department of the
city whenever attending a fire or an alarm of fire, shall have the exclusive
right of way on any and all of the streets and alleys of the city; all persons
driving vehicles of any kind upon the approach of any Fire Department vehicle
giving audible signals by bell, siren or by the use of flashing red or amber
lights shall immediately drive the same entirely off the center of the road to
a position as near as possible to the right-hand edge or curb of the highway,
clear of any intersection or highway, and stop in that position, unless
otherwise directed by a police or traffic officer, until the Fire Department
vehicles have passed.
(1986 Code, § 203.15)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 32.16 FOLLOWING OR PARKING NEAR FIRE EQUIPMENT.
   No person driving a vehicle of any kind on the streets of the city shall
follow any Fire Department vehicle or apparatus traveling in response to a fire
alarm, closer than 500 feet, or drive into or park a vehicle within the block
where the fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm unless permitted
to do so by a police or Fire Department officer.
(1986 Code, § 203.16)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 32.17 DRIVING OVER A FIRE HOSE.
   No person shall drive any wagon, cart or motor vehicle of any kind over any
hose belonging to the Fire Department of the city laid upon the streets of the
city at the occurrence of any fire in the city or any alarm of fire.
(1986 Code, § 203.17)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 33: OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
   
33.01   Sanitary Inspector
§ 33.01 SANITARY INSPECTOR.
   There is hereby created a Sanitary Inspector in and for the city. The Chief
of Police shall serve as Sanitary Inspector and shall make inspections as are
necessary or as may be required by the City Council, the Board of Health or the
ordinances of this city.
(1986 Code, § 204.01)
CHAPTER 34: PLANNING COMMISSION
Section
   
34.01   Establishment
   
34.02   Composition
   
34.03   Organization; meetings
   
34.04   Powers and duties of the Commission
   
34.05   Zoning ordinances; public hearings
   
34.06   Plats; approval
§ 34.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   A City Planning Commission for the City of Osakis is hereby established. The
Commission shall be the city planning agency authorized by M.S. § 462.354 Subd.
1, as it may be amended from time to time.
(1986 Code, § 205.01)
§ 34.02 COMPOSITION.
   (A)   Membership.
      (1)   The City Planning Commission shall consist of 5 members.
      (2)   The City Engineer and the City Attorney shall be members ex-
officio, and the City Council may select from its own membership 2 members of
the Commission.
      (3)   The 5 members shall be appointed and removed by the Council at its
discretion.
(Am. Ord. 49, passed 1-7-2002)
   (B)   Terms, vacancies and oath.
      (1)   Of the members of the Commission first appointed, one shall be
appointed for a term of 1 year, one for a term of 2 years, one for a term of 3
years, and one for a term of 4 years.
      (2)   Their successors shall be appointed for terms of 4 years.
      (3)   Both original and successive appointees shall hold their offices
until their successors are appointed and qualified.
      (4)   The terms of ex-officio members shall correspond to their
respective official tenures. Vacancies during the term shall be filled by the
Council for the unexpired portion of the term.
      (5)   Before entering upon the discharge of his or her duties, every
appointed member shall take an oath that he or she will faithfully discharge
the duties of his or her office.
      (6)   All members shall receive $50 per meeting attended, and shall get
paid the same as Council members (twice a year).
(1986 Code, § 205.02) (Am. Ord. 12, passed 2-6-1995; Am. Ord. 63, passed 2-6-
2006; Am. Ord. 96, passed 9-2-2014)
§ 34.03 ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS.
   (A)   Officers. The Commission shall elect a Chairperson from among its
appointed members for a term of 1 year; and the Commission may create and fill
other offices as it may determine.
   (B)   Meetings, records and reports.
      (1)   The Commission shall hold meetings when required.
      (2)   It shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep
a record of its resolutions, transactions and findings, which record shall be a
public record.
      (3)   On or before February 15 of each year the Commission shall submit
to the City Council a report of its work during the preceding calendar year.
      (4)   Expenditures of the Commission shall be within amounts appropriated
for the purpose by the City Council.
(1986 Code, § 205.03) (Am. Ord. 31, passed 3-3-1997)
§ 34.04 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall have the powers and duties given
planning agencies generally by law. The Commission shall also exercise the
duties conferred upon it by this chapter and by the Council.
   (B)   After the Commission has prepared and adopted a comprehensive plan,
the Commission shall periodically but at least once every 3 years, review the
comprehensive plan, any ordinances and any capital improvement program the
Council has adopted to implement the plan.
   (C)   After the review it shall, to the extent it deems necessary, revise
the comprehensive plan, adopt the amendments or the new comprehensive plan, and
recommend it to the Council in accordance with law.
   (D)   Similarly, after the review, it shall recommend to the Council any
amendments it deems desirable to the capital improvement program and any
ordinance implementing the plan.
   (E)   Request for variances from the literal provisions of this section in
instances where their strict enforcement would cause undue hardship because of
circumstances unique to the individual property under consideration.
   (F)   In granting a variance, this Board may impose conditions to ensure
compliance and to protect adjacent properties. The Board may not permit as a
variance any use that is not permitted under this chapter for the property in
the zone where the affected person’s land is located.
(1986 Code, § 205.04) (Am. Ord. 45, passed 8-2-1999)
§ 34.05 ZONING ORDINANCES; PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   No zoning ordinance or amendment shall be adopted by the Council until a
public hearing has been held thereon by the Planning Commission upon notice as
provided in M.S. § 462.357 Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time.
(1986 Code, § 205.05)
§ 34.06 PLATS: APPROVAL.
   (A)   Any subdivision plat submitted to the Council for approval shall,
prior to final approval, be referred to the Planning Commission for review and
recommendation.
   (B)   Any plat so referred shall be returned to the Council by the
Commission with its recommendations within 30 days, and failure of the
Commission to report within that period is deemed to have satisfied the
requirements of this section.
(1986 Code, § 205.06)
CHAPTER 35: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION
Section
   
35.01   Policy and purpose
   
35.02   Definitions
   
35.03   Establishment of emergency management organization
   
35.04   Powers and duties of Director
   
35.05   Local emergencies
   
35.06   Emergency regulations
   
35.07   Emergency management a government function
   
35.08   Participation in labor disputes or politics
§ 35.01 POLICY AND PURPOSE.
   Because of the existing possibility of the occurrence of disasters of
unprecedented size and destruction resulting from fire, flood, tornado,
blizzard, destructive winds or other natural causes, or from sabotage, hostile
action or from hazardous material mishaps of catastrophic measure; and in order
to ensure that preparations of this city will be adequate to deal with those
disasters, and generally, to provide for the common defense and to protect the
public peace, health and safety, and to preserve the lives and property of the
people of this city, it is hereby found and declared to be necessary:
   (A)   To establish a city emergency management organization responsible for
city planning and preparation for emergency government operations in time of
disasters;
   (B)   To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during emergencies and
disasters;
   (C)   To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between this city and other
political subdivisions of this state and of other states with respect to the
carrying out of emergency-preparedness functions; and
   (D)   To comply with the provisions of M.S. § 12.25, as it may be amended
from time to time, which requires that each political subdivision of the state
shall establish a local organization for emergency management.
§ 35.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISASTER. A situation which creates an immediate and serious impairment to
the health and safety of any person, or a situation which has resulted in or is
likely to result in catastrophic loss to property, and for which traditional
sources of relief and assistance within the affected area are unable to repair
or prevent the injury or loss.
   EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances which calls for
immediate action to prevent from developing or occurring.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.
      (1)   The preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency
functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily
responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from
disasters caused by fire, flood, tornado and other acts of nature, or from
sabotage, hostile action or from industrial hazardous material mishaps.
      (2)   These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services,
police services, emergency medical services, engineering, warning services,
communications, radiological and chemical, evacuation, congregate care,
emergency transportation, existing or properly assigned functions of plant
protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other
functions related to civil protection, together with all other activities
necessary or incidental for carrying out the foregoing functions.
      (3)   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT includes those activities sometimes referred
to as CIVIL DEFENSE FUNCTIONS.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES. The total personnel resources engaged in city-
level emergency management functions in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter or any rule or order thereunder. This includes personnel from city
departments, authorized volunteers and private organizations and agencies.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION. The staff responsible for coordinating
city-level planning and preparation for disaster response. This ORGANIZATION
provides city liaison and coordination with federal, state and local
jurisdictions relative to disaster preparedness activities and assures
implementation of federal and state program requirements.
§ 35.03 ESTABLISHMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   There is hereby created within the city government an emergency
management organization which shall be under the supervision and control of the
City Emergency Management Director, called the Director.
   (B)   The Director shall be appointed by the City Council for an indefinite
term and may be removed by the Council at any time.
   (C)   The Director shall serve as established by the City Council and shall
be paid his or her necessary expenses. The Director shall have direct
responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the
emergency preparedness organization, subject to the direction and control of
the Council.
§ 35.04 POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.
   (A)   The Director shall represent the city on any regional or state
conference for emergency management. The Director shall develop proposed mutual
aid agreements with other political subdivisions of the state for reciprocal
emergency management aid and assistance in an emergency too great to be dealt
with unassisted, and shall present these agreements to the Council for its
action. These arrangements shall be consistent with the State Emergency Plan.
   (B)   The Director shall make studies and surveys of the human resources,
industries, resources, and facilities of the city as deemed necessary to
determine their adequacy for emergency management and to plan for their most
efficient use in time of an emergency or disaster. The Director shall establish
the economic stabilization systems and measures, service staffs, boards and
sub-boards required, in accordance with state and federal plans and directions
subject to the approval of the Mayor.
   (C)   The Director shall prepare a comprehensive emergency plan for the
emergency preparedness of the city and shall present the plan to the Council
for its approval. When the Council has approved the plan, it shall be the duty
of all city agencies and all emergency preparedness forces of the city to
perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved. The plan may
be modified in like manner from time to time. The Director shall coordinate the
emergency management activities of the city to the end that they shall be
consistent and fully integrated with the emergency plans of the federal
government and the state and correlated with emergency plans of the county and
other political subdivisions within the state.
   (D)   In accordance with the State and City Emergency Plan, the Director
shall institute training programs, public information programs and conduct
practice warning alerts and emergency exercises as may be necessary to assure
prompt and effective operation of the City Emergency Plan when a disaster
occurs.
   (E)   The Director shall utilize the personnel, services, equipment,
supplies and facilities of existing departments and agencies of the city to the
maximum extent practicable. The officers and personnel of all city departments
and agencies shall, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperate with and
extend services and facilities to the city's emergency management organization
and to the Governor upon request. The head of each department or agency in
cooperation with the Director shall be responsible for the planning and
programming of those emergency activities as will involve the utilization of
the facilities of the department or agency.
   (F)   The Director shall, in cooperation with those city departments and
agencies affected, assist in the organizing, recruiting, and training of
emergency management personnel, which may be required on a volunteer basis to
carry out the emergency plans of the city and state. To the extent that
emergency personnel are recruited to augment a regular city department or
agency for emergencies, they shall be assigned to the departments or agencies
and shall be under the administration and control of the department or agency.
   (G)   Consistent with the state emergency services law, the Director shall
coordinate the activity of municipal emergency management organizations within
the city and assist in establishing and conducting training programs as
required to assure emergency operational capability in the several services as
provided by M.S. § 12.25, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (H)   The Director shall carry out all orders, rules and regulations issued
by the Governor with reference to emergency management.
   (I)   The Director shall prepare and submit reports on emergency
preparedness activities when requested by the Mayor.
§ 35.05 LOCAL EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   A local emergency may be declared only by the Mayor or his or her
legal successor. It shall not be continued for a period in excess of 3 days
except by or with the consent of the Council. Any order, or proclamation
declaring, continuing or terminating a local emergency shall be given prompt
and general publicity and shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk/
Treasurer.
   (B)   A declaration of a local emergency shall invoke necessary portions of
the response and recovery aspects of applicable local or inter-jurisdictional
disaster plans, and may authorize aid and assistance thereunder.
   (C)   No jurisdictional agency or official may declare a local emergency
unless expressly authorized by the agreement under which the agency functions.
However, an inter-jurisdictional disaster agency shall provide aid and services
in accordance with the agreement under which it functions.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 35.06 EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Whenever necessary, to meet a declared emergency or to prepare for an
emergency for which adequate regulations have not been adopted by the Governor
or the Council, the Council may by resolution promulgate regulations,
consistent with applicable federal or state law or regulation, respecting: the
conduct of persons and the use of property during emergencies; the repair,
maintenance and safeguarding of essential public services, emergency health,
fire and safety regulations, drills or practice periods required for
preliminary training and all other matters which are required to protect public
safety, health and welfare in declared emergencies.
   (B)   Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be in writing; shall
be dated; shall refer to the particular emergency to which it pertains, if so
limited, and shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk/Treasurer. A copy
shall be kept posted and available for public inspection during business hours.
Notice of the existence of these regulations and their availability for
inspection at the City Clerk/Treasurer's Office shall be conspicuously posted
at the front of the City Hall or other headquarters of the city or at other
places in the affected area as the Council shall designate in the resolution.
By resolution, the Council may modify or rescind a regulation.
   (C)   The Council may rescind any regulation by resolution at any time. If
not sooner rescinded, every regulation shall expire at the end of 30 days after
its effective date or at the end of the emergency to which it relates,
whichever comes first. Any resolution, rule or regulation inconsistent with an
emergency regulation promulgated by the Council shall be suspended during the
period of time and to the extent conflict exists.
   (D)   During a declared emergency, the city is, under the provisions of M.S.
§ 12.31, as it may be amended from time to time and notwithstanding any
statutory or Charter provision to the contrary, empowered, through its Council,
acting within or without the corporate limits of the city, to enter into
contracts and incur obligations necessary to combat the disaster by protecting
the health and safety of persons and property and providing emergency
assistance to the victims of a disaster.
   (E)   The city may exercise these powers in the light of the exigencies of
the disaster without compliance with the time-consuming procedures and
formalities prescribed by law pertaining to the performance of public work,
entering rental equipment agreements, purchase of supplies and materials,
limitations upon tax levies, and the appropriation and expenditure of public
funds, including, but not limited to, publication of resolutions, publication
of calls for bids, provisions of personnel laws and rules, provisions relating
to low bids and requirement for bids.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 35.07 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT A GOVERNMENT FUNCTION.
   (A)   All functions and activities relating to emergency management are
hereby declared to be governmental functions.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not affect the right of any
person to receive benefits to which he or she would otherwise be entitled under
this resolution or under the worker's compensation law, or under any pension
law, nor the right of any person to receive any benefits or compensation under
any act of Congress.
§ 35.08 PARTICIPATION IN LABOR DISPUTES OR POLITICS.
   The emergency management organization shall not participate in any form of
political activity, nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for
political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a labor dispute.
CHAPTER 36: BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
Section
   
36.01   General provisions
   
36.02   Powers and duties
   
36.03   Decisions
§ 36.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   There is hereby created a Board of Adjustments which shall be the Council
members. The Board of Adjustments shall have all the powers and duties set
forth herein.
(1986 Code, §§ 206.02, 1105.01)
§ 36.02 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board shall have the power and duty of hearing and deciding, subject to
appeal to the Council as herein provided, appeals and requests in the following
case: appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative officer in the
enforcement of this subchapter.
(1986 Code, § 1105.02) (Am. Ord. 45, passed 8-2-1999)
§ 36.03 DECISIONS.
   (A)   Within 60 days after filing of a request for variance or an appeal
from an administrative order or determination, the Board of Adjustments shall
set a date for hearing thereon, and shall hear the persons as wish to be heard,
either in person or by agent or attorney.
   (B)   Notice of any like hearing shall be mailed not less than 10 days
before the date of hearing to the person or persons who filed the appeal or
request, and, in the case of a request for a variance, to each owner of
property situated wholly or partly within 200 feet of the property to which the
variance relates, insofar as the names and addresses of the owners can be
determined by the Clerk/Treasurer from records available to the public.
   (C)   Within a reasonable time after the hearing, the Board shall make its
order deciding the matter and serve a copy of the order upon the applicant or
the petitioner by mail.
   (D)   Any interested party may, within 45 days of the date the decision is
made, to appeal the decision to the District Court.
(1986 Code, § 1105.03)
CHAPTER 37: VOLUNTEER FIRST RESPONDER SERVICE
Section
   
37.01   Definitions
   
37.02   Purpose
   
37.03   Volunteer first responder service established
   
37.04   Election
   
37.05   Duties of Medical Director
   
37.06   Qualifications
   
37.07   Compensation
   
37.08   First responder fund
   
37.09   Availability of service
   
37.10   Licensing
   
37.11   Interference with service
§ 37.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMBULANCE. A vehicle which is designed or intended to be used in providing
transportation of wounded, injured, sick, invalid or incapacitated human
beings, or expectant mothers.
   ATTENDANT. A trained and/or qualified individual responsible for the
operation of an ambulance and the care of the patients whether or not the
attendant also serves as driver.
(Ord. 34, passed 10-6-1997)
§ 37.02 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is for the purpose of providing adequate medical assistance for
the sick and injured and promoting the public health, safety and comfort and
welfare of the citizens of the Osakis area.
(Ord. 34, passed 10-6-1997)
§ 37.03 VOLUNTEER FIRST RESPONDER SERVICE ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established a volunteer first responder service for the City
of Osakis to provide response to the sick and injured until emergency vehicles
arrive for transportation.
(Ord. 34, passed 10-6-1997)
§ 37.04 ELECTION.
   The Osakis Volunteer First Responder Department shall have 2 elected
officers: President/Vice President and Secretary/Treasurer. These officers
shall be elected in accordance with the Constitution and bylaws of the service,
subject to City Council confirmation.
(Ord. 34, passed 10-6-1997)
§ 37.05 DUTIES OF MEDICAL DIRECTOR.
   (A)   The service shall be directed and supervised by the Medical Director
whose duty it shall be to establish rules and regulations are duly executed;
and otherwise do and perform with the assistance of the additional personnel as
necessary to accomplish the object of this chapter.
   (B)   He or she shall be responsible for the proper training and discipline
of the members of the service.
(Ord. 34, passed 10-6-1997)
§ 37.06 QUALIFICATIONS.
   The qualifications required shall be outlined in the Constitution and bylaws
of the service.
(Ord. 34, passed 10-6-1997)
§ 37.07 COMPENSATION.
   Compensation shall be set by the City Council.
(Ord. 34, passed 10-6-1997)
§ 37.08 FIRST RESPONDER FUND.
   It is hereby established and the City Clerk-Treasurer shall maintain a fund
to be known as the first responder fund, a record of which shall be kept by the
City Clerk-Treasurer from which all disbursements shall be paid.
(Ord. 34, passed 10-6-1997)
§ 37.09 AVAILABILITY OF SERVICE.
   The first responder service shall offer service 24 hours per day every day
of the year.
(Ord. 34, passed 10-6-1997)
§ 37.10 LICENSING.
   The ambulance shall posses a valid license issued by the Emergency Medical
Services Regulatory Board.
(Ord. 34, passed 10-6-1997)
§ 37.11 INTERFERENCE WITH SERVICE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to give, or make cause to be made a call
for first responder service without probable cause or to neglect to obey any
reasonable order of a driver or attendants at an ambulance call or to interfere
with the first responder service’s discharge of its duties.
(Ord. 34, passed 10-6-1997)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 38: PERSONNEL POLICY
Section
   
38.01   Personnel policy adopted
§ 38.01 PERSONNEL POLICY ADOPTED.
   The personnel policy as amended is hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length in this code of
ordinances.
CHAPTER 39: PARK AND RECREATION ADVISORY COMMISSION
Section
   
39.01   Policy and purpose
   
39.02   Organization; meetings
§ 39.01 POLICY AND PURPOSE.
   The Park and Recreation Advisory Commission is established to promote the
systematic, comprehensive development of park facilities and recreational
activities necessary for the physical, mental, emotional, and moral health and
well-being of the residents of the city.
   (A)   Duties of the Commission. The Park and Recreation Advisory Commission
advises and makes recommendations to the City Council in matters pertaining to
park and recreation programs in the city.
   (B)   Membership. The Park and Recreation Advisory Commission shall consist
of 5 members and may be up to 8 members.
      (1)   One member shall be selected from the City of Osakis business
community, and may include a business owner or employee of a business located
within the City of Osakis.
      (2)   At least 2 of the members appointed shall be at large and residents
of the City of Osakis (may be students in a junior or senior high school at the
time of their appointment).
      (3)   Two or more members of the Commission need not be residents of the
city.
      (4)   The Commission shall include at least 1, but not more than 2
Council members.
      (5)   The members shall be appointed and removed by the Council at its
discretion.
   (C)   Terms, vacancies and oath.
      (1)   Both original and successive appointees shall hold their offices
until their successors are appointed and qualified.
      (2)   Vacancies shall be filled by the Council.
      (3)   Before entering upon the discharge of his or her duties, every
appointed member shall take an oath that he or she will faithfully discharge
the duties of his or her office.
(Ord. 138, passed 2-12-2024)
§ 39.02 ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS.
   (A)   Officers. The Commission shall elect a Chairperson from among its
appointed members for a term of 2 years; and the Commission may create and fill
other offices as it may determine. The Secretary shall be elected by the
Commission and is for a 2-year term.
   (B)   Meetings, records and reports.
      (1)   The Commission shall hold meetings when required.
      (2)   It shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep
a record of its resolutions, transactions and findings, which record shall be a
public record.
      (3)   The Commission shall submit to the City Council a report of its
work.
      (4)   Expenditures of the Commission shall be within amounts appropriated
for the purpose by the City Council.
(Ord. 138, passed 2-12-2024)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter
   
50.   GENERAL WATER AND SEWER
   
51.   WATER SYSTEM
   
52.   SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
   
53.   REFUSE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
   
54.   STORM DRAINAGE UTILITY
   
55.   INFLOW AND INFILTRATION
CHAPTER 50: GENERAL WATER AND SEWER
Section
   
50.01   Water and Sewer Department
   
50.02   Use of water or sewer system restricted
   
50.03   Application for service
   
50.04   Service connections
   
50.05   Accounting and billing; collecting
   
50.06   Protection of public and city
§ 50.01 WATER AND SEWER DEPARTMENT.
   There is hereby established a Water and Sewer Department, which shall be
under the supervision of the Superintendent of Sewer and Waters.
   (A)   Superintendent.
      (1)   The Council shall appoint a Superintendent of the sewer and water
systems of the city, and other employees as may be necessary, at salaries or
wages as the Council may determine.
      (2)   The Superintendent shall have control, under the direction of the
Council, of the drainage, sewer and water systems of the city, and shall have
powers and discharge duties as are hereinafter set forth, or which may from
time to time be delegated to him or her.
   (B)   Duties.
      (1)   The Superintendent shall have immediate control of all property
belonging to the Department; he or she shall issue all permits for the laying
of service pipes in connections with the municipal sewer or water systems, keep
an accurate record thereof, and make reports to the Council as may be required
of him or her.
      (2)   He or she shall keep a record showing the location, number and size
of all taps in the mains and service pipes connected therewith, and of all
other matters relating to the Department.
      (3)   He or she shall make and return to the Council an annual report
showing the number of gallons of water used and the property on hand, and other
information as may be required.
(1986 Code, § 401.01)
§ 50.02 USE OF WATER OR SEWER SYSTEM RESTRICTED.
   No person shall make or use any water or sewer system except pursuant to
application and permit as provided in this chapter. No person shall make or use
any installation contrary to the regulatory provisions of this chapter.
(1986 Code, § 401.02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 50.03 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
   (A)   Procedure.
      (1)   Application for water or sewer service installation and for water
service shall be made to the Superintendent on forms prescribed by the
Superintendent and furnished by the city.
      (2)   By his or her signature, the applicant shall agree to conform to
this chapter and to rules and regulations that may be established by the city
as conditions for the use of water.
   (B)   Fees and deposit.
      (1)   Application for a service installation shall be made by the owner
of the property to be served or by his or her agent.
      (2)   The applicant shall at the time of making application pay to the
city the amount of the fees or deposit required for the installation of the
service connection as provided in this chapter.
      (3)   When a water service connection has been installed, application for
water service may be made either by the owner or his or her agent or by the
tenant or occupant of the premises.
(1986 Code, § 401.03)
§ 50.04 SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
   No connection shall be made to the city water or sanitary sewer systems
without a permit received from the approving authority. A permit fee will be
established by Council.
(Am. Ord. 24, passed 4-1-1996)
§ 50.05 ACCOUNTING AND BILLING; COLLECTING.
   (A)   Accounts in name of owner. All accounts shall be carried in the name
of the owner. The owner shall be liable for water, sewer and garbage charges
supplied to his or her property, whether he or she is occupying the property or
not, and any charges unpaid shall be a lien upon the property.
   (B)   Bills for service.
      (1)   Water, sewer and garbage service charges shall be billed together.
Bills shall be mailed to the customers monthly and shall specify the water
consumed and the sewer and water charges in accordance with the rates set out
in this chapter.
      (2)   Garbage charges shall be billed to customers monthly and shall
specify the charges for garbage in accordance with the rate set by the City
Council or the garbage services provided.
   (C)   Rates. The utility rates for sewer and water services shall be set by
the city on an annual basis. The utility rates scheduled by the city shall
describe the access charge and services charges imposed by the city for sewer
and water services.
   (D)   Delinquent accounts.
      (1)   All charges for water, sewer or garbage service shall be due on the
monthly due date specified by the city for the respective account and shall be
delinquent 30 days thereafter.
      (2)   The city shall endeavor to collect delinquent accounts promptly. In
any case, where satisfactory arrangements for payment have not been made the
Sewer and Water Department may, after procedural requirements of division (D)
below have been complied with, discontinue service to the delinquent customer
by shutting off the water at the stop box.
      (3)   When water service to any premises has been discontinued, service
shall not be restored except upon the payment of all delinquent bills and a fee
of $25 during regular hours; on weekends, holidays, and after hours the fee
will be $150.
      (4)   Delinquent accounts shall be certified to the City Clerk/Treasurer
who shall prepare an assessment roll each year providing for assessment of the
delinquent amounts against the respective properties served.
      (5)   The assessment roll shall be delivered to the Council for adoption
at or before the monthly November meeting for certification to the County
Auditor for collection along with taxes.
      (6)   This action is optional and may be subsequent to taking legal
action to collect delinquent accounts.
   (E)   Procedure for shutoff of service.
      (1)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city's bill shall contain an
address and telephone number of the city, and a clearly visible and easily
readable provision to the effect:
         (a)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set
forth on the bill; and
         (b)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a $5 charge
will be charged; after the account is 60 days overdue, a disconnect notice will
be mailed containing a cut-off notice that if the bill is not paid within 10
days of the mailing of the disconnect notice, service will be discontinued for
nonpayment; and
         (c)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill
shall have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be represented in
person and by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may
present orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the city
official in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to
make a final determination of the customer’s complaint.
      (2)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained;
only questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence
of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified.
      (3)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility
service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only
after all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on
charge in the sum of $25 during regular operating hours; on weekends, holidays,
nights and after-hours, the charge will be $150.
      (4)   If the customer requests a hearing before the date specified, a
hearing shall be held on the matter by Council at the next scheduled regular
Council meeting.
      (5) If, as a result of the hearing, the City Council finds that the
amount claimed to be owing is actually due and unpaid and that there is no
legal reason why the water supply of the delinquent customer may not be shut
off in accordance with the ordinance, the city may shut off the supply.
      (6)   Service shut-offs and turn-ons for seasonal residents; after hours
the fee will be $150 per time.
(1986 Code, § 401.05) (Am. Ord. passed 12-5-1994; Am. Ord. 108, passed 2-1-
2016; Am. Ord. 112, passed 8-7-2017; Am. Ord. 116, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 50.06 PROTECTION OF PUBLIC AND CITY.
   (A)   Permit and bond.
      (1)   A permit for construction and connection of the extension between a
building drain and the sewer main or stub, herein called the BUILDING SEWER, or
between the building water service pipes and a water main or stub shall be
issued only upon application by a contractor who has furnished a bond either to
the Clerk/Treasurer or the Secretary of State under M.S. § 326.40, as it may be
amended from time to time.
      (2)   The bond shall be in the amount of $2,000 conditioned so as to
secure compliance by the principal with the provisions of this chapter and to
further secure performance by him or her of all work undertaken within the
city.
   (B)   Liability insurance.
      (1)   Before undertaking the construction work authorized by the permit,
the contractor shall secure and maintain a policy of insurance against damages
to property or injury or death to persons.
      (2)   The policy shall indemnify and save harmless the city and its
personnel against any claim, damages or cause of action arisen out of the work
and from any expenses of defending the same.
      (3)   The property damage insurance coverage shall be in the amount of at
least $50,000 and the public liability damage for injury or death shall be in
the amount of at least $100,000 per claimant and $250,000 for any number of
claims per occurrence.
      (4)   Proof of insurance shall be filed with the city prior to
construction work and the policy shall provide that the city shall be notified
immediately of any termination or modification of insurance.
      (5)   If the insurance coverage is inadequate in amount, the contractor
shall indemnify and hold harmless the city and its personnel in like manner.
   (C)   Apportionment of costs.
      (1)   The owner shall bear the costs and expenses incident to the
installation and connection of the building sewer or extension of water service
to private property.
      (2)   He or she shall indemnify the city for any loss of damage directly
or indirectly caused by its installation and connection.
      (3)   To the extent he or she deems necessary, the Superintendent shall
establish rules and regulations for the proper implementation of these
requirements which, when approved by the Council by resolution, shall govern
the installation and connection of building sewers and extension of water
service to private property.
(1986 Code, § 401.06) (Am. Ord. 25, passed 4-1-1996)
CHAPTER 51: WATER SYSTEM
Section
   
51.01   General regulations
   
51.02   Meters
   
51.03   Plumbing regulations
§ 51.01 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Discontinuance of service. The city may discontinue service to any
water consumer without notice for necessary repairs, upon notice as provided in
§
50.05(D) above, for nonpayment of charges, or for violation of rules and
regulations affecting utility service.
   (B)   Supply from one service.
      (1)   No more than 1 house or building shall be supplied from 1 service
connection except by special permission of the Council.
      (2)   Whenever 2 or more parties are supplied from 1 pipe connecting with
a service main, each building or part of building separately supplied shall
have a separate stop box and separate meter.
   (C)   Turning on water, tapping mains. No person except an authorized city
employee shall turn on any water supply at the stop box or tap any distributing
main or pipe of water supply system or insert a stop cock or other appurtenance
therein without a city permit
   (D)   Repair of leaks.
      (1)   The consumer or owner shall be responsible for maintaining the
service pipe from the main into the building served.
      (2)   If he or she fails to repair any leak in the service pipe within 24
hours after notice by the city, the city may turn the water off. The water
shall not then be turned on again until the sum of $25 has been paid to the
city.
      (3)   When the waste of water is great or damage is likely to result from
the leak, the city shall turn the water off immediately upon giving notice if
repair is not commenced immediately.
   (E)   Use of fire hydrants. No person other than an authorized city employee
shall operate a fire hydrant or interfere in any way with the city water system
without first obtaining authority to do so from the Fire Chief.
   (F)   Private water supply.
      (1)   No water pipe of the city water supply system shall be connected
with any pump, well or tank that is connected with any other source of water
supply.
      (2)   When any like connection is found, any city official or employee
shall notify the owner to sever the connection and if this is not done
immediately, the city shall turn off the water supply forthwith.
      (3)   Before any new connection to the city system is permitted, the
Department shall ascertain that no cross connection will exist when the new
connection is made.
   (G)   Restricted hours.
      (1)   Whenever the Council determines that a shortage of water supply
threatens the city, it may, by resolution, limit the times and hours during
which city water may be used for sprinkling, irrigation, car washing, air
conditioning or other specified uses.
      (2)   After publication of the resolution or 2 days after the mailing of
the resolution to each customer, no person shall use or permit water to be used
in violation of the resolution and any customer who does so shall be charged
$10 for each day of violation and the charge shall be added to his or her next
water bill.
      (3)   If the emergency required immediate compliance with terms of the
resolution, the Council may provide for the delivery of a copy of the
resolution to the premises of each customer, and any customer who has received
the notice and thereafter uses or permits water to be used in violation of the
resolution shall be subject to the charge provided above.
      (4)   Continued violation shall be cause for discontinuance of water
service.
   (H)   Permitting use by others.
      (1)   No person shall permit city water to be used for any purpose except
upon his or her own premises except in an emergency and then only if written
permission is first obtained from the Clerk/Treasurer.
      (2)   Anyone wishing to obtain water from a hydrant for construction
purposes shall make application to the Clerk/Treasurer for those services.
(1986 Code, § 402.01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.02 METERS.
   (A)   Meters required.
      (1)   Except for the extinguishment of fires, no person other than an
authorized city employee shall use water from the city water supply system or
permit water to be drawn therefrom unless the water passes through a meter
supplied or approved by the city.
      (2)   No person not authorized by the Sewer and Water Department shall
connect, disconnect, take apart or in any manner change or interfere with any
meter or its use.
   (B)   Meter installation. Meters shall be installed by the city or a
licensed contractor at the property owner's expense.
   (C)   Maintenance.
      (1)   The city shall maintain and repair at the property owner’s expense
any meter that has become unserviceable through ordinary wear and tear and
shall replace it if necessary.
      (2)   Where repair or replacement is made necessary the expense caused
thereby shall be a charge against and collected from the water customer and
water service may be disconnected until the cause is corrected and the amount
charged is paid.
   (D)   Complaints; meter testing.
      (1)   When a consumer complains that the bill for any past service period
is excessive, the city shall have the meter reread on request.
      (2)   If the consumer remains dissatisfied, he or she may, on written
request and the deposit of $50 have the meter tested.
      (3)   If the test shows an error in the city's favor exceeding 5% of the
water consumed, the deposit shall be refunded, an accurate meter shall be
installed, and the bill shall be adjusted accordingly.
      (4)   This adjustment shall not extend back more than 1 service period
from the date of the written request.
   (E)   Meters property of property owners. Water meters shall be the property
of the property owners and may removed or replaced to a size and type when
deemed necessary.
   (F)   Meter reading and inspection. Authorized meter readers shall have
access with permission at reasonable hours of the day to all parts of every
building and premises connected with the city water supply system in order to
read meters and make inspections.
(1986 Code, § 402.02) (Am. Ord. 32, passed 10-6-1997; Am. Ord. 120, passed 12-
3-2018)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.03 PLUMBING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Service pipes.
      (1)   Every service pipe shall be laid with sufficient bend to allow not
less than 1 foot of extra length and in a manner so as to prevent rupture by
settlement.
      (2)   The service pipe shall be placed not less than 6 feet below the
surface and be so arranged as to prevent rupture by freezing.
      (3)   A shut-off or other stop box with water valve of the size and
strength required shall be placed close to the inside wall of the building and
be well protected from freezing.
      (4)   Copper tubing or 160 PSI Polyethylene pipe NSF approved shall be
used for all services of 2 inches or less.
      (5)   Each joint shall be left uncovered until inspected by the city.
Every service over 2 inches shall be cast iron. Connections with the mains for
domestic supply shall be at least 3/4 of an inch.
   (B)   Water meter setting. Every water meter shall be installed in
accordance with the following provisions:
      (1)   The service pipe from the water main to the meter shall be brought
through the floor in a vertical position where the pipe enters the building.
The stop and waste valve shall be 12 inches above the floor;
      (2)   The bottom of the meter shall be between 6 and 12 inches above the
finished floor line. The meter shall be set not more than 12 inches
horizontally from the inside line of the basement wall unless a different
position is approved by the Council’s designated agent. A suitable bracket
shall be provided to support the meter in a proper vertical position and
prevent noise from vibration;
      (3)   Each meter installation shall have a stop and waste valve on the
street side of the meter. In no case shall more than 12 inches of pipe be
exposed between the point of entrance through the basement floor and the stop
and waste valve. A stop and waste valve shall also be installed on the house
side of the meter;
      (4)   The water pipe connecting with the main shall not exceed 2 feet
under the basement floor from the inside of the basement wall to the water
meter connection; and
      (5)   Meter setting services for 5/8-inch, 3/4-inch and 1-inch meters
shall be of copper pipe or 160 PSI Polyethylene pipe NSF approved from the
terminus of the service pipe up to and including the stop and waste valve on
the building side.
   (C)   Location of stop boxes.
      (1)   Curb stop boxes shall be installed generally where desired by the
owners of occupied properties, but they shall be placed as near as possible to
the curb if on a street or within 1 foot of the alley line if the main is
located in the alley.
      (2)   They shall be installed at an approximate depth of 6 feet below the
established grade and shall be left in an accurate vertical position when back-
filling is completed.
(1986 Code, § 402.03) (Am. Ord. 73, passed 9-4-2007)
CHAPTER 52: SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
Section
General Sewer Provisions
   
52.01   Definitions
   
52.02   Use of the public sewers
   
52.03   Control of industrial wastes directed to public sewers
   
52.04   Basis for sewer service charges
   
52.05   Amount of sewer service charges
   
52.06   Billing practice
   
52.07   Entry of easements
   
52.08   Sewer construction and connections
   
52.09   Violations
   
52.10   Appeals
   
52.11   Validity
   
52.12   Audit, notification and records
Individual Sewage Disposal Systems
   
52.25   Definitions
   
52.26   Licensing
   
52.27   Permits
   
52.28   Construction requirements
   
52.29   Administration
   
52.30   Inspection
   
52.31   Maintenance
   
52.32   Abandonment of septic system
   
52.33   Objectives
GENERAL SEWER PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVING AUTHORITY. The City Clerk/Treasurer or his or her duly authorized
representatives.
   BOD or BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter in 5 days as 20°C, expressed as
milligrams per liter (mg/l). Quantitative determination of BOD shall be made in
accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
   BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer.
   BUILDING SEWER. A sanitary sewer which begins immediately outside of the
foundation wall of any building or structure being served, and ends to its
connection to the public sewer.
   CHLORINE REQUIREMENT. The amount of chlorine, in mg/l, which must be added
to sewage to produce a residual chlorine as specified in the national pollutant
discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit.
   CITY. The City of Osakis.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm or
surface water.
   COMMERCIAL USER. Any place of business which discharges sanitary waste as
distinct from industrial wastewater.
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS. BOD, suspended solids, nitrogen, pH or fecal coliform
bacteria, plus additional pollutants indemnified in the city's NPDES permit for
its wastewater treatment facility; provided that the facility is designed to
treat additional pollutants, and, in fact, does remove those pollutants to a
substantial degree.
   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. That portion of the sewer service charge relating to
the cost of retiring outstanding bond issues or other long term obligations of
the wastewater collection and treatment facilities.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specified use of land owned by
others.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of FLOATABLE OIL if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
   GOVERNMENTAL USER. Users which are units, agencies or instrumentalities of
federal, state or local government discharging normal domestic strength
wastewater.
   GROUND GARBAGE. The residue from the preparation, cooking, dispensing,
handling, storage, and sale of food products and produce that has been shredded
to a degree so that all particles will be carried freely in suspension under
the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle
greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS. Wastewater with pollutants that will adversely
affect the wastewater collection and treatment facilities or disrupt the
quality of wastewater treatment if discharged to the wastewater collection and
treatment facilities.
   INDUSTRIAL USERS or INDUSTRIES.
      (1)   Entities that discharge into a publicly owned wastewater treatment
works, liquid wastes resulting from the processes employed in industrial or
manufacturing processes, or from the development of any natural resources.
      (2)   These are identified in the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemental
under one of the following divisions:
         (a)   Division A: Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing;
         (b)   Division B: Mining;
         (c)   Division C: Manufacturing;
         (d)   Division E: Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and
Sanitary Sewers; or
         (e)   Division I: Services.
      (3)   For the purpose of this definition, DOMESTIC WASTE shall be
considered to have the following characteristics:
         (a)   BOD5: less than 200 mg/l; and
         (b)   Suspended solids: less than 200 mg/l.
      (4)   Any non-governmental user of a publicly owned treatment works which
discharges wastewater to the treatment works which contains toxic pollutants or
poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to contaminate the sludge or any municipal
systems or to injure or to interfere with any sewage treatment process, or
which constitutes a hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance or
creates any hazard in or has an adverse effect on the waters receiving any
discharge from the treatment works.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged or
escaping from any industrial or manufacturing process or from the development
of any natural resources. This term includes any wastewater which is not
sanitary sewage.
   INSTITUTIONAL USER. A user of the treatment facilities whose establishment
is primarily engaged in activities of an educations, religious, social,
cultural, charitable or human services nature (e.g., churches, non-profit
organizations).
   MAY. Permissible.
   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Osakis.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT.  
      (1)   A document issued by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency which
establishes effluent limitations and monitoring requirements for the municipal
wastewater treatment facility.
      (2)   NPDES PERMIT No. MN0020028 and modifications thereof pertain to the
municipal wastewater treatment facility.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer
overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water
or groundwaters.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTEWATER. Wastewater with concentrations of BOD
no greater than 200 mg/l and suspended solids no greater than 200 mg/l.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS. Includes all costs associated with the
operation and maintenance of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities
during the design or useful life of the wastewater treatment facilities,
including administration and replacement costs, all as determined from time to
time, by the city.
   PERSON. Any and all persons, including any individual, firm, company,
municipal or private corporation, association, society, institution,
enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration. The
concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams per liter of solution.
Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and a hydrogen-ion
concentration of 10-7.
   PUBLIC SEWER. Any publicly owned sewer, storm drain, sanitary sewer or
combined sewer.
   REPLACEMENT COSTS. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenance which are necessary during the designer useful life
of the wastewater treatment facility whichever is longer to maintain the
capacity and performance for which the facilities were designed and
constructed. Operation and maintenance costs include REPLACEMENT COSTS.
   RESIDENTIAL USER. A user of the treatment facilities whose premises or
building is used primarily as a residence for 1 or more persons, including
dwelling units such as detached and semi-detached housing, apartments and
mobile homes; and which discharges primarily normal domestic strength sanitary
wastes.
   SANITARY SEWAGE. A combination of liquid and water carried wastes discharged
from toilets and/or sanitary plumbing facilities.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that carries sewage or wastewater.
   SEWAGE. The spent water of a person or community. The preferred term is
WASTEWATER.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
   SEWER SERVICE CHARGE. A charge levied on users of the wastewater collection
and treatment facilities for payment of operation and maintenance expenses,
debt service costs and other expenses or obligations of the facilities.
   SHALL. Mandatory.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration
longer than 15 minutes, more than 5 times the average 24-hour concentration of
flows during normal operation, and/or adversely affects the wastewater
collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment facility.
   STANDARD METHODS. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
most recent edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, published jointly by the American Water Works Association, and the
Water Pollution Control Federation.
   STORM SEWER or DRAIN. A drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater,
subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Total suspended matter that either floats on the surface
of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and that is
removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, and referred to as NONFILTERABLE RESIDUE.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent of
the wastewater treatment facilities or water that would not cause violation of
receiving water quality standards, and would not be benefitted by discharge to
the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities.
   USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of the wastewater collection and
treatment facilities for payment of operation and maintenance expenses of those
facilities.
   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community or person. From the standpoint of
source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together
with any groundwater, surface water and storm water that may be present.
   WASTEWATER COLLECTION FACILITIES or WASTEWATER COLLECTION SYSTEM. The
structures and equipment required to collect and carry wastewater.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITY. An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater and sludge. Also referred to as WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLAN.
(1986 Code, § 403.01)
§ 52.02 USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS.
   (A)   Sanitary sewers.
      (1)   No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
unpolluted waters such as storm water, roof runoff, sump pump discharge,
foundation drain, cistern overflow, area drain or cooling water to any sanitary
sewer.
      (2)   Sump pump systems shall have permanently installed discharge lines
which shall not at any time discharge water into the sanitary sewer system. A
sump pump must not discharge directly or indirectly onto a neighboring property
or cause flow of discharged waters onto a neighboring property. For purposes of
this section, the term “sump pump” includes not only sump pump systems, but any
footing or foundation drainage, tiling or floor drainage, or any other similar
method of draining or discharging water from the interior or surrounding area
of a structure.
      (3)   A permanent installation shall be one which provides for year-round
discharge capability to either the outside of the dwelling, building or
structure, upon the surface ground of the property owner, or is connected to
the city storm sewer or discharges through the curb and gutter to the street.
If a sump pump hookup is available the sump pump cannot be discharged to the
street.
      (4)   It shall consist of a rigid line without valving or quick
connections for altering the path of discharge, and if connected to the city
storm sewer line, include a check valve.
   (B)   Storm sewers.
      (1)   Storm water and all other unpolluted water shall be discharged to
the sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers,
or to a natural outlet approved by the approving authority and other regulatory
agencies.
      (2)   Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process waters may be
discharged, on approval of the approving authority and other regulatory
agencies, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet.
   (C)   Prohibitions and limitations. Except as hereinafter provided, no
person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described
waters or wastes to any public sewer:
      (1)   Any liquids, solids or gases which may by reason of their nature or
quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other
substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the
wastewater disposal system or to the operation of the system. Prohibited
materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha,
benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides,
chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides;
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or gasses in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, that could injure or interfere with any waste treatment or sludge
disposal process constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create a public
nuisance in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment facility. A toxic
pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified
pursuant to § 307(a) of the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a);
      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0, or in excess of
9.0, or having any corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater collection and treatment
facilities;
      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of a size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in public sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities, such
as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood underground garbage, whole blood,
paunch, manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk
containers and the like, either whole or ground by garbage grinders; or
      (5)   The following described substances, materials, waters or waste
shall be limited in discharges to sanitary sewer systems to concentrations or
quantities which will not harm either the sanitary sewers, wastewater treatment
process or equipment; will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream
and/or soil, vegetation and groundwater; or will not otherwise endanger lives,
limbs, public property or constitute a nuisance. The approving authority may
set limitations more stringent than those established below if more stringent
limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. The approving authority
will give consideration to the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows
and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sanitary sewers
and wastewater treatment facility and other pertinent factors. Wastes or
wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewers shall not exceed the following
limitations:
         (a)   Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150° F (65°C);
         (b)   Wastewater containing more than 100 mg/l of petroleum oil, non-
biodegradable cutting oils or products or mineral oil origin;
         (c)   Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat
or grease;
         (d)   Any underground garbage. Garbage grinders may be connected to
sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals,
catering establishments or similar places where garbage originates from the
preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises
or when served by caterers;
         (e)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
other toxic and non-conventional pollutants to a degree so that the
concentration exceeds levels specified by federal, state and local authorities;
         (f)   Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances
exceeding limits which may be established by the approving authority or limits
established by any federal or state statute, rule or regulation;
         (g)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of a half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the approving authority in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
         (h)   Any waters or wastes containing substances which are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to a degree that the wastewater
treatment facility effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies
having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters;
         (i)   Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or
wastes in the sanitary sewer system, release obnoxious gasses, form suspended
solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition
deleterious to structures and treatment processes;
         (j)   Materials which exert or cause:
            1.   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements
in quantities so as to constitute a significant load on the wastewater
treatment facility;
            2.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
slugs as defined herein;
            3.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium sulfate); or
            4.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye
wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).
         (k)   Incompatible pollutants in excess of the allowed limits as
determined by city, state and federal laws and regulations in reference to
pretreatment standard developed by the Environmental Protection Agency, and as
contained in 40 C.F.R. pt. 403, as amended from time to time.
   (D)   NPDES permit. No person shall cause or permit a discharge into the
sanitary sewers that would cause a violation of the city's NPDES permit and any
modifications thereof.
   (E)   Special arrangements. No statement contained in this subchapter shall
be construed as prohibiting any special agreement between the approving
authority and any person whereby a waste of unusual strength or character may
be admitted to the wastewater collection and treatment facilities, either
before or after pre-treatment, provide that there is no impairment of the
functioning of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities by reason of
the admission of wastes, and no extra costs are incurred by the city without
recompense by the person; and further provided that all rates and provisions
set forth in this subchapter are recognized and adhered to and provided that
national categorical pretreatment standards and the city’s NPDES permit
limitations are not violated.
   (F)   New connections. New connections to the city's sanitary sewer system
will be allowed only if there is available capacity in all of the downstream
wastewater collection and treatment facilities.
   (G)   Exception: Private garages; occupancies serving 1- and 2-family
dwellings.
(1986 Code, § 403.02) (Am. Ord. 27, passed 5-6-1996; Am. Ord. 48, passed 10-1-
2001; Am. Ord. 2011-21, passed 7-5-2011)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.03 CONTROL OF INDUSTRIAL WASTES DIRECTED TO PUBLIC SEWERS.
   (A)   Submission of basic data.
      (1)   The approving authority may require each person who discharges or
seeks to discharge industrial wastes to a public sewer to prepare and file with
the approving authority, at times as it determines, a report that shall include
pertinent data relating to the quantity and characteristics of the wastes
discharged to the wastewater collection and treatment facilities.
      (2)   In the case of a new connection, the approving authority may
require that this report be prepared prior to making the connection to the
public sewers.
   (B)   Industrial discharges. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are
proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters or wastes contain
substances or possess the characteristics enumerated herein, and which in the
judgment of the approving authority have a deleterious effect upon the
wastewater collection and treatment facilities, processes, equipment or
receiving waters and/or soil, vegetation and groundwater, or which otherwise
create a hazard to life, health or constitute a public nuisance, the approving
authority may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes;
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers, pursuant to § 307(b) of the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C.
§ 1317(b), and its amendments,
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, and/or
      (4)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions
of this subchapter.
   (C)   Control manholes.
      (1)   Each person discharging industrial wastes into a public sewer
shall, at the discretion of the approving authority, construct and maintain 1
or more control manholes or access points to facilitation observation,
measurement and sampling of wastes, including sanitary sewage.
      (2)   Control manholes or access facilities shall be located and built in
a manner acceptable to the approving authority. If measuring and/or sampling
devices are to be permanently installed, they shall be of a type acceptable to
the approving authority.
      (3)   Control manholes, access facilities and related equipment shall be
installed by the person discharging the waste, at the person's expense, and
shall be maintained by the person so as to be in safe condition, accessible and
in proper operating condition at all times.
      (4)   Plans for installation of the control manholes or access facilities
and related equipment shall be approved by the approving authority prior to the
beginning of construction.
   (D)   Measurement of flow. The volume of flow used for computing sewer
service charges shall be the metered water consumption of the person shown in
the records of meter readings maintained by the Water Department or utility
except as noted in division (F) below.
   (E)   Metering of waste.
      (1)   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be
required by the approving authority if this volume cannot otherwise be
determined from the metered water consumption records.
      (2)   Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed, owned and maintained by the person discharging the wastewater.
Following approval and installation, these meters may not be removed without
the consent of the approving authority.
   (F)   Waste sampling.
      (1)   Industrial wastes discharged into the public sewers shall be
subject to the periodic inspection and determination of character and
concentration of those wastes. The determination shall be made by the industry
as often as may be deemed necessary by the approving authority.
      (2)   Samples shall be collected in a manner so as to be representative
of the composition of the wastes. The sampling may be accomplished either
manually or by the use of mechanical equipment acceptable to the approving
authority.
      (3)   Installation, operation and maintenance of the sampling facilities
shall be the responsibility of the person discharging the waste and shall be
subject to the approval of the approving authority.
      (4)   Access to sampling locations shall be granted to the approving
authority or its duly authorized representative at all times.
      (5)   Every care shall be exercised in the collection of samples to
ensure their preservation in a state comparable to that at the time the sample
was taken.
   (G)   Pretreatment.
      (1)   Persons discharging industrial wastes into any public sewer may be
required to pretreat those wastes, if the approving authority determines
pretreatment is necessary to protect the wastewater collection and treatment
facilities or prevent the discharge of incompatible pollutants.
      (2)   In that event the person shall provide at his or her expense the
pretreatment or processing facilities as may be determined necessary to render
wastes acceptable for admission to the sanitary sewers.
      (3)   No user shall increase the process water, or in any manner, attempt
to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute to adequate treatment
to achieve compliance with limitations contained in this subchapter, or
contained in the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any state
requirements.
   (H)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
      (1)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the approving authority, they are necessary for the proper handling
of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in amounts in excess of those
specified in this subchapter, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful
ingredients; except that these interceptors shall not be required for private
living quarters or dwelling units.
      (2)   All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
approving authority, and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. In maintaining these interceptors, the
owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by
appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the
dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by the approving
authority.
      (3)   Disposal of the collected materials performed by owners(s’)
personnel or currently licensed waste disposal firms must be in accordance with
currently acceptable local, county and state rules and regulations.
   (I)   Analyses.
      (1)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which reference is made in this subchapter shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods and with
the federal regulations of 40 C.F.R. pt. 136 Guidelines Establishing Test
Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants, as amended from time to time.
      (2)   Sampling method, location, time, durations and frequencies are to
be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the approving
authority.
   (J)   Submission of information. Plans, specifications and any other
pertinent information relating to proposed flow alkalization pretreatment, or
grease and/or sand interceptor facilities shall be submitted for review and
approval of the approving authority prior to the start of their construction if
the effluent from the facilities is to be discharged into the public sewers. No
construction of the facilities shall commence until the approval had been
granted.
(1986 Code, § 403.03)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.04 BASIS FOR SEWER SERVICE CHARGES.
   (A)   Sewer users served by water utility water meters. There is hereby
levied and assessed upon each lot, parcel of land, building, or premises having
a connection with the wastewater collection system and being served with water
solely by the water utility, a sewer service charge based, in part, on the
quantity of water used, as measured by the water utility water meter used upon
the premises.
   (B)   Billable volume. The user charge assessed residential users and those
users of other classes discharging normal domestic strength wastewater shall be
established proportionately according to billable wastewater volume. Billable
wastewater volume shall be calculated as follows.
      (1)   Residential users.
         (a)   Billable wastewater volume for residential users shall be
calculated on the basis of metered water usage.
         (b)   The per monthly billable wastewater volume shall be equal to
monthly metered water usage as averaged between the first and last quarters of
the calendar year.
         (c)   The city may require residential users to install water meters
for the purpose of determining billable wastewater volume.
      (2)   Non-residential users.
         (a)   The billable wastewater volume of non-residential users may be
determined in the same manner as for residential users.
         (b)   Except that if the city determines that there are significant
seasonal variations in the metered water usage of nonresidential users
resulting in a proportionate increase or decrease in wastewater volume; then
billable wastewater volume shall be:
            1.   Calculated on the basis of monthly metered water usage as
recorded throughout the year; or
            2.   Calculated on the basis of wastewater flow meters.
         (c)   The city may, at its discretion, require nonresidential users to
install additional water meters or wastewater flow meters as may be necessary
to determine billable wastewater volume.
(1986 Code, § 403.04)
§ 52.05 AMOUNT OF SEWER SERVICE CHARGES.
   (A)   Sewer service charge unit costs. The unit costs for the sewer service
charge shall be published annually by the approving authority, in accordance
with this subchapter.
   (B)   A sewer service charge.
      (1)   (a)   The sewer service charge for all users served by water
utility water meters shall be computed in accordance with the formula presented
below:
   T=FC+(V x COV)
         (b)   Where:
            1.   T=Total sewer service charge;
            2.   FC=Fixed charge for debt service;
            3.   COV=Charge per 1,000 gallons for O&M costs; and
            4.   V=Wastewater volume in 1,000 gallons.
      (2)   (a)   The sewer service charge for all users served by private
wells shall be computed in accordance with the formula presented below:
   T=FC+AVC
         (b)   Where:
            1.   T=Total sewer service charge;
            2.   FC=Fixed charge for debt service; and
            3.   AVC=Minimum charge per residential household for O&M costs.
   (C)   Reassignment of sewer users. The approving authority will reassign
sewer users into appropriate sewer service charge categories if wastewater flow
monitoring and sampling programs or other related information indicate a change
of categories is necessary.
   (D)   Operation, maintenance and replacement fund account.
      (1)   All sewer service charge revenues collected for replacement costs
shall be deposited in a separate and distinct fund to be used solely for
replacement costs as defined in this subchapter.
      (2)   All sewer service charge revenues collected for other operation and
maintenance expenses and debt service costs shall also be deposited in 2
additional separate and distinct funds.
      (3)   All revenues for the replacement fund and for operation and
maintenance of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities must be used
solely for the replacement fund and operation and maintenance of the wastewater
collection and treatment facilities.
   (E)   Charge for toxic pollutants. Any person discharging toxic pollutants
which cause an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or sludge from the
city’s wastewater treatment facility shall pay for the increased costs, as may
be determined by the approving authority.
(1986 Code, § 403.05)
§ 52.06 BILLING PRACTICE.
   (A)   Calculation of sewer service charges. Sewer service charges shall be
computed according to the rates and formula presented in this subchapter.
   (B)   Sewer service charge billing period. Sewer service charges shall be
billed by the city to the sewer users on a monthly basis along with the water
and garbage.
   (C)   Payment of sewer service charges. This payment is the same as the
water charges found in §
50.05(B) above.
   (D)   Penalties.
      (1)   These penalties are the same as the water penalties found in §
50.05(C) above.
      (2)   Change of ownership or occupancy of premises found delinquent shall
not be cause for reducing or eliminating these penalties.
   (E)   Civil action. Any charges levied pursuant tot his ordinance and which
have been properly sent to the occupant or owner and not paid, may be recovered
in a civil action by the city in any court of competent jurisdiction.
   (F)   Surcharge for unpolluted waters.
      (1)   A surcharge of $50 per month is hereby imposed and added to every
sewer billing mailed to those properties not in compliance with the unpolluted
waters portion of this subchapter within 60 days of notification of non-
compliance.
      (2)   Any person reconnecting any unpolluted water to the sanitary sewer
following the issuance of a certification of compliance with this subchapter
will be liable for this surcharge upon re-inspection for all months between the
last 2 inspections.
      (3)   This surcharge is in addition to any other penalties that may be
incurred under this subchapter.
(1986 Code, § 403.06) (Am. Ord. 27, passed 5-6-1996)
§ 52.07 ENTRY OF EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Right of entry. The approving authority or other duly authorized
employees or agents of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification,
shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection,
observation or testing, all in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter.
   (B)   Safety. While performing the necessary work on private premises
referred to in this section, the duly authorized municipal employees shall
observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the person.
   (C)   Identification; right to enter easements. The approving authority or
other duly authorized employees of the city, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter all private properties through
which the city holds an easement for the purpose of, but not limited to,
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any
portion of the sewage works lying within the easement, all subject to the
terms, if any, of the easement.
(1986 Code, § 403.07) (Am. Ord. 27, passed 5-6-1996)
§ 52.08 SEWER CONSTRUCTION AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Work authorized. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb the public sewers or
appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
approving authority.
   (B)   Cost of sewer connection. All costs and expenses incident to the
installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the person
making the connection.
   (C)   Use of old building sewers. Old building sewers may be used in
connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test
by the approving authority, to meet all requirements for this subchapter.
   (D)   Materials and methods of construction.
      (1)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench shall conform to the requirements of the
city’s building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of
the city.
      (2)   In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM
and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
   (E)   Building sewer grade.
      (1)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor.
      (2)   In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit
gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by the building drain
shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
   (F)   Storm and groundwater drains. No persons shall make connection of roof
downspouts, exterior foundation drains, sump pumps, area drains or other
sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building drain which is connected
directly or indirectly to a sanitary sewer.
   (G)   Conformance to plumbing codes.
      (1)   The connection of the building sewer into the sanitary sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code, or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9.
      (2)   All like connections shall be made gas tight and water tight. Any
deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the
approving authority before installation.
   (H)   Inspection of connection.
      (1)   The person making a connection to a public sewer shall notify the
approving authority when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer.
      (2)   The connection shall be inspected and approved by the approving
authority.
   (I)   Barricades; restoration.
      (1)   All excavations for the building sewer installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard.
      (2)   Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in
the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
approving authority.
(1986 Code, § 403.08) (Am. Ord. 27, passed 5-6-1996)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.09 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Written notice of violations. Any person found to be violating any
provision of this subchapter shall be declared a public nuisance and shall be
served by the city with a written notice stating the nature of the violation
and providing a reasonable time for the satisfactory correction thereof. The
offender shall, within the period of time stated in the notice, permanently
cease all violations.
   (B)   Abatement of nuisance without notice. If the approving authority
determines that a public nuisance exists within the city and that there is
great and immediate danger to the wastewater collection and treatment
facilities or the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the
approving authority may cause the same to be abated and charge the cost thereof
to the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the
nuisance, as the case may be.
   (C)   Accidental discharge. Any person found to be responsible for
accidentally allowing a deleterious discharge into the sewer system which
causes damage to the wastewater collection and treatment facility and/or
receiving body of water shall in addition to a fine, pay an amount to cover any
damages, both values to be established by the approving authority.
   (D)   Liability to city for losses. Any person violating any provisions of
this subchapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage
occasions by reason of the violation which the city may suffer as a result
thereof.
(1986 Code, § 403.09)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.10 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any user, permit applicant, or permit holder affected by any decision,
action or determination, including cease and desist orders, made by the
approving authority interpreting or implementing the provision of this
subchapter or in any permit issued herein, may file with the approving
authority a written request for reconsideration with 10 days of the date of the
decision, action or determination, setting forth in detail the facts supporting
the user's request for reconsideration.
   (B)   The approving authority shall render a decision on the request for
reconsideration to the user, permit applicant or permit holder in writing
within 15 days of receipt of request.
   (C)   If the ruling on the request for reconsideration made by the approving
authority is unsatisfactory, the person requesting reconsideration may, within
10 days after notification of the action, file a written appeal with the City
Council of the City of Osakis.
   (D)   A fee of $15 shall accompany any appeal to the City Council for their
ruling. This fee may be refunded if the appeal is sustained in favor of the
appellant. The written appeal shall be heard by the City Council within 30 days
from the date of filing. The City Council shall make a final ruling on the
appeal within 10 days from the date of hearing.
(1986 Code, § 403.10)
§ 52.11 VALIDITY.
   (A)   Superseding previous ordinances. This subchapter governing sewer use,
industrial wastewater discharges, sewer service charges and sewer connections
and construction shall supersede all previous ordinances of the city.
   (B)   Invalidation clause. Invalidity of any section, clause, sentence or
provision in this subchapter shall not affect the validity of any other
section, clause, sentence or provision of this subchapter which can be given
effect without invalid part or parts.
   (C)   Amendment. The city, through its duly authorized officers, reserves
the right to amend this subchapter in part or in whole whenever it may deem
necessary.
(1986 Code, § 403.11)
§ 52.12 AUDIT, NOTIFICATION AND RECORDS.
   (A)   Annual audit.
      (1)   The city shall annually review the wastewater contribution of its
sewer users, the operation and maintenance expenses of the wastewater
collection and treatment facilities, and the sewer service charge system in
accordance with those procedures established by the State Auditor’s Office and
federal statutes (40 C.F.R. pt. 35.2140(d)).
      (2)   Based on this review, the city shall revise the sewer service
charge system, if necessary, to accomplish the following:
         (a)   Maintain a proportionate distribution of operation and
maintenance expenses among sewer users based on the wastewater volume and
pollutant loadings discharged by the users;
         (b)   Generate sufficient revenues to pay the operation and
maintenance expenses of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities; and
         (c)   Apply excess revenues collected from the class of users to the
operation and maintenance expenses attributable to that class of users for the
next year and adjust the sewer service charge rates accordingly.
   (B)   Annual notification.
      (1)   The city shall notify its sewer users annually about the sewer
service charge rates. Notification shall separately indicate what portion of
the rates are attributable to the user charge, as defined by this subchapter.
      (2)   The notification shall occur in conjunction with a regular bill.
   (C)   Records. The city shall maintain records regarding wastewater flows
and loadings, costs of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities,
sampling programs and other information which is necessary to document
compliance with 40 C.F.R. pt 35, Subpart E of the Clean Water Act.
(1986 Code, § 403.12)
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
§ 52.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a building
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of any building and conveys the same to the
building sewer.
   CODE ADOPTED. The 1977 edition of the Minnesota Individual Sewage Treatment
Systems Standards (6 M.C.A.R. § 4.8040) recommended by the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
subchapter as if fully set forth herein. Before publication of this code or
ordinances the Clerk/Treasurer shall mark at least 1 copy of the Pollution
Control Agency Code as an official copy and file it in his or her office for
use and examination.
   INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM.
      (1)   A sewage disposal system, other than a public or community system,
which receives sewage from an individual establishment.
      (2)   Unless otherwise indicated, the word SYSTEM as it appears in this
subchapter means INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM.
   SEWAGE.
      (1)   Any water-carried domestic waste, exclusive of footing and roof
drainage, of any residence, industry or commercial establishment, whether
treated or untreated, and includes the liquid wastes produced by bathing,
laundry and culinary operations, and from toilets and floor drains.
      (2)   RAW SEWAGE is sewage which has not been subjected to any treatment
process.
(1986 Code, § 404.01)
§ 52.26 LICENSING.
   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of installing and constructing
sewage disposal systems within the City of Osakis without first obtaining a
license to carry on that occupation from the City Council and procuring and
posting with the City Clerk/Treasurer a bond in the amount of $10,000 in favor
of the city and the public, conditioned upon the faithful performance of
contracts and compliance with this subchapter.
   (B)   This license shall be renewable annually on or before April 1 and may
be revoked as provided in this code for license generally. Any installation,
construction, alteration or repair of a sewage disposal system by a license in
violation of the provisions of this subchapter or refusal on the part of a
licensee to correct the defective work performed by the licensee shall be cause
for revocation of or refusal to renew a license.
   (C)   Before any license issued under the provisions of this section may be
revoked or its renewal refused, the licensee shall be given a hearing to show
cause why the license should not be revoked or refused.
   (D)   Notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing shall be in
writing. The annual license fee shall be set annually by the Council.
Application for the license shall be made annually on a for furnished by the
Clerk/Treasurer.
(1986 Code, § 404.02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.27 PERMITS.
   (A)   Permit required.
      (1)   No person shall install, alter, repair or extend any individual
sewage disposal system in the city without first obtaining a permit therefor
from the Council or its authorized representative for the specific
installation, alteration, repair or extension; and, at the time of applying for
the permit, shall the fee annually set by the Council.
      (2)   Permits shall be valid for a period of 6 months.
   (B)   Applications. Applications for permits shall be made in writing upon
printed blanks or forms furnished by the Clerk/Treasurer and shall be signed by
the applicant.
   (C)   Contents.
      (1)   Each application for a permit shall have thereon the correct legal
description of the property on which the proposed installation, alteration,
repair or extension is to take place, and each application for a permit shall
be accompanied by a plot plan of the land showing the location of any proposed
or existing buildings located on the property with respect to the boundary
lines of the property and complete plans of the proposed system with
substantiating data, if necessary, attesting to the compliance with the minimum
standards of this subchapter.
      (2)   A complete plan shall include the location, size and design of all
parts of the system to be installed, altered, repaired or extended.
      (3)   The application shall also show the present or proposed location of
water supply facilities and water supply piping, and the name of the person who
is to install the system, and shall provide further information as may be
required by the Council.
(1986 Code, § 404.03)
§ 52.28 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every individual sewage disposal system installed after the effective
date of this subchapter and every alteration, extension and repair to any
system made after that date shall conform to the standards of the code adopted
by reference in this subchapter.
   (B)   Any individual sewage disposal system or pertinent part thereof,
irrespective of the date of original installation, which is not located,
constructed or installed in accordance with items 1b and 1c of the Pollution
Control Agency Code shall be so relocated, reconstructed or reinstalled as to
comply with the standards of those items.
(1986 Code, § 404.04)
§ 52.29 ADMINISTRATION.
   The city through its designated agent shall enforce the provisions of this
subchapter.
(1986 Code, § 404.05)
§ 52.30 INSPECTION.
   (A)   The official designated by the Council shall make inspection or
inspections as are necessary to determine compliance with this subchapter.
   (B)   No part of the system shall be covered until it has been inspected and
accepted by the designated official. It shall be the responsibility of the
applicant for the permit to notify the designated official that the job is
ready for inspection or re-inspection, and it shall be the duty of the
designated official to make the indicated inspection within 48 hours after
notice has been given.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of the property to give
the designated official free access to the property at reasonable times for the
purpose of making the inspections.
   (D)   Upon satisfactory completion and final inspection of the system the
designated official shall issue to the applicant a certificate of approval.
   (E)   If upon inspection the designated official discovers that any part of
the system is not constructed in accordance with the minimum standards provided
in this subchapter, he or she shall give the applicant written notification
describing the defects.
   (F)   The applicant shall pay an additional $15 for each re-inspection that
is necessary. The applicant shall have responsible for the correction or
elimination of all defects, and no system shall be placed or replaced in
service until all defects have been corrected or eliminated.
(1986 Code, § 404.06)
§ 52.31 MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Sludge measurement and removal.
      (1)   At least once a year the owner of any septic tank or his or her
agent shall measure or arrange for measurement of the depth of sludge and scum
in the septic tank.
      (2)   When, as a result of that measurement, the top of the sludge layer
in the tank or any compartment of the tank is found to be less than 12 inches
below the bottom of the outlet baffle or submerged pipe, or if the bottom of
the scum layer is less than 3 inches above the bottom of the septic tank outlet
baffle or submerged pipe, the owner or agent shall arrange for the removal and
sanitary disposal of sludge and scum from the tank; provided that this
requirement for measuring shall be waived for any septic tank which is cleaned
as indicated at least once each calendar year.
   (B)   Removal of solids from distribution box.
      (1)   At least once each year the owner of any system equipped with a
distribution box shall arrange for the opening of the distribution box and
removal of any settled solids therein.
      (2)   This material shall be disposed of to the septic tank or by other
means acceptable to the Council.
   (C)   Seepage pit liquid.
      (1)   At least once between May 1 and June 30 of each year the depth of
liquid in each seepage pit shall be measured.
      (2)   When, as a result of this measurement it is found that the liquid
level in the pit is less than 1 foot below the inlet, a second measurement
shall be made 8 to 12 hours after the first measurement, during which time no
liquid shall be discharged from the seepage pit.
      (3)   If, as a result of the second measurement, it is found that the
liquid level in the pit has not lowered at least 2 feet during the indicated
period of time, an additional seepage pit or other acceptable soil absorption
system shall be provided.
(1986 Code, § 404.07)
§ 52.32 ABANDONMENT OF SEPTIC SYSTEM.
   (A)   Private septic system. This section is written to set up rules when
abandoning a private septic system and hooking up to a city sanitary sewer
system:
      (1)   Remove all liquid and settled solids therein;
      (2)   Disconnect septic system from residence;
      (3)   Fill the septic tank with sand and replace cover to seal; and
      (4)   At no time shall a city sanitary sewer line or service be tied into
or through any private septic tanks.
   (B)   Record of abandonment. A record of abandonment shall be filed with the
City Clerk/Treasurer showing date and statement indicating division (A) above
rules were followed.
(Ord. 13, passed 4-3-1995)
§ 52.33 OBJECTIVES.
   (A)   The objectives of this subchapter are to provide adequate and safe
methods of sewage disposal and to prevent the contamination of any existing or
future water supply by any existing or future sewage disposal system.
   (B)   Any system of special, unusual or new design which will satisfy the
states objectives may be accepted as complying with this subchapter and any
permit granted for the construction, installation, alteration or repair of any
like conditions and guarantees as may be stated in the permit.
(1986 Code, § 404.08)
CHAPTER 53: REFUSE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
Section
   
53.01   Definitions
   
53.02   General regulations
   
53.03   Disposal required
   
53.04   Containers
   
53.05   Licensed collectors
   
53.06   Rates and charges
   
53.07   Refuse collection schedule
   
53.08   Collection vehicles
   
53.09   Burying refuse, rubbish or debris
§ 53.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. Organic waste resulting from the preparation of food and decayed
and spoiled food from any source.
   RECYCLABLES. Include paper, plastic bottles, tin cans, aluminum, glass and
other metal goods, each separated or otherwise prepared so as to be acceptable
to the licensed collector.
   REFUSE. Includes garbage and rubbish.
   RUBBISH. Inorganic solid waste such as tin cans, glass, paper, ashes,
sweepings and the like.
(1986 Code, § 502.01)
§ 53.02 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Unauthorized accumulation. Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse on
any premises is a nuisance and prohibited.
   (B)   Refuse in streets and the like.
      (1)   No person shall place any refuse in any street, alley or public
place or upon any private property except in proper containers for collection.
      (2)   No person shall throw or deposit refuse in any stream or other body
of water.
   (C)   Scattering of refuse. No person shall deposit anywhere within the city
any refuse in a manner so that it may be carried or deposited by the elements
upon any public or private premises within the city.
   (D)   Burying the refuse; composting.
      (1)   No person shall bury any refuse in the city except in an approved
sanitary landfill, but leaves, grass clippings and easily biodegradable, non-
poisonous garbage may be composited on the premises where the refuse has been
accumulated.
      (2)   Garbage may be composited only in a rodent-proof structure and in
any otherwise sanitary manner and after the Health Officer gives its approval
to the composting after it finds that the composting will be done in accordance
with these standards.
   (E)   Collection of ashes.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to store, deposit or dispose of any
refuse which is in flame or heated to the point where it could cause danger of
fire or any other material which is flammable as to create a danger of fire or
explosion.
      (2)   The garbage collector will pick up ashes only if stored in a sealed
plastic bag.
   (F)   Burning of leaves.
      (1)   Burning shall be prohibited within 100 feet of the ordinary high
water level of a general development and recreational development lake.
      (2)   A wood burning campfire less than 3 feet in diameter, designed to
enclose ash for removal would be exempt from this rule as well as agricultural
zoned lands.
(1986 Code, § 502.02) (Am. Ord. 19, passed 10-2-1995; Am. Ord. 66, passed 8-7-
2006)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 53.03 DISPOSAL REQUIRED.
   (A)   All refuse accumulated or generated within the city shall be
collected, conveyed and disposed of only by a licensed collector.
   (B)   Every householder, occupant or owner of any residence shall use the
garbage and refuse collection service provided by the licensed collector of the
city.
   (C)   Refuse shall be collected from residences at least once every week
throughout the year.
   (D)   Refuse shall be collected from commercial businesses at least once
every week and more often if necessary in order to avoid any undue
accumulations.
   (E)   Summer residents in the newly annexed areas from Blacks Crescent Beach
Resort to the easterly most city limit line, will be billed only for garbage
for the months of April, May, June, July, August and September at the regular
rate.
(1986 Code, § 502.03) (Am. Ord. 17, passed 9-5-1995; Am. Ord. 29, passed 11-4-
1996)
§ 53.04 CONTAINERS.
   (A)   General requirement.
      (1)   Every householder, occupant or owner of any residence shall use the
container provided by the licensed collector.
      (2)   Any restaurant, industrial establishment or commercial
establishment shall provide on the premises 1 or more containers to receive and
contain all refuse which may accumulate between collections.
      (3)   All normal accumulations of refuse shall be deposited in those
containers.
   (B)   Container requirements.
      (1)   Each container shall be water-tight, shall be impervious to insects
and rodents, except that any commercial or business establishment having refuse
volume exceeding 2 cubic yards per week shall provide bulk or box-type refuse
storage containers of a type approved by the Clerk/Treasurer.
      (2)   Containers shall be maintained in good and sanitary condition.
      (3)   Any container not conforming to the requirements of this chapter or
having ragged or sharp edges or any other defect likely to hamper or injure the
person collecting the contents shall be promptly replaced after notice by the
city.
   (C)   Placement.
      (1)   Where no alley exists, the container shall be placed on the curb
withing 3 feet of the street.
      (2)   Where no street exists and an alley is open to traffic, each
container for premises abutting the alley shall be placed at the rear of the
property within 3 feet of the alley.
   (D)   Use of containers.
      (1)   Refuse shall be drained of liquid and household garbage shall be
wrapped before being deposited in a container.
      (2)   Brush or tree limbs shall not exceed 1/2 inches in diameter or 3
feet in length, and shall be bagged in plastic or biodegradable bags.
      (3)   The licensed collector shall not be required to collect more than
60 gallons of refuse per week from each residential user.
   (E)   Unacceptable refuse. The following types of refuse shall not be placed
in containers but shall be the separate responsibility of the owner or occupant
of the premises to promptly dispose of either through the licensed collector or
the nearest hazardous waste disposal site:
      (1)   Hazardous waste as defined by federal and state laws and
regulations;
      (2)   Explosive waste;
      (3)   Liquid waste of any type in large quantities;
      (4)   Radioactive waste;
      (5)   Steel banding;
      (6)   Animal remains in large quantities;
      (7)   Paint, solvents, gasoline and inflammable liquids;
      (8)   Propane tanks;
      (9)   Aerosol cans, unless generated through normal household use;
      (10)   Waste which is infectious, hazardous, inflammable or toxic; human
remains;
      (11)   Tires in large quantities (in single loads);
      (12)   Large car parts, including gasoline tanks, hardened steel, shafts,
engine blocks and steel wheels;
      (13)   Large metal items;
      (14)   Steel fence materials;
      (15)   Large wood items;
      (16)   Demolition or building waste, including linoleum, carpet and other
flooring materials;
      (17)   Pesticides, insecticides, chemicals or other toxic materials (when
not normally in residential or commercial waste);
      (18)   Soil and sod, rocks, brick, cement and the like;
      (19)   Brush, trees or limbs exceeding 2 inches in diameter or 3 feet in
length; and
      (20)   Fish and wild game cleanings, unless frozen grass or leaves.
   (F)   Recycling encouraged. The City of Osakis encourages and supports the
concept of recycling in order to keep the costs of garbage down and deal
appropriately with environmental concerns.
   (G)   Recycling requirements.
      (1)   The city shall be authorized to pass whatever resolutions are
necessary to encourage and complete recycling through the garbage service
provided to the City of Osakis in connection with state and county requirements
together with individual city requirements.
      (2)   The Council is free from time to time to pass resolutions
controlling and regulating recycling.
   (H)   Recycling provision. The following recycling provisions shall apply in
the City of Osakis.
      (1)   Sixty-four-gallon no sort recycling container will be provided by
the refuse hauler. Items that can be put in recycling container are newspaper,
magazines, direct mail, glass bottles/jars, aluminum and metal cans, cardboard,
chip board, plastic bottles, jugs, jars.
      (2)   Sixty-four-gallon recycling container shall be picked up every
other week by the refuse hauler.
   (I)   Violation. Anyone bringing garbage refuse or recyclables into the city
from outside of the city limits shall be in violation of this chapter.
(1986 Code, § 502.04) (Am. Ord. 19, passed 10-2-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 53.05 LICENSED COLLECTORS.
   (A)   License required. No person shall permit refuse to be picked up from
his or her premises by an unlicensed collector. No person shall collect refuse
in the city except a person holding a license with the city to do so.
   (B)   Application.
      (1)   Any person desiring a license shall make application to the City
Clerk/Treasurer on a form prescribed by the Clerk/Treasurer.
      (2)   The application shall set forth:
         (a)   The name and address of the applicant;
         (b)   A description of each piece of equipment proposed to be used in
the collection;
         (c)   The proposed charges to be made of those who use the service;
         (d)   A description of the kind of service proposed to be rendered;
         (e)   The place to which the refuse is to be hauled; and
         (f)   The manner in which the refuse is to be disposed of.
   (C)   Limitations. Only 1 person shall be licensed for residential
collection during the period of the license from premises within a specific
geographic area defined by the Council. There is no limit to the number of
commercial refuse licenses.
(Am. Ord. 68, passed 3-5-2007)
   (D)   Disposal and roll-off containers.
      (1)   Disposal and roll-off containers. Each contractor, roll-off
company, or any container used for disposal of construction debris, or yard
clean up shall obtain a license from the city.
      (2)   Fee. Each license fee shall be set by the City Council on the first
meeting of each year on the fee schedule.
      (3)   Insurance. Each individual to be licensed shall show proof of
current liability insurance.
      (4)   License. License will run for 1 year from January 15 to January 14
of the following year.
      (5)   Enforcement. The Police Chief will be the enforcing authority for
this division.
(Ord. 69, passed 4-2-2007)
   (E)   Insurance.
      (1)   No license shall be issued until the applicant files with the
Clerk/Treasurer a current policy of public liability insurance covering all
vehicles to be used by the applicant in the licensed business.
      (2)   The limits of coverage of the insurance are:
         (a)   Each person injured, at least $500,000;
         (b)   Each accident, at least $1,000,000; and
         (c)   Property damage, at least $250,000.
   (F)   License fees.
      (1)   License shall be issued for a period of 1 year.
      (2)   The license fee shall annually be established by the Council.
   (G)   Rates and charges. No licensee shall charge any user of his or her
refuse collection service more than an amount annually set by the Council.
(1986 Code, § 502.05)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 53.06 RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Schedule. The owner or occupant of any premises served by a city
refuse collection contractor (the city refuse collection system) shall pay to
the city a service charge assessed and set by the Council.
   (B)   Billing.
      (1)   The service charge shall be made to the owner or occupant of each
building or housing unit served.
      (2)   If the building is served by city water or sewer, the refuse
collection charge shall be billed as a separate entry on the water or sewer
bill.
      (3)   If the premises are not so served, the refuse collection charge
shall be separately billed by the City Clerk/Treasurer.
      (4)   The Council shall charge a late payment charge of $5 for any
payment not made by the tenth day following the billing date.
   (C)   Payment.
      (1)   Service charges shall be payable at the same time as bills for
water service and subject to the same conditions of payment.
      (2)   If any charge is unpaid by November of any year, the Council shall
levy an assessment equal to the unpaid charge and shall certify the assessment
to the County Auditor for collection in the same manner as assessments for
local improvements.
   (D)   Fund. All service charges and late payment charges shall be deposited
in the water and sewer fund.
(1986 Code, § 502.06) (Am. Ord. 108, passed 2-1-2016)
§ 53.07 REFUSE COLLECTION SCHEDULE.
   Each licensee shall collect refuse from premises for which he has a
collection contract in accordance with the maximum amount permitted by the
city.
(1986 Code, § 502.07)
§ 53.08 COLLECTION VEHICLES.
   (A)   Every refuse collection vehicle shall be lettered on the outside so as
to identify the licensee.
   (B)   Every vehicle used for hauling garbage shall be covered, leak-proof,
durable and of easily cleanable construction.
   (C)   Every vehicle used for hauling refuse shall be sufficiently airtight,
and so used as to prevent unreasonable quantities of dust, paper or other
collected materials to escape.
   (D)   Every vehicle shall be kept clean to prevent nuisances, pollution or
insect-breeding, and shall be maintained in good repair.
(1986 Code, § 502.08)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 53.09 BURYING REFUSE, RUBBISH OR DEBRIS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BUILDING. Any structure or part of the structure including but not
limited to sheds, fences, sidewalks and driveways.
      REFUSE. Organic waste including but not limited to wood, tree limbs,
branches, shrubbery and the like.
      RUBBISH. Inorganic solid waste, such as tin cans, glass, paper, ashes,
sweepings and the like.
      DEBRIS. Any solid waste such as lumber, concrete, brick, tar, metals,
plastic, insulation, carpeting, linoleum, glass, rubber and the like,
including, but not limited to, any portion of a demolished building.
   (B)   General prohibition.
      (1)   That no person shall bury refuse, rubbish or debris, including but
not limited to the foundation or any portion of a building upon its demolition
within the city limits of Osakis.
      (2)   All refuse, rubbish or debris shall be properly disposed of at a
demolition landfill that has been licensed by or has received a permit from the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
(Am. Ord. 518, passed 8-3-1992)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 54: STORM DRAINAGE UTILITY
Section
   
54.01   Establishment of utility
   
54.02   Purpose
   
54.03   Definitions
   
54.04   Determining REFs for land uses
   
54.05   Other land uses
   
54.06   Storm water drainage rates and charges
   
54.07   Adjustment of charges
   
54.08   Exceptions
   
54.09   Supplying information
   
54.10   Estimated charges
   
54.11   Billing method
   
54.12   Certification of past due fees on taxes
   
54.13   Recollection of charges
§ 54.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF UTILITY.
   (A)   The municipal storm sewer system shall be conducted as a public
utility pursuant to M.S. § 444.075, as it may be amended from time to time,
from which revenues will be derived subject to the provisions of this chapter
and the Minnesota Statues.
   (B)   The storm water drainage utility shall be a part of the Street
Department.
   (C)   Just and reasonable changes for use, access, connection and
availability of storm sewer drainage facilities shall be calculated and
determined based on expected and typical storm water run off as may be
calculated within reasonable and practical limits and with dues and equitable
charges.
(Ord. 57, passed 7-16-2003)
§ 54.02 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of all funds derived from the storm water drainage utility
is to pay for all or part of the construction, reconstruction, repair, enlarge,
improvement, acquisition, maintenance, operation, administrations and use of
the storm water utility as established by the City of Osakis.
   (B)   All revenues derived from the fee shall be credited to the appropriate
storm water fund.
(Ord. 57, passed 7-16-2003)
§ 54.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENCY FACTOR (REF). One REF is the ratio of the average
volume of surface water runoff generated from land use to the average volume of
storm water runoff generated by a typical single-family residential land use,
during a standard 1-year rainfall event.
(Ord. 57, passed 7-16-2003)
§ 54.04 DETERMINING REFS FOR LAND USES.
   The REF values for various land uses are as follows:
 
Land Use Classification Land Use                                         REF
1                       Single-family and duplex residential             1.00
2                       Multiple-family residential                      2.50
                        Commercial, industrial, warehouse, institutions
3                       (school, churches, government buildings,         5.00
                        hospitals)
 
(Ord. 57, passed 7-16-2003)
§ 54.05 OTHER LAND USES.
   Other land uses not listed in the foregoing table shall be classified by the
City Engineer by assigning them to the most similar class from the standpoint
of probable hydrologic response.
(Ord. 57, passed 7-16-2003)
§ 54.06 STORM WATER DRAINAGE RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Fees for the use and availability of the storm sewer system shall be
determined through the use of the REF.
   (B)   In determining charges, the Council shall, from time to time, by
resolution, establish a basic system rate to be charged against each parcel of
land having a REF of 1.
(Ord. 57, passed 7-16-2003)
§ 54.07 ADJUSTMENTS OF CHARGES.
   (A)   The City Council may by resolution, from time to time, adopt policies
providing for the adjustment of storm water drainage charges from parcels of
groups of parcels, based upon hydrologic data supplied by affected property
owners, demonstrating an actual hydrologic response substantially different
from the REF being used for the parcel or parcels.
   (B)   This adjustment shall be made only after receiving the recommendation
of the City Engineer and shall not be made effective retroactively.
   (C)   Adjustment of fees shall not be retroactive.
   (D)   If the adjustment would have the effect of changing the REF for all or
substantially all of the land uses in a particular classification, the
adjustment shall be accomplished by amending the REF table in §
54.04 above.
(Ord. 57, passed 7-16-2003)
§ 54.08 EXCEPTIONS.
   The following land uses are exempt from storm water utility fees:
   (A)   Public rights-of-way;
   (B)   Wetlands and public waters as defined by state law; and
   (C)   Municipal owned property.
(Ord. 57, passed 7-16-2003)
§ 54.09 SUPPLYING INFORMATION.
   (A)   The owner, occupant or person in charge of any premises shall supply
the city with information as the city may reasonably request related to the
use, development and area of the premises.
   (B)   Willful failure to provide this information or to falsify it is a
violation of this section.
(Ord. 57, passed 7-16-2003)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 54.10 ESTIMATED CHARGES.
   If the owner, occupant or person in charge of any premises fails or refuse
to provide the information requested, as provided in §
54.09 above, the charge for the premises shall be estimated and billed in
accordance with the estimate, based upon information then available to the
city.
(Ord. 57, passed 7-16-2003)
§ 54.11 BILLING METHOD.
   (A)   Statements for storm water drainage utility fees will be computed
every month and collected by the city monthly along with other utilities such
as sewer and water.
   (B)   Any prepayment or overpayment of charges shall be retained by the city
and applied against subsequent monthly fees.
   (C)   Delinquent accounts will be treated the same as sewer and water
accounts.
(Ord. 57, passed 7-16-2003)
§ 54.12 CERTIFICATION OF PAST DUE FEES ON TAXES.
   (A)   Any storm water utility fees past due on October 1 of any year may be
certified to the County Auditor for collection with real estate taxes in the
following year or any year thereafter.
   (B)   In addition, the city shall also have the right to bring a civil
action or to take other legal remedies to collect unpaid fees.
(Ord. 57, passed 7-16-2003)
§ 54.13 RECOLLECTION OF CHARGES.
   If a property owner or person responsible for paying the storm water
drainage fees or charges questions the correctness of an invoice for the charge
or fee, that person may have the determination of the charge recomputed by
written request to the Mayor made with 90 days of mailing of the invoice in
question by the city.
(Ord. 57, passed 7-16-2003)
CHAPTER 55: INFLOW AND INFILTRATION
Section
   
55.01   Applicability and purpose
   
55.02   Definitions
   
55.03   Compatibility with other regulations
   
55.04   Prohibition against discharge into the sanitary sewer system
   
55.05   Prohibited connections
   
55.06   Sump pump regulation
   
55.07   Inspection
   
55.08   Certificates of compliance
   
55.09   Multi-unit residential rentals, commercial, industrial and HOA
properties
   
55.10   Corrections
   
55.11   Violations
   
55.12   Temporary waivers
   
55.13   Public nuisance
   
55.14   Appeals
 
   
55.99   Penalty
§ 55.01 APPLICABILITY AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter shall apply to all water entering the sanitary sewer
system unless explicitly exempted by the city. The city and its representatives
are authorized to administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   The City Council finds that the discharge of water from roof, surface,
groundwater, sump pump, footing tile, swimming pools, or other natural
precipitation into the municipal sanitary sewer system has the potential to
cause property damage and overload the city’s sanitary sewer system. The City
Council therefore finds it essential for the maintenance of health,
minimization of property damage, and to maintain the life and capacity of the
wastewater treatment system that the provisions of this chapter be strictly
enforced.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 55.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   CLEAR WATER. Stormwater, natural precipitation, melting snow, ground water
or flow from roof runoff, ground surface runoff, subsurface drainage,
downspouts, eave troughs, rainspouts, yard drains, sump pumps, footing tiles or
swimming pools, foundation drains, yard fountains, ponds, cistern overflows,
water discharged from any nonresidential air conditioning unit or system, or
any other water that is not required to be treated by state or federal law,
that enters the sanitary sewer system through any separation, gap, crack,
fracture, collapse or other structural defect in the sewer lateral. Swimming
pool water that is required to be treated in accordance with the city, county
or state regulations shall not be considered CLEAR WATER.
   INFLOW AND INFILTRATION (I/I). The excess flow of clear water into the
city’s wastewater treatment system.
      INFILTRATION. When groundwater or surface water seeps into sewer pipes
via cracks, broken pipes, and leaky joints.
      INFLOW. When clear water from illegal connections of sump pumps,
downspouts, foundation drains and other sources of clear water are channeled
directly into sanitary sewer pipes. INFLOW damages sewer services, not just the
illegal connections.
   INSPECTION VIDEO. A digital recording of the televised inspection process of
a private sewer lateral.
   POST-REPAIR VIDEO. A digital recording of the televised inspection process
of a private sewer lateral demonstrating the condition of the lateral after
repairs or connections have been completed.
   PRIVATE SEWER LATERAL. All sewer service pipes extending from the city
sanitary sewer main to the dwelling, building or structure it serves.
   OWNERSHIP RESPONSIBILITY. The property owner shall own and be responsible
for the routine maintenance and repair of the private sewer lateral, including
the connection to the city sanitary sewer main.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 55.03 COMPATIBILITY WITH OTHER REGULATIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule,
regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in
addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other
provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions
different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other
provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher
protective standards for human health or the environment shall apply.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 55.04 PROHIBITION AGAINST DISCHARGE INTO THE SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal
sanitary sewer collection system, or infiltrate into the sanitary sewer system
any clear water because of a sump pump, defective plumbing, a defective sewer
service lateral or by any other means.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 55.05 PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS.
   No person shall make or maintain a connection between any conductor, device
or system designed to move clear water drainage from its source to any pipe,
cleanout, floor drain, foundation drain, sink or any other apparatus with a
direct connection to the city’s sanitary sewer system.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 55.06 SUMP PUMP REGULATION.
   Any dwelling, structure or building that has a sump pump system to remove
groundwater from its foundation, footing or basement must have a permanently
installed discharge line that shall:
   (A)   At no time discharge water into the city’s sanitary sewer system or be
capable of connection or reconnection to the city’s sanitary sewer system.
   (B)   Provide year-round discharge capability to the outside of the
dwelling, building or structure, to the city’s storm sewer system.
   (C)   Consist of a rigid discharge line constructed of rigid piping material
inside the dwelling or building, without any connections for altering the path
of discharge, and if connected to the city’s storm sewer, must include a check
valve of an approved type and diameter.
   (D)   Be directed toward the front or rear yard so as not to trespass or
discharge onto adjoining properties.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 55.07 INSPECTION.
   By December 31, 2025, every person owning improved real estate, or
contractors and builders who are building a structure connected to the city’s
sanitary sewer system, shall obtain an inspection of each building located on
such property by an inspector approved by the city. The purpose of this city
inspection shall be to confirm that there is no prohibited discharge into the
municipal sanitary sewer system. Failure to have an inspection as required in
this section is a violation of the city code.
   (A)   The city will conduct inspections for a fee established in Osakis’ fee
schedule. The city will provide an inspection form if a property owner wishes
to have the inspection conducted by an independent inspector. All inspectors
must follow the guidelines prescribed on the inspection form and submit a
digital recording of the televised inspection process of the sewer lateral in a
format specified by the city.
   (B)   Inspections. For purposes of complying with the mandates of this
chapter to eliminate clear water drainage into the sanitary sewer system, the
Public Works Director, or his or her designee (“inspector”) is authorized to
conduct inspections of private sewer laterals and sump pumps for all properties
connected to the city’s sanitary sewer system for the limited purpose of
confirming that there is no sump pump or other prohibited discharge of clear
water drainage or any separation, gap, crack, fracture, collapse or other
structural defect in the sewer lateral. The cost of inspections will be paid
for by the owner or occupant of the property. The fee for a certificate of
compliance and for inspections by the city is stated in the city’s fee
schedule.
      (1)   The city will perform inspections and issue certificates of
compliance without fees until December 31, 2025. After January 1, 2026, fees
will be charged.
      (2)   Except as set forth in division (B)(4) below, inspections are
required when one of the following occurs:
         (a)   The property is offered for sale or conveyance by deed or
contract for deed, unless the certificate of compliance is still valid pursuant
to §
55.08 below.
         (b)   For the purpose of safeguarding the health and safety of the
general public or occupants of a building or to determine compliance with the
city code when the city has identified specific areas that have exceeded peak
flow rates as established by the local authority having jurisdiction.
         (c)   When the city’s operational inspection process identifies a
private sewer lateral that shows excess discharge of clear water or any
separation, gap, crack, fracture, collapse or other structural defect in the
sewer lateral.
         (d)   When a new building is completed and ready for occupancy the
builder will contact the city and request an inspection.
         (e)   When a building permit is issued to change the use or increase
the size or footprint of an existing structure.
         (f)   When a new owner takes possession of a property that has not
received a satisfactory inspection certificate.
         (g)   Owners of the property are responsible for the cost of
inspections.
         (h)   When the city orders a street improvement project and the
property is located on or adjacent to a street in the improvement project area
the property will require an inspection the city will conduct such inspection
at no cost to the property owner. If the property owner wishes to have a
private contractor perform the inspection, that cost will be paid by the
property owner.
      (3)   Inspections shall be conducted pursuant to §
52.07. In addition to the inspection requirements in §
52.07, owners shall be required to comply with the following:
         (a)   Provide sufficient space and access to the private sewer lateral
within the dwelling, building or other structure, including removal of any
obstacles so that the private sewer lateral and waste stack cleanout or final
cleanout, as necessary, is completely accessible to the inspector;
         (b)   Clear, or contract with for services to clear, the private sewer
lateral of any root intrusions, structural blockages or any other intrusions
that prevent the completion of an inspection and to allow clear televising of
the private sewer lateral from the dwelling private sewer lateral from the
dwelling, building or other structure to its connection with the city’s
sanitary sewer main;
         (c)   Remove, or contract with services to remove, any toilet on the
lowest level of the building for access purposes as described in division (B)
(3)(a) above; and
         (d)   The owner shall pay a penalty, as provided in the city’s fee
schedule, for any missed inspections. If the owner or the owner’s
representative arrives later than 20 minutes past the scheduled inspection time
without notification prior to the appointment, it shall be considered a missed
inspection.
      (4)   Inspections shall not be required under the following
circumstances:
         (a)   It is a newly constructed dwelling and title to the property is
transferred to the first owner and the builder has obtained an inspection and
delivers an inspection certificate to the first owner;
         (b)   It is the sale or other transfer of title of any property with a
dwelling that is being conveyed to a public body;
         (c)   It is the sale or transfer of title of any property that
contains a dwelling that will be demolished and the service lateral will be
properly capped and sealed;
         (d)   It is the sale or conveyance of any property that contains a
dwelling by a sheriff or other public or court officer in the performance of
their official duties. This exception does not apply to the sale by a person
appointed by a probate court; or
         (e)   The property is connected to a septic system and has no public
sewer access or has been granted a connection waiver by the city.
      (5)   The city shall complete its inspection reports within 30 business
days from the date of the inspection and immediately send the report to the
property owner. The reports shall indicate all sewer lateral defects,
deficiencies and violations discovered in sufficient detail to identify the
violations and to contract for repairs as necessary.
      (6)   At the discretion of the inspector, the inspector may refuse to
conduct a scheduled inspection if doing so would pose a risk to the inspector’s
health, safety or welfare or if the inspector believes the inspection process
is likely to cause damage to the property or private sewer lateral. In such
cases, the property owner will be required to have the inspection performed by
an independent contractor at the property owner’s expense.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 55.08 CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Issuance. The city shall issue a certificate of compliance if the
inspection verifies that all the following conditions are met:
      (1)   There is no sewer pipe joint degradation, as evidenced by root
intrusion and mineral staining, scaling and deposit;
      (2)   There are no prohibited discharges or connections as defined by §§
55.04 and
55.05 above;
      (3)   There are no misaligned joints obstructing the flow of wastes
causing blockages, exfiltration or the intrusion of roots or minerals;
      (4)   The lateral is free of holes, cracks, fractures, collapses, or
other structural defects.
   (B)   Fees. The fees for issuing certificates of compliance will be listed
in the city’s fee schedule. The city will perform inspections and issue
certificates of compliance without fees until December 31, 2025. After January
1, 2026, fees will be charged.
   (C)   Certificates of compliance period. Certificates are valid for a period
of 5 years from the date of issuance. No new inspections or certificates shall
be required until one of the events in §
55.07(B)(2) occurs.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 55.09 MULTI-UNIT RESIDENTIAL RENTALS, COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND HOA
PROPERTIES.
   (A)   For commercial and industrial properties and condominium or townhome
residential properties with a homeowners’ association (“HOA properties”),
property owners are required to locate the building’s sewer cleanout, open the
cleanout to ensure functionality, identify any private manholes or outside
cleanouts and location of all sump pump systems (if applicable) prior to a
scheduled inspection. This inspection requirement may be met by the following:
      (1)   The City of Osakis will attempt to conduct the inspection if the
project is within the capabilities of the city’s equipment and the inspector’s
knowledge and ability. The fee for this inspection is listed in the city’s fee
schedule. The city will conduct inspections and issue certificates of
compliance without fees until December 31, 2025. After January 1, 2026, fees
will be charged.
      (2)   By hiring a licensed plumber to perform the inspection, the plumber
must inspect the property’s sump pump, sewer service lateral, and groundwater
drainage system, and upon completion, return an inspection form provided by the
city, documenting the results of the inspection and provide a copy of the
digital video file of the televised inspection of the private sewer lateral.
All costs associated with an inspection by a privately retained plumber shall
be the responsibility of the property owner.
   (B)   If any violations are discovered, corrections must be made pursuant to
§
55.10 below. The city shall conduct a reinspection or receive a post-repair
video to verify compliance. Upon verification that corrections have been made,
the city shall issue a certificate of compliance.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 55.10 CORRECTIONS.
   Upon notice that the discharge of clear water on a property is not in
compliance with this chapter, the owner or occupant of the property shall cease
from discharging clear water in violation of this chapter and shall make the
necessary repairs and corrections to discharge the clear water in accordance
with this chapter. Discharge of clear water in compliance with this chapter
shall be corrected within 30 days of the date of notice of noncompliance. If
the repairs and corrections require excavation, the property owner shall have
90 days, exclusive of the months of November through April, to complete the
repairs. A post-repair inspection of the property will be completed within 15
days after the completion of the repair.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 55.11 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Violations, generally. Except as provided in division (B)(1) below,
for owner-occupied, single-family private sewer lateral violations discovered
during a time of sale inspection, when the inspector determines there has been
a violation of any provision of this chapter, the inspector will give notice of
the violation to the owner and occupant in writing and allow time for
compliance as follows.
      (1)   Discharge of clear water in compliance with this chapter shall be
corrected within 30 days of the date of notice of noncompliance. If the repairs
and corrections require excavation, the property owner shall have 90 days,
exclusive of the months of November through April, to complete the repairs.
      (2)   All sump pump violations shall be corrected within 10 days of
notice.
   (B)   Violations discovered at time of sale.
      (1)   Seller responsibilities. When the inspector determines that there
has been a violation of any provision of this chapter prior to the sale, the
seller is responsible for correcting the violations prior to the sale, unless
the buyer has assumed such responsibility as provided in division (B)(2) below.
Failure of a seller to disclose to a buyer that there are uncorrected
violations of this chapter is a violation of the city code. When correcting the
violations, all necessary permits shall be obtained from the city. Upon
completion of the corrections, the city shall reinspect the property to verify
compliance or the seller shall provide a copy of a post-repair video to the
city.
      (2)   Buyer responsibilities. If a seller cannot correct the violations
prior to the sale, the seller must require the buyer to assume the
responsibility for correcting the violations, in which case, the seller and the
buyer shall sign and submit a written acknowledgment to the city that includes:
         (a)   The buyer’s acceptance and assumption of responsibility for
correcting the violations within 90 days after closing on the property;
         (b)   The buyer’s understanding that either the city shall reinspect
the property to verify compliance or a copy of a post-repair video must be
provided to the city in order to verify that the corrections have been
completed;
         (c)   The buyer’s agreement to hold the city harmless from liabilities
and claims if the buyer occupies the dwelling prior to corrections of the
violations; and
         (d)   The buyer’s understanding that failure to correct violations or
deficiencies, failure to provide a post-repair video or failure to allow a
reinspection is a violation of the city code and subjects the buyer to
penalties as stated in §§
55.13 and
55.99.
   (C)   Violations and corrections under the roadway. When the inspector
determines that there has been a violation of any provision of this chapter and
the violations are under the roadway or within the right-of-way, the property
owner is responsible for the repairs. However, no one shall excavate in the
roadway without permission from the city’s Public Works Director.
   (D)   Non-excavation violations and corrections. When the property owner is
correcting violations of the private sewer lateral between the street and the
building using a cured-in-place pipe (“pipe liner”) or similar approved repair
methods, and the corrections only involve the lining of the private sewer
lateral, the contractor shall terminate the pipe liner as close to the
connection with the city’s public sanitary sewer main as possible. If the pipe
liner extends into the public main, the contractor shall trim off the excess
portion and report its approximate location to the Public Works Department as
soon as possible.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 55.12 TEMPORARY WAIVERS.
   (A)   The city may grant a temporary waiver from the provisions of this
chapter where strict enforcement would cause a threat of damage or harm to
other property, the environment, or public safety because of circumstances
unique to the individual property or due to weather conditions. A written
request for a temporary waiver must be first submitted to the City Clerk
specifying the reasons for the temporary waiver.
   (B)   If a temporary waiver is granted, the property owner shall pay an
additional fee for sewage service charges based on the number of gallons
discharged into the city’s sanitary sewer system as estimated by the Public
Works Director.
   (C)   The Public Works Director may set conditions to the temporary waiver.
The Public Works Director may terminate the temporary waiver upon a failure to
comply with any conditions imposed on the temporary waiver. The Public Works
Director must give a 5-day written notice of the termination to the property
owner and occupant setting forth the reasons for the termination. After
expiration or termination of a temporary waiver, the property owner shall
comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 55.13 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   An owner or occupant who fails to have an inspection, who has done work that
does not comply with this chapter, who reconnects to a previously disconnected
prohibited discharge, who fails to pay the penalty or who has failed to do the
work required by this chapter within the specified time limit, will be deemed
to have created a public nuisance subject to abatement and assessment, as
provided in
Ch. 90 of this city code.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 55.14 APPEALS.
   (A)   Applications for appeal of any administrative determination made
pursuant to this chapter shall be addressed in writing to the City Clerk within
30 days of the determination.
   (B)   Applications shall at a minimum identify the property for the appeal
is sought, the name of the property owner, and describe in detail the
determination which is being appealed. Within 60 days of receipt of the
application, the City Council shall make its decision on the matter and send a
written copy of such decision to the property owner by mail.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 55.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A monthly surcharge in an amount duly adopted by the City Council and
set forth in the city’s fee schedule shall be assessed against any property on
which clear water is discharged in violation of this chapter. The monthly
surcharge will be charged on the property’s municipal utility billing statement
if one or more of the following conditions apply:
      (1)   An owner fails to complete an inspection pursuant to §
55.07;
      (2)   An owner whose property was found in violation of this chapter did
not make the necessary repairs and furnish proof of those changes to the city
within the time frames required by this chapter;
      (3)   An owner fails to allow an inspection or reinspection to verify
compliance; or
      (4)   The property owner or occupant reconnects a clear water discharge
line to the municipal sanitary sewer system after it has been previously
disconnected at the city’s or a court’s direction. The property owner will be
subject to the penalty for all months between the last two inspections.
   (B)   The penalty shall be added for every month during which the property
is not in compliance.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-10-2024)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter
   
70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
   
71.   PARKING REGULATIONS
   
72.   BICYCLES
   
73.   SNOWMOBILES; RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
   
74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
   
75.   PARKING SCHEDULES
   
76.   VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Regulations
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Turning
   
70.03   Through streets; one-way streets
   
70.04   Speed limits
   
70.05   Unreasonable acceleration or breaking
   
70.06   Unreasonable acceleration defined
   
70.07   Unreasonable breaking defined
   
70.08   Truck restrictions
   
70.09   Seasonal weight restrictions
   
70.10   Establishment of safety zones and the like
Specific Regulations
   
70.25   Removing keys
   
70.26   Exhibition driving prohibited
   
70.27   Through streets
   
70.28   Signs, signals and the like
   
70.29   Unauthorized signs
   
70.30   Damage to sign
   
70.31   Pedestrians
   
70.32   Hitching rides
   
70.33   Mufflers
   
70.34   Unsafe equipment
   
70.35   Passenger interfering with driver
   
70.36   Wagons and animals
   
70.37   Hitchhiking
   
70.38   Reporting of accidents
   
70.39   Windshield
   
70.40   Police duties
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Any term used in this chapter and defined in M.S. § 169.01, as it may be
amended from time to time, has the meaning given it by that section.
(1986 Code, § 701.01)
§ 70.02 TURNING.
   (A)   Restriction on turns.
      (1)   The Council by resolution may, whenever necessary to preserve a
free flow of traffic or to prevent accidents, designate any intersection as one
where the turning of vehicles to the left or to the right, or both, is to be
restricted at all times or during specified hours.
      (2)   The City Engineer shall mark by appropriate signs any intersections
designated.
      (3)   No intersection on a trunk highway shall be so designated until the
consent of the Commissioner of Transportation to the designation is first
obtained.
      (4)   No person shall turn a vehicle at any like intersection contrary to
the directions on the signs.
   (B)   U-turns.
      (1)   No person shall turn a vehicle so as to reverse its direction or
turn more than 90 degrees for the purpose of entering a parking spot on any
street or at any intersection where traffic is regulated by a traffic control
signal.
      (2)   It shall also be a violation of this section to make a U-turn in
any area posted with a “No U-Turn” sign.
   (C)   Other turning. No person shall turn a motor vehicle so as to proceed
in the opposite direction upon any street, highway or alley within the City of
Osakis except at an intersection of 2 streets where it is not posted that the
turn is forbidden.
(1986 Code, § 701.02) (Am. Ord. passed 6-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.03 THROUGH STREETS; ONE-WAY STREETS.
   (A)   The Council by resolution may designate any street or portion of
street as a through highway or a 1-way roadway where necessary to preserve the
free flow of traffic or to prevent accidents.
   (B)   The City Engineer shall post appropriate signs at the entrance to the
street.
   (C)   No trunk highway shall be so designated unless the consent of the
Commissioner of Transportation to that designation is first secured.
(1986 Code, § 701.03)
§ 70.04 SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle within the City of Osakis at a rate of
speed in excess of 30 mph.
   (B)   Provided, however, that at any place within the city where a higher or
lower speed limit has been duly and lawfully indicated with appropriate traffic
devices, no person shall drive a vehicle in excess of the rate so set.
(1986 Code, § 701.04)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.05 UNREASONABLE ACCELERATION OR BREAKING.
   Any unreasonable acceleration or unreasonable breaking of any motor vehicle
on any public street, alley, sidewalk, parking lot or other public right-of-way
or public property within the city is hereby declared to be a public nuisance
and is prohibited.
(1986 Code, § 701.05)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.06 UNREASONABLE ACCELERATION DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   UNREASONABLE ACCELERATION. Any acceleration which is not the result of an
emergency and it is in a manner so as to cause squealing or screeching sound by
the tires of the vehicle or the throwing or sand or gravel by the tires of the
vehicle or both.
(1986 Code, § 701.06)
§ 70.07 UNREASONABLE BREAKING DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   UNREASONABLE BREAKING. Breaking, not in the course of making an emergency
stop, in a manner so as to cause squealing or screeching sound by the tires of
the vehicle or the throwing of sand or gravel by the tires of the vehicle or
both.
(1986 Code, § 701.07)
§ 70.08 TRUCK RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The City Council by resolution may designate streets on which travel
by commercial vehicles in excess of 9-tons’ gross weight is prohibited.
   (B)   The City Engineer shall erect appropriate signs on those streets.
   (C)   No person shall operate a commercial vehicle on those posted streets
in violation of the restrictions stated.
(1986 Code, § 701.08)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.09 SEASONAL WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The City Engineer may prohibit the operation of vehicles upon any
street under his or her jurisdiction or impose weight restrictions on vehicles
to be operated on that street whenever the street, by reason of deterioration,
rain, snow or other climatic conditions, will be seriously damaged or destroyed
unless the use of vehicles on the street is prohibited or the permissible
weights thereof reduced.
   (B)   He or she shall erect and maintain signs plainly indicating the
prohibition or restriction at each end of that portion of the street affected.
   (C)   No person shall operate a vehicle on a posted street in violation of
the prohibition or restriction.
(1986 Code, § 701.09)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.10 ESTABLISHMENT OF SAFETY ZONES AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   To assist in the direction and control of traffic, to improve safe
driving conditions at any intersection or dangerous location and to warn
pedestrians or drivers of motor vehicles of dangerous conditions or hazards,
the Chief of Police may establish safety zones, lanes of traffic and stop
intersections, and he or she may order installation by the City Engineer of
stop signs, yield signs, warning signs, signals, pavement markings or other
devices.
   (B)   No regulation may be established on a trunk highway unless the consent
of the Commissioner of Transportation is first secured.
(1986 Code, § 701.14)
SPECIFIC REGULATIONS
§ 70.25 REMOVING KEYS.
   (A)   No person shall leave a motor vehicle, except a truck which is engaged
in loading or unloading, unattended on any street, used car lot, or unattended
parking lot without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, and
removing all ignition keys from the vehicle.
   (B)   Whenever any police officer finds any motor vehicle standing in
violation of this provision, he or she shall remove the keys from the vehicle
and deliver them to police headquarters.
(1986 Code, § 701.15)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.26 EXHIBITION DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall turn, accelerate, decelerate or otherwise operate a
motor vehicle within the city in a manner which causes unnecessary engine noise
or backfire, squealing tires, skidding, sliding, swaying, throwing of sand or
gravel, or in a manner simulating a race.
   (B)   Unreasonable squealing or screeching sounds emitted by tires, or the
throwing of sand or gravel by the tires is prima facie evidence of a violation
of this section.
(1986 Code, § 701.16)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.27 THROUGH STREETS.
   Every driver of a vehicle shall bring a vehicle to a full stop before
entering any through street or stop intersection which has been properly
designated and posted as so.
(1986 Code, § 701.17)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.28 SIGNS, SIGNALS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   All signs, signals, markings, placed by the city shall conform to the
standards prescribed by the Commissioner of Highways and whenever so required
by law shall be so placed only with the expressed approval and authorization
from the Commissioner.
   (B)   No person shall disobey the instructions of any official traffic
control device placed within the City of Osakis by the State Highway Department
or the city unless the time otherwise directed by a police officer.
(1986 Code, § 701.18)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.29 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS.
   No person shall:
   (A)   Place, maintain or display any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or
device imitating, resembling or hiding an official traffic control device, a
railroad sign or signal; or
   (B)   Place or maintain, or display any light or sign, signal or lighting
device in a way so as to interfere with the effectiveness of any highway
traffic control device or signal or device used in the operation of the
railroad.
(1986 Code, § 701.19)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.30 DAMAGE TO SIGN.
   No person shall alter, deface, injury, knock down, remove any official
traffic control device or railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or
insignia thereon or any part thereof.
(1986 Code, § 701.20)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.31 PEDESTRIANS.
   Pedestrians shall cross any street in the City of Osakis only at the
intersection thereof with another street and shall pass over the portion of the
street as it included within the lines of the sidewalk, projected, and not
diagonally nor in the middle of block.
(1986 Code, § 701.21)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.32 HITCHING RIDES.
   No person shall ride or jump upon any vehicle without the consent of the
driver, and no person when riding shall allow any part of the body to protrude
beyond the limits of the vehicle, nor shall any person hang onto any vehicle
whatsoever.
(1986 Code, § 701.23)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.33 MUFFLERS.
   Every motor vehicle or motorcycle shall use a muffler which shall be
sufficient to deaden the sound of the exhaust and the muffler shall not be
disconnected or cut out while the motor vehicle or motorcycle is being operated
upon any street or highway or avenue or alleyway within the city.
(1986 Code, § 701.24)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.34 UNSAFE EQUIPMENT.
   No person shall drive and no owner shall cause or knowingly allow to be
driving, on any street or highway, in the city any vehicle or combination of
vehicles which is in an unsafe condition as to endanger any person or which
does not contain those parts or is not at all times equipped with proper brakes
and lamps and other equipment in proper condition and adjusted as required by
the Highway Traffic Regulation Act of the State of Minnesota or which is
equipped in violation of the law.
(1986 Code, § 701.25)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   Obstruction of windshields, see §
70.39
§ 70.35 PASSENGER INTERFERING WITH DRIVER.
   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded or when there are in
the front seat a number of persons, exceeding 3 as to obstruct the view of the
driver to the front or side of the vehicle or as to interfere with the driver's
control or the driving mechanisms of the vehicle.
(1986 Code, § 701.26)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.36 WAGONS AND ANIMALS.
   Every person riding an animal or driving any animal drawn vehicle upon a
street or alley shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable
to the driver of a vehicle except those provisions which by their nature can
have no application.
(1986 Code, § 701.27)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.37 HITCHHIKING.
   No person shall stand in a street or alley for the purpose of soliciting a
ride from a driver of any private or public vehicle.
(1986 Code, § 701.28)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.38 REPORTING OF ACCIDENTS.
   Every driver of a vehicle involved in any type of accident with a
pedestrian, other vehicle or fixed object shall remain at the scene of the
accident until permitted to leave by a police officer, except that this shall
not prevent the driver from leaving the scene to summon police or to provide
medical aid or treatment for an injured person provided that he or she return
to the scene forthwith.
(1986 Code, § 701.29)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.39 WINDSHIELD.
   (A)   No person shall drive and no owner shall cause or knowingly permit to
be driven, on any street or alley in the city any vehicle or combination of
vehicles having any objects suspended from the inside rear view mirror or
suspended from, or affixed to any portion of the forward interior part of the
vehicle between the driver and the windshield.
   (B)   Provided that the stickers which may be required by law may be affixed
to the windshield shall not be in contrary to this chapter.
(1986 Code, § 701.30)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.40 POLICE DUTIES.
   (A)   The Police Department shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and
the state traffic laws.
   (B)   Police officers are authorized to direct all traffic within the city,
either in person or by means of visible or audible signal, in conformity with
this chapter and the state traffic laws.
   (C)   During a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the Police Department may direct traffic as conditions
require not withstanding the provisions of this chapter and the state traffic
laws.
   (D)   Officers of the Fire Department may direct or assist the police in
directing traffic at the scene of a fire or in the immediate vicinity.
(1986 Code, § 701.31)
CHAPTER 71: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   General parking regulations
   
71.02   Bus stops and taxi stands
   
71.03   Periods of snow removal
   
71.04   Abandoned vehicle
Cross-reference:
   For provisions concerning motor vehicle storage fees, see §
76.01.
§ 71.01 GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Angle and parallel parking.
      (1)   Except where angle parking is indicated by appropriate signs or
makings, each vehicle parked upon a street where there is a curb shall be
stopped or parked with the right hand wheels parallel with and within 12 inches
of the right hand curb.
      (2)   If there be no curb, then the vehicle shall be parked parallel with
the edge and as far right in the street or alley as may be practicable.
      (3)   No vehicle shall be stopped with its left side to the curb.
   (B)   Time limit parking zones.
      (1)   The City Council may, by resolution, designate certain areas where
the right to park is limited during hours specified.
      (2)   The City Engineer shall mark by appropriate signs each zone so
designated.
      (3)   During the hours specified on the sign, no person shall park a
vehicle in any limited parking zone for a longer period than is so specified.
   (C)   Camping purposes. No person shall for camping purposes, leave or park
a house trailer on any street or alley in the city.
   (D)   Display for sale purposes. No person shall park any vehicle on any
street for the purpose of displaying it for sale.
   (E)   Impoundment.
      (1)   Any police officer may remove a vehicle from a street to a garage
or other place of safety when the vehicle is left unattended and constitutes an
obstruction to traffic or hinders snow removal or street improvement or
maintenance operations.
      (2)   The vehicle shall not be released until the fees for towing and
storage are paid in addition to any fine imposed for violation of this chapter.
   (F)   Prima facie violation. The presence of any motor vehicle on any street
when standing or parking in violation of this chapter is prima facie evidence
that the registered owner of the vehicle committed or authorized the commission
of the violation.
   (G)   Trailer. No person shall leave a trailer or camper parked on any
street or avenue between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. if the trailer
or camper is not hitched to another motor vehicle for towing purposes.
   (H)   Winter parking regulations. No parking on public streets November 1 to
April 1 between the hours of 12:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m., unless so otherwise
marked.
(1986 Code, § 701.10) (Am. Ord. 74, passed 9-4-2007; Am. Ord. 110, passed 3-7-
2016; Am. Ord. 113, passed 10-2-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.02 BUS STOPS AND TAXI STANDS.
   (A)   Designation.
      (1)   The City Council by resolution may designate spaces on streets in
the city where vehicles engaged in carrying passengers for hire shall stand or
park.
      (2)   The Chief of Police shall mark by appropriate sign any bus stop or
taxi stand so established.
   (B)   Parking restrictions. Except for the purpose of loading or unloading
passengers, no driver of any vehicle other than a bus shall stand or park at a
bus stop and no driver of any vehicle other than a taxicab shall stand or park
in a taxi stand.
   (C)   Bus and taxi parking.
      (1)   No driver of any bus shall stand or park the bus upon any street
except at a bus stop.
      (2)   Except for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or for a
reasonable time while on personal errands, no driver of any taxicab shall stand
or park upon any street except at a taxi stand.
(1986 Code, § 701.12)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.03 PERIODS OF SNOW REMOVAL.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever existing or forecasted weather conditions require that
snow plowing be carried out, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle or
permit it to stand upon any street or street right of way during periods of
snow removal.
      (2)   All vehicles will be ticketed and towed from the streets when city
crew starts to remove snow.
   (B)   Failure to remove a vehicle during snow plowing or ice treatment is a
violation of this chapter and is punishable pursuant to §
10.99.
   (C)   When applicable the prohibitions of division (B) above shall not apply
on any block after it has become substantially cleared of snow and ice from
curb to curb.
(1986 Code, § 701.13) (Am. Ord. passed 7-15-1994)
§ 71.04 ABANDONED VEHICLE.
   (A)   All abandoned vehicles found within the city limits shall be dealt
with pursuant to M.S. §§ 168B.01 and 609.01, as they may be amended from time
to time.
   (B)   Any vehicles found to be abandoned pursuant to the statue may be dealt
with.
(1986 Code, § 701.33)
CHAPTER 72: BICYCLES
Section
   
72.01   General rights and regulations
   
72.02   Carrying packages or extra persons
   
72.03   Hitching to vehicles
Cross-reference:
   Riding bicycles, roller blades and the like in the Business District, see
Ch. 74, Sch. I
§ 72.01 GENERAL RIGHTS AND REGULATIONS.
   Every person riding a bicycle upon the streets or alleyways of the city
shall have all the rights and duties of the rights of a vehicle except as to
provisions of this chapter, which by their nature, cannot have application to
bicycles and shall have bicycle equipped with reflectors, brakes and other
equipment as may be required by state law.
(1986 Code, § 702.01)
§ 72.02 CARRYING PACKAGES OR EXTRA PERSONS.
   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at 1 time than the number for
which it is designed and equipped, nor shall any person operating a bicycle
carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the driver from keeping at
least 1 hand upon the bars.
(1986 Code, § 702.02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.03 HITCHING TO VEHICLES.
   No person riding or operating a bicycle shall attach the same or himself or
herself to any vehicle upon a street or alleyway in the city.
(1986 Code, § 702.03)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 73: SNOWMOBILES; RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
   
73.01   Purpose
   
73.02   Definitions
   
73.03   Operation
   
73.04   Crossing streets or highways
   
73.05   Traffic laws
   
73.06   Yielding
   
73.07   Operation by minors
   
73.08   Equipment
   
73.09   Emergencies
   
73.10   Animals
   
73.11   Adoption of Minnesota Statutes
   
73.12   Snowmobiles, motorized golf carts, Class 1 and 2 ATVs and other
recreational vehicles
§ 73.01 PURPOSE.
   Because the operation and use of snowmobiles and other recreational vehicles
in an uncontrolled manner endangers the public peace, health and safety of the
city's inhabitants, the city adopts the following rules to regulate the
operation and use of recreational vehicles and provide greater protection to
the public peace, health and safety of the inhabitants of the city while
snowmobiles and other recreational vehicles are operated and used in the city.
(Am. Ord. 54, passed 12-2-2002)
§ 73.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES (ATVs).  
      (1)   CLASS 1 ATVS are motorized flotation-tired vehicles of not less
than 3 low pressure tires, but not more than 6 tires, that is limited in engine
displacement of less than 1,000 cubic centimeters and total dry weight less
than 1,000 pounds.
      (2)   CLASS 2 ATVs are motorized floatation-tired vehicles of not less
than 3 low pressure tires, but not more than 6 tires, that is limited in engine
displacement of less than 1,000 cubic centimeters and total dry weight of 1,000
to 1,800 pounds.
   OPERATE. To ride in or on and control the operation of a snowmobile or other
recreational vehicle.
   OPERATION. To ride in or on, or control the operation of, or be in actual
physical control of a snowmobile or other recreational vehicle.
   OPERATOR. Any person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
snowmobile or other recreational vehicle.
   OWNER. A person, other than a lien holder, having an interest in or title to
a snowmobile or other recreational vehicle, entitling that person to the use or
possession thereof.
   PERSON. Includes an individual, partnership, corporation, the state and its
agencies and subdivision and any body of persons, whether incorporated or not.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any real property owned by the city including all city
parks and recreation areas.
   RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE or RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Any self propelled
vehicle and any vehicle propelled or drawn by a self propelled vehicle used for
recreational purposes, including but not limited to snowmobile, trail bike or
other all terrain vehicle, hovercraft or motor vehicle licensed for highway
operation that is being used for off road recreational purposes.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular traffic, together with all boulevards and sidewalks, except as
herein-described.
(Am. Ord. 54, passed 12-2-2002; Am. Ord. 86, passed 8-6-2012)
§ 73.03 OPERATION.
   Snowmobiles, Class 1 and Class 2 ATVs or other recreational vehicles may be
driven within the city limits with a valid permit, excluding the following
prohibited streets and roadways.
   (A)   Operation prohibited.
      (1)   All operation of snowmobiles, Class 1 ATVs or other recreational
vehicles are prohibited on the following streets or roadways:
         (a)   All of Nokomis Street, also known as Highway 27;
         (b)   All of Main Street west of the intersection with First Avenue
East;
         (c)   All of Second Street West and Central Avenue between Nokomis and
Lake Street; and
         (d)   All of First Avenue East, Lake Street from the west edge of the
intersection of Central Avenue to the east city limits.
      (2)   All operations of motorized golf carts and Class 2 ATVs or other
recreational vehicles are prohibited on the following streets or roadways:
         (a)   All of Nokomis Street, also known as Highway 27;
         (b)   All of Main Street between First Avenue East and First Avenue
West;
         (c)   All of Central Avenue between Nokomis Street and Main Street.
   (B)   Public roads.
      (1)   Except as outlined in division (A) above, snowmobiles and all
terrain vehicles or other recreational vehicles may be operated on the portion
of any right-of-way of any public highway, street, road, trail or alley used
for motorized vehicle traffic, so long as the snowmobile, all terrain vehicle
or recreational vehicle travels on the most right-hand portion of the lane of
travel, except in passing, which is used for vehicle traffic in the same
direction.
      (2)   No operation on public roads may occur on freeways, interstate
highways, trunk highways, county state aid highways.
      (3)   A person may operate a snowmobile or other recreational vehicle
upon the ditch bottom or outside of trunk, county state aid and county highways
where the highways are so configured within the corporation city limits.
   (C)   Sidewalks. Snowmobiles, all terrain vehicles or other recreational
vehicles may not be operated on public sidewalks provided for pedestrian
travel.
   (D)   Boulevards. No snowmobile, all terrain vehicle or other recreational
vehicle may be operated on a boulevard within any public right-of-way.
   (E)   Private property. No snowmobile, all terrain vehicle or other
recreational vehicle may be operated on private property of another without
specific permission of the owner or the person in control of the property.
   (F)   Public property. No snowmobile, all terrain vehicle or other
recreational vehicle may be operated on any other public property, including
parks and recreational areas, except as the city code may specifically permit.
   (G)   Alcohol and drugs.
      (1)   No person shall operate a snowmobile, all terrain vehicle or other
recreational vehicle within the city limits, whether on public or private
property, while under the influence of alcohol or drugs as defined by M.S. §§
169A.20 and 84.91, as they may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   These statutes are incorporated by reference herein.
   (H)   Speed.
      (1)   No person shall operate a snowmobile or other recreational vehicle
at a rate of speed greater than reasonable and proper under all surrounding
circumstances.
      (2)   No person shall operate a snowmobile or recreational vehicle on
public roadways at speeds greater than 20 mph.
   (I)   Recklessness. No person shall operate a snowmobile or other
recreational vehicle at any place in a careless, reckless or negligent manner
or heedlessly in disregard of the rights or safety of others, or in a manner so
as to endanger or be likely to endanger or cause injury or damage to any person
or property.
   (J)   Towing. No person shall operate a snowmobile or other recreational
vehicle so as to tow any person or thing on a public street or highway except
through use of a rigid tow bar attached to the rear of the vehicle.
   (K)   Operation near people. No person shall operate a snowmobile or other
recreational vehicle within 100 feet of any fisherman, pedestrian, skating rink
or sliding area where the operation would conflict with use or endanger other
person or property.
   (L)   Exceptions. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the owner of
a snowmobile, all terrain vehicle or other recreational vehicle who lives in an
area where operation is restricted from using the street for access to streets
where operation is allowed so long as the operation is designed to obtain
access to or direct return from the unrestricted areas.
   (M)   Other operations. All other operations of snowmobiles, all terrain
vehicles and other recreational vehicles must comply with the other
requirements of this chapter and other state statutes.
(Am. Ord. 54, passed 12-2-2002; Am. Ord. 86, passed 8-6-2012)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 73.04 CROSSING STREETS OR HIGHWAYS.
   A snowmobile or other recreational vehicle may make a direct crossing of a
street or highway except an interstate highway or freeway provided:
   (A)   The crossing is made an any angle approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the street or highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents
a quick and safe crossing;
   (B)   The vehicle is brought to a complete stop before crossing the shoulder
or main traveled way;
   (C)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard;
   (D)   In crossing a divided street or highway, crossing is made only at an
intersection of the street or highway with another public street or highway;
and
   (E)   If the crossing is made between the hours of 1/2 hour after sunset to
1/2 hour before sunrise or in conditions of reduced visibility, only if both
front and rear lights are on.
(Am. Ord. 54, passed 12-2-2002)
§ 73.05 TRAFFIC LAWS.
   City regulations, including but not limited to §
73.03 above shall apply to the operation of snowmobiles and recreational
vehicles and golf carts upon streets and highways, except for those relating to
required equipment and except those which by their nature have no application.
(Am. Ord. 54, passed 12-2-2002)
§ 73.06 YIELDING.
   No snowmobile or other recreational vehicle shall enter any intersection
without yielding the right-of-way to any vehicles or pedestrians at the
intersection, or so close to the intersection as to constitute an immediate
hazard.
(Am. Ord. 54, passed 12-2-2002)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 73.07 OPERATION BY MINORS.
   (A)   No person under 14 years of age shall operate on streets or the
roadway surface of highways, or make a direct crossing of a trunk, county state
aid, county highway or city street as the operator of a snowmobile.
   (B)   A person 14 years of age or older, but less than 18 years of age, may
operate a snowmobile on streets and highways as permitted under this chapter
and make a direct crossing of streets and highways only if he or she has in his
or her possession a valid snowmobile safety certificate issued by the
Commissioner, as may be required by M.S. §§ 84.81 et seq., as it may be amended
from time to time.
   (C)   No owner of a snowmobile or other recreational vehicle or golf cart
shall permit the vehicle to be operated contrary to the provisions of this
section or state law.
(Am. Ord. 54, passed 12-2-2002)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 73.08 EQUIPMENT.
   No person shall operate a snowmobile or other recreational vehicle any place
within the city limits unless it is equipped with the appropriate equipment
required by state law.
(Am. Ord. 54, passed 12-2-2002)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 73.09 EMERGENCIES.
   Notwithstanding any prohibitions in this chapter, a snowmobile or other
recreational vehicle may be operated on a public thoroughfare in an emergency
during the period of time when, and at location where, snow upon the roadway
renders travel by automobile impractical.
(Am. Ord. 54, passed 12-2-2002)
§ 73.10 ANIMALS.
   No person shall intentionally drive, chase, run over or kill any animal with
a snowmobile or other recreational vehicle.
(Am. Ord. 54, passed 12-2-2002)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 73.11 ADOPTION OF MINNESOTA STATUTES.
   Minnesota Statutes §§ 84.81 through § 84.929, as they may be amended from
time to time, and M.S. Ch. 169A, as it may be amended from time to time, are
hereby adopted by reference and shall be applicable to snowmobiles, golf carts
and other recreational vehicles.
(Am. Ord. 54, passed 12-2-2002)
§ 73.12 SNOWMOBILES, MOTORIZED GOLF CARTS, CLASS 1 AND 2 ATVS AND OTHER
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   Operation. Snowmobiles, motorized golf carts, Class 1 and 2 ATVs and
other recreational vehicles are allowed on city streets not prohibited under §
70.03 and roadways not subject to the State of Minnesota jurisdiction, if the
owner obtains a permit under this section.
   (B)   Permit.
      (1)   Any person desiring a permit to operate a snowmobile, motorized
golf cart, Class 1 or 2 ATVs or other recreational vehicle shall submit an
application to the Chief of Police along with a fee as set by the Council from
time to time and the following information:
         (a)   Applicant's name;
         (b)   Application date;
         (c)   Insurance company and policy number for liability coverage.
      (2)   All permits renew annually on May 1 with proof of a valid liability
insurance and drivers license. The city shall issue permits only to a person
having a valid Minnesota driver’s license and residing in the city.
      (3)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee may revoke the permit at
any time if there is evidence that the permittee cannot safely operate a
snowmobile, motorized golf cart, Class 1 or 2 ATV on the designated roadway.
   (C)   Hours of operation. Motorized golf carts may be operated on city
streets with a permit between sunrise and sunset.
   (D)   Requirements.
      (1)   The Chief of Police may designate on the permit the streets and
hours of operation as the Chief determines is in the public’s safety interest.
      (2)   No person shall operate a motorized golf cart in inclement weather
or when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog or other conditions, or
at any time there is insufficient light to clearly see persons in vehicles on
the roadway at a distance of 500 feet.
      (3)   Motorized golf carts, Class 1 ATVs and Class 2 ATVs shall display
the assigned permit at the rear most of the vehicle. A slow moving vehicle
emblem shall also be displayed, as provided for in M.S. § 169.522, as it may be
amended from time to time.
      (4)   No person shall operate a recreational vehicle within a public road
right-of-way in the City of Osakis except by permit from the Chief of Police.
      (5)   The operation and regulation of all permit required vehicles is
governed by this chapter and M.S. § 169.045 as it may be amended from time to
time.
(Am. Ord. 54, passed 12-2-2002; Am. Ord. 86, passed 8-6-2012)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 74: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Riding bicycles, roller blades and the like
SCHEDULE I. RIDING BICYCLES, ROLLER BLADES AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   No person shall operate or ride a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates
or roller blades upon any sidewalk within the Business District described as
follows.
 
Street/Area                            Location
Central Avenue                         Between Nokomis and Main Street
Main Street                            Between First Avenue East and First
                                       Avenue West
The concrete area in front of the Fire Extending to within 4 feet of Nokomis
Station and Community Center
 
   (B)   Persons riding bicycles upon a street or alley shall not ride more
than 2 abreast.
   (C)   Whenever any person is riding a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates or
roller blades upon any sidewalk, other than in the business district, the
person shall yield the right of way to any pedestrians walking on the sidewalk.
(1986 Code, § 702.04) (Am. Ord. 14, passed 5-1-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 75: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Prohibited parking
SCHEDULE I. PROHIBITED PARKING.
 
Street         Location
Central Avenue From the intersection with Nokomis Street to the intersection
               with Great Northern Railroad tracks
Main Street    Between intersections with First Avenue East and Second Avenue
               West
 
   (A)   No person shall park a motor vehicle between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 5:30 a.m. on any day on the above for a longer period of time than
designated in areas where parking time is limited by posted notice.
   (B)   The Police Department or authorized representative of the city is
hereby authorized to remove the vehicle from the street and to store the same
for the owner thereof.
   (C)   The removal and storage charge shall be paid by the owner, or
designated representative prior to the release of the vehicle.
   (D)   If the removal and storage charges remain unpaid for 10 days following
removal, the vehicle will be considered abandoned and may be disposed of in
accordance with M.S. Ch. 168B, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (E)   All emergency vehicles, city vehicles and vehicles owned by any
utility company shall be exempt from these parking restrictions.
(1986 Code, § 701.10(C))
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 76: VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT REGULATIONS
Section
   
76.01   Motor vehicle storage fee
Cross-reference:
   For provisions concerning parking and abandoned vehicles, see
Ch. 71.
§ 76.01 MOTOR VEHICLE STORAGE FEE.
   (A)   A set fee per day will be charged for the storage of motor vehicles
that are impounded. The total accumulated fee charged will not exceed the set
maximum per fee schedule. Vehicles that have been impounded will not be
released until the storage fees and tow bill have been paid in full. Storage
fees will not be assessed until after the day if impound and 48 hours have
passed.
   (B)   All fees are set annually by the City Council.
(Ord. 89, passed 4-1-2013)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
   
90.   PUBLIC NUISANCES
   
91.   ABANDONED VEHICLES
   
92.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
   
93.   ANIMALS
   
94.   TREES
   
95.   PARKS AND RECREATION
   
96.   ALARM SYSTEMS
   
97.   FAIR HOUSING
   
98.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
   
99.   MAILBOXES
   
100.   CLANDESTINE DRUG LABS
   
101.   PARADES AND ATHLETIC EVENTS
CHAPTER 90: PUBLIC NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Assessable current services
   
90.02   Tree diseases
Nuisances
   
90.15   Public nuisance
   
90.16   Public nuisances affecting health
   
90.17   Public nuisances affecting morals and decency
   
90.18   Public nuisances affecting peace and safety
   
90.19   Nuisance parking and storage
   
90.20   Inoperable motor vehicles
   
90.21   Building maintenance and appearance
   
90.22   Duties of city officers
   
90.23   Abatement
   
90.24   Recovery of cost
   
90.25   Prohibition of cannabis use in public places
Weeds
   
90.35   Short title
   
90.36   Jurisdiction
   
90.37   Definitions; exclusions
   
90.38   Owners responsible for trimming, removal and the like
   
90.39   Elimination of nuisances caused by weeds and grass
   
90.40   Abatement by city
   
90.41   Liability
Open Burning
   
90.60   Definitions
   
90.61   Prohibited materials
   
90.62   Permit required for open burning
   
90.63   Purposes allowed for open burning
   
90.64   Permit application for open burning; permit fees
   
90.65   Permit process for open burning
   
90.66   Permit holder responsibility
   
90.67   Revocation of open burning permit
   
90.68   Denial of open burning permit
   
90.69   Burning ban or air quality alert
   
90.70   Rules and laws adopted by reference
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 ASSESSABLE CURRENT SERVICES.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CURRENT SERVICE. One or more of the following: snow, ice or rubbish
removal from sidewalks; weed elimination from street grass plots adjacent to
sidewalks or from private property; removal or elimination of public health or
safety hazards from private property, excluding any hazardous building included
in M.S. §§ 463.15 through 463.26 as they may amended from time to time;
installation or repair of water service lines; street sprinkling, street
flushing, light street oiling or other dust treatment of streets; repair of
sidewalks and alleys; trimming and care of trees and removal of unsound and
insect-infected trees from the public streets or private property; and the
operation of a street lighting system.
   (B)   Snow, ice, dirt and rubbish.
      (1)   Duty of owners and occupants. The owner and the occupant of any
property adjacent to a public sidewalk shall use diligence to keep the walk
safe for pedestrians. No owner or occupant shall allow snow, ice, dirt or
rubbish to remain on the walk longer than 24 hours after its deposit thereon.
Failure to comply with this section shall constitute a violation.
      (2)   Removal by city. The City Clerk/Treasurer or other person
designated by the City Council may cause removal from all public sidewalks all
snow, ice, dirt and rubbish as soon as possible beginning 24 hours after any
matter has been deposited thereon or after the snow has ceased to fall. The
City Clerk/Treasurer or other designated person shall keep a record showing the
cost of removal adjacent to each separate lot and parcel.
   (C)   Public health and safety hazards. When the city removes or eliminates
public health or safety hazards from private property under the following
provisions of this chapter, the administrative officer responsible for doing
the work shall keep a record of the cost of the removal or elimination against
each parcel of property affected and annually deliver that information to the
City Clerk/Treasurer.
   (D)   Installation and repair of water service lines. Whenever the city
installs or repairs water service lines serving private property under the
water provisions of the city, the City Clerk/Treasurer shall keep a record of
the total cost of the installation or repair against the property.
   (E)   Repair of sidewalks and alleys.
      (1)   Duty of owner. The owner of any property within the city abutting a
public sidewalk or alley shall keep the sidewalk or alley in repair and safe
for pedestrians. Repairs shall be made in accordance with the standard
specifications approved by the City Council and on file in the office of the
City Clerk/Treasurer.
      (2)   Inspections; notice. The City Council or its designee shall make
inspections as are necessary to determine that public sidewalks and alleys
within the city are kept in repair and safe for pedestrians or vehicles. If it
is found that any sidewalk or alley abutting on private property is unsafe and
in need of repairs, the City Council shall cause a notice to be served, by
registered or certified mail or by personal service, upon the record owner of
the property, ordering the owner to have the sidewalk or alley repaired and
made safe within 30 days and stating that if the owner fails to do so, the city
will do so and that the expense thereof must be paid by the owner, and if
unpaid it will be made a special assessment against the property concerned.
      (3)   Repair by city. If the sidewalk or alley is not repaired within 30
days after receipt of the notice, the City Clerk/Treasurer shall report the
facts to the City Council and the City Council shall by resolution order the
work done by contract in accordance with law. No person shall enter private
property to repair a sidewalk, except with the permission of the owner or after
obtaining an administrative warrant. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall keep a
record of the total cost of the repair attributable to each lot or parcel of
property.
   (F)   Personal liability. The owner of property on which or adjacent to
which a current service has been performed shall be personally liable for the
cost of the service. As soon as the service has been completed and the cost
determined, the City Clerk/Treasurer, or other designated official, shall
prepare a bill and mail it to the owner and thereupon the amount shall be
immediately due and payable at the office of the City Clerk/Treasurer.
   (G)   Damage to public property. Any person driving any vehicle, equipment,
object or contrivance upon any street, road, highway or structure shall be
liable for all damages which the surface or structure thereof may sustain as a
result of any illegal operation, or driving or moving of the vehicle, equipment
or object or contrivance; or as a result of operating, driving or moving any
vehicle, equipment, object or contrivance weighing in excess of the maximum
weight permitted by statute or this code. When the driver is not the owner of
the vehicle, equipment, object or contrivance, but is operating, driving or
moving it with the express or implied permission of the owner, then the owner
and the driver shall be jointly and severally liable for any damage. Any person
who willfully acts or fails to exercise due care and by that act damages any
public property shall be liable for the amount thereof, which amount shall be
collectable by action or as a lien under M.S. § 514.67, as it may be amended
from time to time.
   (H)   Assessment. On or before October 31 of each year, the City Clerk/
Treasurer shall list the total unpaid charges for each type of current service
and charges under this section against each separate lot or parcel to which
they are attributable under this section. The City Council may then spread the
charges against property benefitted as a special assessment under the authority
of M.S. § 429.101 as it may be amended from time to time and other pertinent
statutes for certification to the County Auditor and collection along with
current taxes the following year or in annual installments, not exceeding 10,
as the City Council may determine in each case.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.02 TREE DISEASES.
   (A)   Trees constituting nuisance declared. The following are public
nuisances whenever they may be found within the city:
      (1)   Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected to any
degree with the Dutch Elm disease fungus Ceratocystis Ulmi (Buisman) Moreau or
which harbors any of the elm bark beetles Scolytus Multistriatus (Eichh.) or
Hylungopinus Rufipes (Marsh);
      (2)   Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including branches, stumps,
firewood or other elm material from which the bark has not been removed and
burned or sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle insecticide;
      (3)   Any living or standing oak tree or part thereof infected to any
degree with the Oak Wilt fungus Ceratocystis fagacearum;
      (4)   Any dead oak tree or part thereof which in the opinion of the
designated officer constitutes a hazard, including but not limited to logs,
branches, stumps, roots, firewood or other oak material which has not been
stripped of its bark and burned or sprayed with an effective fungicide; and
      (5)   Any other shade tree with an epidemic disease.
   (B)   Abatement of nuisance. It is unlawful for any person to permit any
public nuisance as defined in division (A) above to remain on any premises the
person owns or controls within the city. The nuisance may be abated as provided
in §§ 90.22 and 90.23.
   (C)   Record of costs. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall keep a record of the
costs of abatement done under this section for all work done for which
assessments are to be made, stating and certifying the description of the land,
lots, parcels involved, and the amount chargeable to each.
   (D)   Unpaid charges.
      (1)   On or before September 1 of each year, the City Clerk/Treasurer
shall list the total unpaid charges for each abatement against each separate
lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this section.
      (2)   The City Council may then spread the charges or any portion thereof
against the property involved as a special assessment as authorized by M.S. §
429.101, as it may be amended from time, to time and other pertinent statutes
for certification to the County Auditor and collection the following year along
with the current taxes.
Penalty, see § 10.99
NUISANCES
§ 90.15 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Whoever by his or her act or failure to perform a legal duty intentionally
does any of the following is guilty of maintaining a public nuisance, which is
a misdemeanor:
   (A)   Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures or
endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort or repose of any considerable
number of members of the public;
   (B)   Interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous for passage any public
highway or right-of-way, or waters used by the public; or
   (C)   Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law or §§
90.16,
90.17 or
90.18, or any other part of this code to be a public nuisance and for which no
sentence is specifically provided.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.16 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.
   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health:
   (A)   Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or vegetable
matter;
   (B)   All diseased animals running at large;
   (C)   All ponds or pools of stagnant water;
   (D)   Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours after
death;
   (E)   Accumulations of manure, refuse or other debris;
   (F)   Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent-free or fly-tight
or which are so maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to emit foul and
disagreeable odors;
   (G)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake, canal or
body of water by sewage, industrial waste or other substances;
   (H)   All noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation upon public or
private property;
   (I)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders, in unreasonable
quantities;
   (J)   All public exposure of people having a contagious disease; and
   (K)   Any offensive trade or business as defined by statute not operating
under local license.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.17 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY.
   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public morals
and decency:
   (A)   All gambling devices, slot machines and punch boards, except as
otherwise authorized by federal, state or local law;
   (B)   Betting, bookmaking and all apparatus used in those occupations;
   (C)   All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual
intercourse, gambling houses, houses of ill fame and bawdy houses;
   (D)   All places where intoxicating liquor is manufactured or disposed of in
violation of law or where, in violation of law, people are permitted to resort
for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor, or where intoxicating liquor
is kept for sale or other disposition in violation of law, and all liquor and
other property used for maintaining that place; and
   (E)   Any vehicle used for the unlawful transportation of intoxicating
liquor, or for promiscuous sexual intercourse, or any other immoral or illegal
purpose.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.18 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.
   The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and
safety:
   (A)   All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks 24 hours after the
snow or other precipitation causing the condition has ceased to fall;
   (B)   All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent
people from having a clear view of all traffic approaching an intersection;
   (C)   All wires and limbs of trees which are so close to the surface of a
sidewalk or street as to constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles;
   (D)   All obnoxious noises in violation of Minn. Rules Ch. 7030, as they may
be amended from time to time which are hereby incorporated by reference into
this code;
   (E)   The discharging of the exhaust or permitting the discharging of the
exhaust of any stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat, motor
vehicle, motorcycle, all terrain vehicle, snowmobile or any recreational device
except through a muffler or other device that effectively prevents loud or
explosive noises therefrom and complies with all applicable state laws and
regulations;
   (F)   The using or operation or permitting the using or operation of any
radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, paging system, machine or
other device for producing or reproduction of sound in a distinctly and loudly
audible manner so as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of any person
nearby. Operation of any device referred to above between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner so as to be plainly audible at the property line
of the structure or building in which it is located, or at a distance of 50
feet if the source is located outside a structure or building shall be prima
facie evidence of violation of this section;
   (G)   No person shall participate in any party or other gathering of people
giving rise to noise, unreasonably disturbing the peace, quiet or repose of
another person. When a police officer determines that a gathering is creating a
like noise disturbance, the officer may order all persons present, other than
the owner or tenant of the premises where the disturbance is occurring, to
disperse immediately. No person shall refuse to leave after being ordered by a
police officer to do so. Every owner or tenant of like premises who has
knowledge of the disturbance shall make every reasonable effort to see that the
disturbance is stopped;
   (H)   Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary public use of
streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds except under conditions as are
permitted by this code or other applicable law;
   (I)   Radio aerials or television antennae erected or maintained in a
dangerous manner;
   (J)   Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use
of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather,
obstructing traffic and the free use of the street or sidewalk;
   (K)   All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures over streets
and sidewalks, so situated so as to endanger public safety, or not constructed
and maintained as provided by ordinance;
   (L)   The allowing of rain water, ice or snow to fall from any building or
structure upon any street or sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk;
   (M)   Any barbed wire fence less than 6 feet above the ground and within 3
feet of a public sidewalk or way;
   (N)   All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so situated
or operated on private property as to attract the public;
   (O)   Waste water cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or other
public properties;
   (P)   Accumulations in the open of discarded or disused machinery, household
appliances, automobile bodies or other material in a manner conducive to the
harboring of rats, mice, snakes or vermin, or the rank growth of vegetation
among the items so accumulated, or in a manner creating fire, health or safety
hazards from accumulation;
   (Q)   Any well, hole or similar excavation which is left uncovered or in
another condition as to constitute a hazard to any child or other person coming
on the premises where it is located;
   (R)   Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or a
public street drain, gutter or ditch with trash of other materials;
   (S)   The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk or other public
property of any glass, tacks, nails, bottles or other substance which may
injure any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire when passing over the
substance;
   (T)   The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public right-of-way or on
adjacent private property;
   (U)   All other conditions or things which are likely to cause injury to the
person or property of anyone.
   (V)   (1)   Noises prohibited.
         (a)   General prohibition. No person shall make or cause to be made
any distinctly and loudly audible noise that unreasonably annoys, disturbs,
injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety or welfare of
any person or precludes their enjoyment of property or affects their property’s
value. This general prohibition is not limited by the specific restrictions of
this section.
         (b)   Defective vehicles or loads. No person shall use any vehicle so
out of repair or so loaded as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding,
rattling or other noise.
         (c)   Loading, unloading, unpacking. No person shall create loud or
excessive noise in loading, unloading or unpacking any vehicle.
         (d)   Radios, phonographs, paging systems, and the like.
            1.   No person shall use or operate or permit the use or operation
of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, paging system,
machine or other device for the production or reproduction of sound in a
distinct and loudly audible manner as to unreasonably disturb the peace, quiet
and comfort of any person nearby.
            2.   Operation of any like set, instrument, phonograph, machine or
other device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner so as to
be plainly audible at the property line of the structure or building in which
it is located, in the hallway or apartment adjacent, or at a distance of 50
feet if the source is located outside a structure or building, shall be prima
facie evidence of a violation of this section.
         (e)   Schools, churches, hospitals and the like. No person shall
create any excessive noise on a street, alley or public grounds adjacent to any
school, institution of learning, church or hospital when the noise unreasonably
interferes with the working of the institution or disturbs or unduly annoys its
occupants or residents and when conspicuous signs indicate the presence of the
institution.
      (2)   Hourly restriction of certain operations.
         (a)   Domestic power equipment.
            1.   No person shall operate a power lawn mower, power hedge
clipper, chain saw, mulcher, garden tiller, edger, drill or other similar
domestic power maintenance equipment except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on
any weekend or holiday.
            2.   Snow removal equipment is exempt from this provision.
         (b)   Refuse hauling. No person shall collect or remove garbage or
refuse in any residential district except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:
00 p.m. on any weekday.
         (c)   Construction activities. No person shall engage in or permit
construction activities involving the use of any kind of electric, diesel or
gas-powered machine or other power equipment except between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m. on any weekend or holiday.
         (d)   All unnecessary noises and annoying vibrations. The term
UNNECESSARY NOISES shall include, but shall not be limited to, the operation of
refrigerator units on parked truck trailers and/or on parked semi-trailers
within the City of Osakis between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
      (3)   Noise impact statements.
         (a)   The Council may require any person applying for a change in
zoning classification or a permit or license for any structure, operation,
process, installation or alteration or project that may be considered a
potential noise source to submit a noise impact statement on a form prescribed
by the Council.
         (b)   It shall evaluate each statement and take its evaluation into
account in approving or disapproving the license or permit applied for or the
zoning change requested.
   (W)   Reflected glare or light from private exterior lighting exceeding 0.5
footcandles as measured on the property line of the property where the lighting
is located when abutting any residential parcel, and 1 footcandle when abutting
any commercial or industrial parcel; and
   (X)   Reflected glare or light from private exterior lighting exceeding 0.5
footcandles as measured on the property line of the property where the lighting
is located when abutting any residential parcel and 1 footcandle when abutting
any commercial or industrial parcel.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.19 NUISANCE PARKING AND STORAGE.
   (A)   Declaration of nuisance. The outside parking and storage on
residentially-zoned property of large numbers of vehicles and vehicles,
materials, supplies or equipment not customarily used for residential purposes
in violation of the requirements set forth below is declared to be a public
nuisance because it:
      (1)   Obstructs views on streets and private property;
      (2)   Creates cluttered and otherwise unsightly areas;
      (3)   Prevents the full use of residential streets for residential
parking;
      (4)   Introduces commercial advertising signs into areas where commercial
advertising signs are otherwise prohibited;
      (5)   Decreases adjoining landowners' and occupants' enjoyment of their
property and neighborhood;
      (6)   Otherwise adversely affects property values and neighborhood
patterns; and/or
      (7)   The parking of a truck trailer or a semi-trailer on any city
streets within a residential district for more than 8 executive hours.
   (B)   Unlawful parking and storage.
      (1)   A person must not place, store or allow the placement or storage of
pipe, lumber, forms, steel, machinery or similar materials, including all
materials used in connection with a business, outside on residential property,
unless shielded from public view by an opaque cover or fence.
      (2)   A person must not cause, undertake, permit or allow the outside
parking and storage of vehicles on residential property unless it complies with
the following requirements: vehicles, watercraft and other articles stored
outside on residential property must be owned by a person who resides on that
property. Students who are away at school for periods of time but still claim
the property as their legal residence will be considered residents on the
property.
(Am. Ord. 105, passed 9-8-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.20 INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to keep, park, store or abandon any motor vehicle
which is not in operating condition, partially dismantled, used for repair of
parts or as a source of repair or replacement parts for other vehicles, kept
for scrapping, dismantling or salvage of any kind, or which is not properly
licensed for operation with the state.
   (B)   This section does not apply to a motor vehicle enclosed in a building
and/or kept out of view from any street, road or alley, and which does not
foster complaint from a resident of the city. A privacy fence is permissible.
   (C)   Any motor vehicles described in this section constitute a hazard to
the health and welfare of the residents of the community in that the vehicles
can harbor noxious diseases, furnish a shelter and breeding place for vermin
and present physical danger to the safety and well-being of children and
citizens; and vehicles containing fluids which, if released into the
environment, can and do cause significant health risks to the community.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.21 BUILDING MAINTENANCE AND APPEARANCE.
   (A)   Declaration of nuisance. Buildings, fences and other structures that
have been so poorly maintained that their physical condition and appearance
detract from the surrounding neighborhood are declared to be public nuisances
because they:
      (1)   Are unsightly;
      (2)   Decrease adjoining landowners’ and occupants’ enjoyment of their
property and neighborhood; and
      (3)   Adversely affect property values and neighborhood patterns.
   (B)   Standards. A building, fence or other structure is a public nuisance
if it does not comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   No part of any exterior surface may have deterioration, holes,
breaks, gaps, loose or rotting boards or timbers;
      (2)   Every exterior surface that has had a surface finish such as paint
applied must be maintained to avoid noticeable deterioration of the finish. No
wall or other exterior surface may have peeling, cracked, chipped or otherwise
deteriorated surface finish on more than 20% of:
         (a)   Any 1 wall or other flat surface; or
         (b)   All door and window moldings, eaves, gutters and similar
projections on any one side or surface.
      (3)   No glass, including windows and exterior light fixtures, may be
broken or cracked, and no screens may be torn or separated from moldings;
      (4)   Exterior doors and shutters must be hung properly and have an
operable mechanism to keep them securely shut or in place;
      (5)   Cornices, moldings, lintels, sills, bay or dormer windows and
similar projections must be kept in good repair and free from cracks and
defects that make them hazardous or unsightly;
      (6)   Roof surfaces must be tight and have no defects that admit water.
All roof drainage systems must be secured and hung properly;
      (7)   Chimneys, antennae, air vents and other similar projections must be
structurally sound and in good repair. These projections must be secured
properly, where applicable, to an exterior wall or exterior roof; and
      (8)   Foundations must be structurally sound and in good repair.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.22 DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, and §
90.23 below, the Police Department, or Sheriff or person designated by the City
Council under §
10.20, if the city has at the time no Police Department, may enforce the
provisions relating to nuisances.
   (B)   Any peace officer or designated person shall have the power to inspect
private premises and take all reasonable precautions to prevent the commission
and maintenance of public nuisances.
(Am. Ord. 85, 8-6-2012)
§ 90.23 ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Notice. Written notice of violation; notice of the time, date, place
and subject of any hearing before the City Council; notice of City Council
order; and notice of motion for summary enforcement hearing shall be given as
set forth in this section.
      (1)   Notice of violation. Written notice of violation shall be served by
a peace officer or designated person on the owner of record or occupant of the
premises either in person or by certified or registered mail. If the premises
is not occupied, the owner of record is unknown, or the owner of record or
occupant refuses to accept notice of violation, notice of violation shall be
served by posting it on the premises.
      (2)   Notice of City Council hearing. Written notice of any City Council
hearing to determine or abate a nuisance shall be served on the owner of record
and occupant of the premises either in person or by certified or registered
mail. If the premises is not occupied, the owner of record is unknown, or the
owner of record or occupant refuses to accept notice of the City Council
hearing, notice of City Council hearing shall be served by posting it on the
premises.
      (3)   Notice of City Council order. Except for those cases determined by
the city to require summary enforcement, written notice of any City Council
order shall be made as provided in M.S. § 463.17 (Hazardous and Substandard
Building Act), as it may be amended from time to time.
      (4)   Notice of motion for summary enforcement. Written notice of any
motion for summary enforcement shall be made as provided for in M.S. § 463.17
(Hazardous and Substandard Building Act), as it may be amended from time to
time.
   (B)   Procedure.
      (1)   Whenever a peace officer or designated person determines that a
public nuisance is being maintained or exists on the premises in the city, the
officer or person designated shall notify in writing the owner of record or
occupant of the premises of that fact and order that the nuisance be terminated
or abated.
      (2)   The notice of violation shall specify the steps to be taken to
abate the nuisance and the time within which the nuisance is to be abated.
      (3)   If the notice of violation is not complied with within the time
specified, the officer or designated person shall report that fact forthwith to
the City Council.
      (4)   Thereafter, the City Council may, after notice to the owner or
occupant and an opportunity to be heard, determine that the condition
identified in the notice of violation is a nuisance and further order that if
the nuisance is not abated within the time prescribed by the City Council, the
city may seek injunctive relief by serving a copy of the City Council order and
notice of motion for summary enforcement or obtain an administrative search and
seizure warrant and abate the nuisance.
   (C)   Emergency procedure; summary enforcement.
      (1)   In cases of emergency, where delay in abatement required to
complete the notice and procedure requirements set forth in divisions (A) and
(B) above will permit a continuing nuisance to unreasonably endanger public
health safety or welfare, the City Council may order summary enforcement and
abate the nuisance.
      (2)   To proceed with summary enforcement, the officer or designated
person shall determine that a public nuisance exists or is being maintained on
premises in the city and that delay in abatement of the nuisance will
unreasonably endanger public health, safety or welfare.
      (3)   The officer or designated person shall notify in writing the
occupant or owner of the premises of the nature of the nuisance and of the
city’s intention to seek summary enforcement and the time and place of the City
Council meeting to consider the question of summary enforcement.
      (4)   The City Council shall determine whether or not the condition
identified in the notice to the owner or occupant is a nuisance, whether public
health, safety or welfare will be unreasonably endangered by delay in abatement
required to complete the procedure set forth in division (A) of this section,
and may order that the nuisance be immediately terminated or abated.
      (5)   If the nuisance is not immediately terminated or abated, the City
Council may order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance.
   (D)   Immediate abatement. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city,
without notice or other process, from immediately abating any condition which
poses an imminent and serious hazard to human life or safety.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.24 RECOVERY OF COST.
   (A)   Personal liability.
      (1)   The owner of premises on which a nuisance has been abated by the
city shall be personally liable for the cost to the city of the abatement,
including administrative costs.
      (2)   As soon as the work has been completed and the cost determined, the
City Clerk/Treasurer or other official shall prepare a bill for the cost and
mail it to the owner.
      (3)   Thereupon the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the
office of the City Clerk/Treasurer.
   (B)   Assessment.
      (1)   After notice and hearing as provided in M.S. § 429.061, as it may
be amended from time to time, if the nuisance is a public health or safety
hazard on private property, the accumulation of snow and ice on public
sidewalks, the growth of weeds on private property or outside the traveled
portion of streets, or unsound or insect-infected trees, the City Clerk/
Treasurer shall, on or before September 1 next following abatement of the
nuisance, list the total unpaid charges along with all other charges as well as
other charges for current services to be assessed under M.S. § 429.101, as it
may be amended from time to time, against each separate lot or parcel to which
the charges are attributable.
      (2)   The City Council may then spread the charges against the property
under that statute and other pertinent statutes for certification to the County
Auditor and collection along with current taxes the following year or in annual
installments, not exceeding ten, as the City Council may determine in each
case.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.25 PROHIBITION OF CANNABIS USE IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the definitions included
in M.S. § 342.01, as enacted by the Ninety Third Legislature of the State of
Minnesota in House File 100, and as the same may be amended from time to time,
shall apply.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all public places within the city, including but
not limited to any public street, avenue, boulevard, right-of-way, road, alley,
sidewalk, park, trail, parking lot, beach, pier, building, and municipal liquor
store. Provided, however, that the following shall not be considered a PUBLIC
PLACE:
         (a)   A private residence, including the person’s curtilage or yard;
         (b)   Private property not generally accessible by the public, unless
the person is explicitly prohibited from consuming cannabis flower, cannabis
products, lower-potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products on the
property by the owner of the property; or
         (c)   The premises of an establishment or event licensed to permit on-
site consumption.
   (B)   Use in public places unlawful.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use cannabis flower,
cannabis products, lower-potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer
products in a public place.
      (2)   Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a petty
misdemeanor and fined up to $300 or the maximum amount for a petty misdemeanor
allowed by state law.
(Ord. 137, passed 9-11-2023)
Cross-reference:
   Cannabis Businesses, see
Ch. 125
WEEDS
§ 90.35 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be cited as the Weed Ordinance.
§ 90.36 JURISDICTION.
   This subchapter shall be in addition to any state statute or county
ordinance presently in effect, subsequently added, amended or repealed.
§ 90.37 DEFINITIONS; EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DESTRUCTION ORDER. The notice served by the City Council or designated
city official, in cases of appeal, on the property owner of the ordinance
violation.
      PROPERTY OWNER. The person occupying the property, the holder of legal
title or a person having control over the property of another, such as a right-
of-way, easement, license or lease.
      WEEDS, GRASSES and RANK VEGETATION. Includes but is not limited to the
following:
         (1)   Noxious weeds and rank vegetation shall include but not be
limited to: alum (allium), Buckthorn, Bur Cucumber, Canada Thistle, Corncockle,
Cressleaf Groundsel, Curly Dock, Dodder, Field Bindweed, French Weed, Hairy
Whitetop, Hedge Bindweed, Hoary Cress, Horsenettle, Johnsongrass, Leafy Spurge,
Mile-A-Minute Weed, Musk Thistle, Oxeye Daisy, Perennial Sowthistle, Poison
Hemlock, Purple Loosestrife, Quackgrass, Russian Knapweed, Russian Thistle,
Serrated Tussock, Shatter Cane, Sorghum, Wild Carrot, Wild Garlic, Wild
Mustard, Wild Onion, Wild Parsnip;
         (2)   Grapevines when growing in groups of 100 or more and not pruned,
sprayed, cultivated, or otherwise maintained for 2 consecutive years;
         (3)   Bushes of the species of tall, common, or European barberry,
further known as berberis vulgaris or its horticultural varieties;
         (4)   Any weeds, grass, or plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers,
or other ornamental plants, growing to a height exceeding 12 inches;
         (5)   Rank vegetation includes the uncontrolled, uncultivated growth
of annuals and perennial plants; and
         (6)   The term WEEDS does not include shrubs, trees, cultivated plants
or crops.
   (B)   In no event shall cultivated plants or crops include plants which have
been defined by state statute or administrative rule as being noxious or
detrimental plants.
§ 90.38 OWNERS RESPONSIBLE FOR TRIMMING, REMOVAL AND THE LIKE.
   All property owners shall be responsible for the removal, cutting or
disposal and elimination of weeds, grasses and rank vegetation or other
uncontrolled plant growth on their property, which at the time of notice, is in
excess of 6 inches in height.
(Am. Ord. 2009-13, passed 7-6-2009)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.39 ELIMINATION OF NUISANCES CAUSED BY WEEDS AND GRASS.
   (A)   It is the primary responsibility of any owner or occupant of any lot
or parcel of land to maintain any grass growing thereon at a height of not more
than 6 inches.
   (B)   If any owner or occupant fails to assume this responsibility and after
notice given by the city has not, within 7 days of the notice complied, the
city may cause the work to be done and the expense thus incurred shall be a
lien upon the real estate.
   (C)   The City Clerk/Treasurer shall certify to the Douglas/Todd County
Auditor a statement of the amount of the cost incurred by the city.
   (D)   This amount together with interest shall be entered as a special
assessment against the lot or parcel of land and be collected in the same
manner as real estate taxes.
(1986 Code, § 302.03) (Am. Ord. 84, passed 8-6-2012)
§ 90.40 ABATEMENT BY CITY.
   In the event the property owner shall fail to comply within 7 regular
business days the City Council or designee may employ the services of city
employees or outside contractors and remove the weeds to conform to this
subchapter by all lawful means. The property owner has the right to appeal
abatements by the city to the City Council within 48 hours of such abatement.
(Ord. 84, passed 8-6-2012) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.41 LIABILITY.
   (A)   The property owner is liable for all costs of removal, cutting or
destruction of weeds as defined by this subchapter.
   (B)   The property owner is responsible for all collection costs associated
with weed destruction, including but not limited to court costs, attorney’s
fees and interest on any unpaid amounts incurred by the city. If the city uses
municipal employees, it shall set and assign an appropriate per hour rate for
employees, equipment, supplies and chemicals which may be used.
   (C)   All sums payable by the property owner are to be paid to the City
Clerk/Treasurer and to be deposited in a general fund as compensation for
expenses and costs incurred by the city.
   (D)   All sums payable by the property owner may be collected as a special
assessment as provided by M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to
time.
OPEN BURNING
§ 90.60 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIRE CHIEF, FIRE MARSHAL, and ASSISTANT FIRE MARSHALS. The Fire Chief, Fire
Marshal and Assistant Fire Marshals of the Fire Department which provides fire
protection services to the city.
   OPEN BURNING.
      (1)   The burning of any matter if the resultant combustion products are
emitted directly to the atmosphere without passing through a stack, duct or
chimney, except a RECREATIONAL FIRE as defined herein.
      (2)   Mobile cooking devices such as manufactured hibachis, charcoal
grills, wood smokers, and propane or natural gas devices are not defined as
OPEN BURNING.
   RECREATIONAL FIRE.
      (1)   A fire set with approved starter fuel no more than 3 feet in
height, contained within the border of a RECREATIONAL FIRE SITE using dry,
clean wood; producing little detectable smoke, odor or soot beyond the property
line; conducted with an adult tending the fire at all times; for recreational,
ceremonial, food preparation for social purposes; extinguished completely
before quitting the occasion; and respecting weather conditions, neighbors,
burning bans and air quality so that nuisance, health or safety hazards will
not be created.
      (2)   No more than 1 RECREATIONAL FIRE is allowed on any property at one
time.
   RECREATIONAL FIRE SITE.
      (1)   An area of no more than a 3-foot diameter circle (measured from the
inside of the fire ring or border); completely surrounded by non-combustible
and non-smoke or odor producing material, either of natural rock, cement,
brick, tile or blocks or ferrous metal only an which area is depressed below
ground, on the ground, or on a raised bed.
      (2)   Included are permanent outdoor wood burning fireplaces. Burning
barrels are not a RECREATION FIRE SITE as defined herein.
      (3)   RECREATIONAL FIRE SITES shall not be located closer than 25 feet to
any structure.
   STARTER FUELS. Dry, untreated, unpainted, kindling, branches, cardboard or
charcoal fire starter. Paraffin candles and alcohols are permitted as STARTER
FUELS and as aids to ignition only. Propane gas torches or other clean gas
burning devices causing minimal pollution must be used to start an open burn.
   WOOD. Dry, clean fuel only such as twigs, branches, limbs, “presto logs,”
charcoal, cord wood or untreated dimensional lumber. The term does not include
wood that is green with leaves or needles, rotten, wet, oil soaked or treated
with paint, glue or preservatives. Clean pallets may be used for recreational
fires when cut into 3-foot lengths.
§ 90.61 PROHIBITED MATERIALS.
   (A)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning oils, petro
fuels, rubber, plastics, chemically treated materials, or other materials which
produce excessive or noxious smoke such as tires, railroad ties, treated,
painted or glued wood composite shingles, tar paper, insulation, composition
board, sheet rock, wiring, paint or paint fillers.
   (B)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of hazardous
waste or salvage operations, open burning of solid waste generated from an
industrial or manufacturing process or from a service or commercial
establishment or building material generated from demolition of commercial or
institutional structures.
   (C)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of discarded
material resulting from the handling, processing, storage, preparation, serving
or consumption of food.
   (D)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of any leaves or
grass clippings.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.62 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR OPEN BURNING.
   No person shall start or allow any open burning on any property in the city
without first having obtained an open burn permit, except that a permit is not
required for any fire which is a recreational fire as defined in §
90.60 above.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.63 PURPOSES ALLOWED FOR OPEN BURNING.
   (A)   Open burn permits may be issued only for the following purposes:
      (1)   Elimination of fire of health hazard that cannot be abated by other
practical means;
      (2)   Ground thawing for utility repair and construction;
      (3)   Disposal of vegetative matter for managing forest, prairie or
wildlife habitat, and in the development and maintenance of land and rights-of-
way where chipping, composting, landspreading or other alternative methods are
not practical;
      (4)   Disposal of diseased trees generated on-site, diseased or infected
nursery stock, diseased bee hives; and
      (5)   Disposal of unpainted, untreated, non-glued lumber and wood shakes
generated from construction, where recycling, reuse, removal or other
alternative disposal methods are not practical.
   (B)   Fire training permits can only issued by the Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.64 PERMIT APPLICATION FOR OPEN BURNING; PERMIT FEES.
   Open burning permits shall be obtained by making application on a form
prescribed the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and adopted by the Fire
Department. The permit application shall be presented to the Fire Chief, Fire
Marshal and Assistant Fire Marshals for reviewing and processing those
applications.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.65 PERMIT PROCESS FOR OPEN BURNING.
   Upon receipt of the completed open burning permit application and permit
fee, the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal or Assistant Fire Marshals shall schedule a
preliminary site inspection to locate the proposed burn site, note special
conditions, and set dates and time of permitted burn and review fire safety
considerations.
§ 90.66 PERMIT HOLDER RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Prior to starting an open burn, the permit holder shall be responsible
for confirming that no burning ban or air quality alert is in effect. Every
open burn event shall be constantly attended by the permit holder or his or her
competent representative. The open burning site shall have available,
appropriate communication and fire suppression equipment as set out in the fire
safety plan.
   (B)   The open burn fire shall be completely extinguished before the permit
holder or his or her representative leaves the site. No fire may be allowed to
smolder with no person present. It is the responsibility of the permit holder
to have a valid permit, as required by this subchapter, available for
inspection on the site by the Police Department, Fire Department, MPCA
representative or DNR forest officer.
   (C)   The permit holder is responsible for compliance and implementation of
all general conditions, special conditions, and the burn event safety plan as
established in the permit issued. The permit holder shall be responsible for
all costs incurred as a result of the burn, including but not limited to fire
suppression and administrative fees.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.67 REVOCATION OF OPEN BURNING PERMIT.
   (A)   The open burning permit is subject to revocation at the discretion of
DNR forest officer, the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal or Assistant Fire Marshals.
   (B)   Reasons for revocation include but are not limited to a fire hazard
existing or developing during the course of the burn, any of the conditions of
the permit being violated during the course of the burn, pollution or nuisance
conditions developing during the course of the burn, or a fire smoldering with
no flame present.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.68 DENIAL OF OPEN BURNING PERMIT.
   If established criteria for the issuance of an open burning permit are not
met during review of the application, it is determined that a practical
alternative method for disposal of the material exists, or a pollution or
nuisance condition would result, or if a burn event safety plan cannot be
drafted to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal or Assistant Fire
Marshals, these officers may deny the application for the open burn permit.
§ 90.69 BURNING BAN OR AIR QUALITY ALERT.
   No recreational fire or open burn will be permitted when the city or DNR has
officially declared a burning ban due to potential hazardous fire conditions or
when the MPCA has declared an Air Quality Alert.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.70 RULES AND LAWS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The provisions of M.S. §§ 88.16 to 88.22, as these statutes may be amended
from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
subchapter as if fully set forth at this point.
CHAPTER 91: ABANDONED VEHICLES
Section
   
91.01   General provisions
   
91.02   Council authority
§ 91.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Impoundment and sale.
      (1)   The City Police Department shall take into custody and impound any
abandoned motor vehicle as defined by M.S. § 168B.011, as it may be amended
from time to time.
      (2)   It shall give notice of the taking as provided by law and if the
owner of any lien holder does not reclaim the vehicle within the period
provided by law, it shall provide for the sale of the vehicle to the highest
bidder at public auction or sale following 2-weeks’ published notice.
   (B)   Summary action in certain cases. When an abandoned motor vehicle is
more than 7 model years of age, is lacking vital component parts, and does not
display a license plate currently valid in Minnesota or any other state of
foreign country, it shall immediately be eligible for sale under division (A)
above and shall not be subject to the notification, reclamation or title
provisions of M.S. §§ 168B.01 et seq., as they may be amended from time to
time.
   (C)   Disposition of proceeds. The proceeds of the sale of an abandoned
motor vehicle shall be placed in the general fund of the city. If the former
owner or entitled lien holder makes application and furnishes satisfactory
proof of ownership or lien interest within 90 days of the sale, he or she shall
be paid the proceeds of the sale of the vehicle less the cost of towing,
preserving and storing the vehicle and all administrative, notice and
publication costs incurred in its handling.
   (D)   Abandonment a crime. Any person who abandons a vehicle on public or
private property without the consent of the person in control of the property
is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (E)   Abandonments.
      (1)   No use, structure, sign building, vehicle, machine or any other
piece or article or real estate or personal property may be abandoned or
permitted, in any public or private place, because of disuse or neglect, to
become unsightly or offensive to the public.
      (2)   Any non-conforming use or use authorized by this chapter, when
abandoned or discontinued, shall be removed or restored to as near its original
state as is practicable. Non-use for a period of 12 months shall be presumptive
evidence of intention to abandon or discontinue.
      (3)   Any citizen may make complaint to District Court where this section
of this chapter is not complied with.
      (4)   The penalty for this offense shall be the obligation to remove or
to correct unsightly or offensive thing or condition or remove or restore the
abandoned or discontinued use within a time to be fixed by the court, or, in
the discretion of the court, the same may be ordered removed or corrected and
the costs thereof assessed against the owner of the property or the real estate
on which the same is found to exist, together with all costs of prosecution.
(1986 Code, § 209.01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.02 COUNCIL AUTHORITY.
   The City Council is hereby authorized to adopt by resolution rules and
regulations as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
(1986 Code, § 209.02)
CHAPTER 92: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
Section
Street Excavations
   
92.01   Permit required
   
92.02   Application and regulations
   
92.03   Bond
   
92.04   General regulations for excavations
   
92.05   Refilling excavations
   
92.06   Curbs and sidewalks
   
92.07   Utility and light pole
Assessable Current Services; Obligations of Property Owners and Occupants
   
92.20   Definition
   
92.21   Snow, ice, dirt and rubbish
   
92.22   [Reserved]
   
92.23   Public health and safety hazards
   
92.24   Installation and repair of water service lines
   
92.25   Repair of sidewalks and alleys
   
92.26   Street sprinkling, street flushing, tree care and the like
   
92.27   Street lighting system
   
92.28   Personal liability
   
92.29   Assessment
Local Improvement Policy
   
92.40   Cut-off date for petitions
   
92.41   Classification of projects
   
92.42   Financing Class B and C improvements
   
92.43   Assessment regulations for Class B improvements
   
92.44   Assessment rules for Class C improvements
   
92.45   Special rules
   
92.46   Federal, state and county aid use
   
92.47   Procedural restrictions
   
92.48   Branch service line
   
92.49   Partial prepayment
   
92.50   Certification of assessments
   
92.51   Permanent improvement revolving fund
   
92.52   Assessment manual
Street Numbers
   
92.65   General provisions
STREET EXCAVATIONS
§ 92.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person, except an authorized city employee or a contractor
performing work under a contract with the city, shall make any excavation in a
street, alley, sidewalk or public ground without first having secured a permit
therefor from the city.
   (B)   The fee for the permit shall be set annually by the Council for each
location covered by the permit but no fee shall be required for excavation made
pursuant to a permit for sewer or water construction.
(1986 Code, § 301.01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.02 APPLICATION AND REGULATIONS.
   The city shall prepare the necessary application forms and permits required
under §
92.01 above. The Council shall also establish from time to time the rules and
regulations with respect to excavations as it finds necessary to protect the
public from injury, prevent damage to public or private property, and minimize
interference with the public use of street, alley, sidewalks and public
grounds. Any person making an excavation covered by this section shall comply
with the rules and regulations.
(1986 Code, § 301.02)
§ 92.03 BOND.
   (A)   Any permittee except a public utility corporation or a bonded plumber
shall file with the Clerk/Treasurer a corporate surety bond in the amount of
$10,000 conditioned that the permittee will:
      (1)   Perform work in connection with the excavation in accordance with
applicable ordinances and regulations;
      (2)   Indemnify the city and hold it harmless from all damage caused in
the execution of the work; and
      (3)   Pay all costs and damages suffered by the city by reason of the
failure of the permittee to observe the terms of applicable ordinances and
regulations or because of negligence in the execution of the work. The bond
shall be approved as to form and legality by the City Attorney.
   (B)   Any permittee except a public utility corporation shall furnish proof
that the permittee has in existence an insurance policy protecting him or her
from liability to the public, including the city, to an amount equal to the
maximum claim the city might be required to pay under M.S. Ch. 466, as it may
be amended from time to time.
(1986 Code, § 301.03)
§ 92.04 GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR EXCAVATIONS.
   (A)   Street openings shall be made in a manner that will cause the least
inconvenience to the public. Provision shall be made for the passage of water
along the gutters and at least 1/2 of the traveled portion of the street shall
be left open and in good condition for the safe passage of vehicles.
   (B)   Open excavations shall be guarded with substantial barriers and marked
with red flags and at night with red lights or flashing devices. Pipes or mains
exposed to freezing temperatures shall be protected so as to prevent freezing.
   (C)   Any person responsible for exposing a city main or pipe so that it
might be damages by freezing shall be liable to the city for all damages caused
by the freezing and all damages sustained by others by the freezing for which
the city may be liable.
(1986 Code, § 301.04)
§ 92.05 REFILLING EXCAVATIONS.
   (A)   Every street excavation shall be refilled as soon as possible after
the work is completed and paving, sidewalks and appurtenances shall be replaced
in at least as good condition as before the excavation to the satisfaction of
the Clerk/Treasurer.
   (B)   All dirt and debris shall be removed immediately.
   (C)   Any person who fails to comply with these requirements within 24 hours
after notice from the city shall be liable to the city for the full cost
incurred by the city in remedying the defect and restoring the street,
sidewalk, alley or public ground to its proper condition.
   (D)   The cost shall be an obligation of the surety on the bond of the
permittee.
(1986 Code, § 301.05)
§ 92.06 CURBS AND SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Construction and specifications. All sidewalks hereafter constructed,
altered or repaired shall be of a uniform width of at least 4 feet in all
residential districts, shall be built or rebuilt on the grade now or hereafter
established, and the outer edge thereof shall be as nearly as possible on a
straight line.
   (B)   Materials. All sidewalks hereafter constructed, or repaired shall be
constructed or repaired with a good grade of cement concrete, and shall conform
in all respects to the specifications approved by the City Council.
   (C)   Curbs. All curbs shall be constructed 12 feet from the property line
at the outside of the curb; shall be 6 inches in thickness at the top, and
conform to other requirements as may be specified by the City Council or its
representatives.
   (D)   General. No owner of property having a public sidewalk adjacent
thereto shall permit any part of the sidewalk to be raised above the
established level thereof more than 1/2 inch in any manner which might catch
the foot of a pedestrian, nor permit any holes or depressions to occur in the
sidewalk in which a pedestrian might step or catch his or her foot in a manner
liable to cause injury.
   (E)   Obstructing sidewalks. No person shall encumber or obstruct any
sidewalk by placing or maintaining thereon any building material, boxes, fuel,
carts, sacks, wheelbarrows or any other materials or things which may obstruct
the sidewalk, except with the permission of the City Council.
   (F)   Riding on sidewalks. No person or persons shall be permitted to ride
upon any sidewalk with a bicycle or a motor cycle.
   (G)   Driving upon or damage to sidewalks. No person or persons shall drive
with any motor vehicle, wagon, sleigh or other vehicle, or drive any horse,
mule, cow or other animal over or across any sidewalk, except at crossings; all
like crossings for access to private property shall be furnished and kept in
good repair by the owner of the property.
   (H)   Damage to sidewalk or public property. No person shall in any manner
willfully injure or deface any sidewalk nor any other public property of the
City of Osakis.
   (I)   Orders of construction. The city shall have authority to order the
construction of and to construct curbs and gutters, or either of them, along
any lot or lots or parcels of land adjoining any regularly laid out street in
the city, and to levy and assess the cost thereof upon the lots or parcels of
land abutting upon the improvement.
   (J)   Report made by Street Commissioner. Whenever the Council shall order
the construction, repair or reconstruction of any curb or gutter, a report
thereon shall be made by the Street Commissioner or other representative of the
Council, which report shall contain a list of the lots or parcels of land with
the number of feet frontage of each upon the improvements, the names of the
owners of the lots or parcels, and an estimate of the proposed improvement.
   (K)   Notice published. Upon the filing of the report the Council shall
cause to be published for 1 week in the official newspaper a notice stating
that the report is filed, and open to the inspection of all persons interested
therein, and that the same will be presented to the City Council for action
thereon at a meeting to be held at a time and place specified in the notice,
which meeting shall be the regular meeting of the Council occurring next after
1 week from the publication of the notice, at which meeting, all parties
interested therein may be heard.
   (L)   Meeting; orders. At the meeting held pursuant to the notice, or at any
subsequent adjourned meeting, the Council may order the construction, repair or
reconstruction of the curbs and gutters, or either of them, and upon completion
of the work shall assess and levy against each lot or parcel of land abutting
upon the improvement the sum as will cover the cost of making the improvement
thereon, and cause the same to be collected in the same manner as other taxes
or assessments.
   (M)   Sidewalks; curbs and gutters. The construction, repair or
reconstruction of sidewalks may be ordered jointly with the order to construct
curbs and gutters, or either of them, and the city may furnish the labor or
materials as it may deem proper.
   (N)   Adoption of policies. The city may adopt policies as it may deem
appropriate from time to time regarding its contribution or any or all portion
of the costs of construction of curbs and gutters, blacktopping, sewer and
water mains.
(1986 Code, § 301.06)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.07 UTILITY AND LIGHT POLE.
   (A)   No person shall erect any pole in any street or public grounds without
first complying with the provisions of §
92.01 through this section.
   (B)   Every pole in the streets and public grounds of the city, whether
erected hereafter under a permit or heretofore, shall be subject to the control
of the Council, and shall be removed when so ordered by the Council, at the
expense of the owner.
   (C)   (1)   All poles erected in the streets or public grounds shall be
available for supporting wires of any franchise holder having occasion to
string wires in the streets and public grounds.
      (2)   Every subsequent user of the poles shall pay upon demand to the
prior owner his or her equal share of cost thereof, or rental thereof.
   (D)   The purchase, erection or maintaining of any pole on the streets or
other public grounds in the city shall constitute an agreement to all
provisions of this subchapter.
(1986 Code, § 301.08)
Penalty, see § 10.99
ASSESSABLE CURRENT SERVICES; OBLIGATIONS OF PROPERTY OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS
§ 92.20 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CURRENT SERVICE. One or more of the following: snow, ice or rubbish removal
from sidewalks; weed elimination from street grass plots adjacent to sidewalks
or from private property; removal or elimination of public health or safety
hazards from private property, excluding any hazardous building included in
M.S. §§ 463.15 to 463.26, as they may be amended from time to time;
installation or repair of water service lines; street sprinkling, street
flushing, light street oiling or other dust treatment of streets; repair of
sidewalks and alleys; trimming and care of trees and removal of unsound and
insect-infected trees from the public streets or private property; and the
operation of a street lighting system.
(1986 Code, § 302.01)
§ 92.21 SNOW, ICE, DIRT AND RUBBISH.
   (A)   Duty of owners and occupants. The owner and the occupant of any
property adjacent to a public sidewalk shall use diligence to keep the walk
safe for pedestrians. No like owner or occupant shall allow dirt or rubbish to
remain on the walk longer than 24 hours after its deposit thereon.
   (B)   Duty of owners and occupants regarding removal of snow and ice. The
owner and the occupant of any property adjacent to a public sidewalk shall use
diligence to keep the walk safe for pedestrians by removing snow and ice. No
like owner or occupant shall allow snow or ice to remain on the sidewalk longer
than 24 hours after its deposit thereon on the following streets:
      (1)   All of Nokomis Street, also known as Douglas County Road 82.
      (2)   Main Street, between Second Avenue West and First Avenue East.
      (3)   Oak Street, between Central Avenue and Second Avenue East.
      (4)   Pike Street, between First Avenue East and Second Avenue East.
      (5)   All of First Avenue East.
      (6)   All of Central Avenue.
      (7)   All of First Avenue West.
      (8)   All of Second Avenue West.
      (9)   All of Third Avenue West.
      (10)   Main Street, from Co. Road 3 to Second Avenue West.
   (C)   Removal by city.
      (1)   The City Council shall designate officials who shall remove from
all public sidewalks identified in division (B) above, all snow and ice as soon
as possible, beginning 24 hours after any like matter has been deposited
thereon or after the snow has ceased to fall. The City Council shall also
designate officials who shall remove dirt and rubbish from all public
sidewalks, including but not limited to, those identified in division (B)
above. The cost for such removal by the city shall be assessable pursuant to
this section and §
90.01.
      (2)   The city officials shall keep a record showing the cost of the
removal adjacent to each separate lot and parcel, and shall deliver the
information to the City Clerk/Treasurer.
(1986 Code, § 302.02) (Am. Ord. 93, passed 11-4-2013; Am. Ord. 94, passed 5-5-
2014; Am. Ord. 98, passed 12-1-2014; Am. Ord. 143, passed 9-8-2025)
§ 92.22 [RESERVED]
§ 92.23 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY HAZARDS.
   (A)   When the city removes or eliminates public health or safety hazards
from private property under city ordinance, the administrative officer
responsible for doing the work shall keep a record of the cost of the removal
or elimination against each parcel of property affected and annually deliver
the information to the City Clerk/Treasurer.
   (B)   The charge for the work may at the city’s discretion be made a special
assessment against the property concerned.
   (C)   This section does not apply to hazardous buildings under the hazardous
building law, M.S. §§ 463.15 to 463.26, as they may be amended from time to
time.
(1986 Code, § 302.04)
§ 92.24 INSTALLATION AND REPAIR OF WATER SERVICE LINES.
   Whenever the city installs or repairs water service lines serving private
property under Title V of this code, the designated official shall keep a
record of the total cost of the installation or repair against the property and
deliver the information to the City Clerk/Treasurer annually by August 15 as to
each parcel of property on which the cost has not been paid.
(1986 Code, § 302.05)
§ 92.25 REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS AND ALLEYS.
   (A)   Duty of owner. The owner of any property within the city abutting a
public sidewalk or alley shall keep the sidewalk or alley in repair and safe
for pedestrians. Repairs shall be made in accordance with the standard
specifications approved by the Council on file in the office of the City Clerk/
Treasurer.
   (B)    Inspections; notice. The designated official shall make the
inspections as are necessary to determine that public sidewalks and alleys
within the city are kept in repair and safe for pedestrians or vehicles. If he
or she finds that any sidewalk or alley abutting on private property is unsafe
and in need of repairs, he or she shall cause notice to be served, by
registered or certified mail or by personal service, upon the record owner of
the property and the occupant, if the owner does not reside within the city or
cannot be found therein, ordering the owner to have the sidewalk or alley
repaired and made safe within 30 days and stating that if the owner fails to do
so, the city will do so on behalf of the city, that the expense thereof must be
paid by the owner, and that if unpaid it will be made a special assessment
against the property concerned.
   (C)   Repair by city. If the sidewalk or alley is not repaired within 30
days after receipt of the notice, the designated official shall report the
facts to the Council and the Council shall by resolution order the Clerk/
Treasurer to repair the sidewalk or alley and make it safe or order the work
done by contract in accordance with law. The Clerk/Treasurer shall kept a
record of the total cost of the repair attributable to each lot or parcel of
property and record the information to the City Clerk/Treasurer.
(1986 Code, § 302.06)
§ 92.26 STREET SPRINKLING, STREET FLUSHING, TREE CARE AND THE LIKE. 
   (A)   Proposed projects.
      (1)   The Council shall each year determine by resolution what streets
and alleys shall be sprinkled or flushed, oiled or given other dust treatment
during the year and the kind of work to be done on each.
      (2)   The Council shall also determine by resolution from time to time
the streets on which trees shall be trimmed and cared for, the kind of work to
be done, and what unsound trees shall be removed.
      (3)   Before any work is done pursuant to either of these resolutions,
the Clerk/Treasurer shall, under the Council’s direction, publish notice that
the Council will meet to consider the projects.
      (4)   The notice shall be published in the official newspaper at least
once no less than 2 weeks prior to the meeting of the Council and shall state
the date, time and place of the meeting, the streets affected and the
particular projects proposed, and the estimated cost of each project, either in
total or on the basis of the proposed assessment per front foot or otherwise.
   (B)    Hearing; order.
      (1)   At the hearing or at any adjournment thereof, the Council shall
hear property owners with reference to the scope and desirability of the
proposed projects.
      (2)   The Council shall thereupon adopt a resolution confirming the
original projects with the modifications as it considers desirable and shall
provide for the doing of the work by day labor through the designated official
or by contract.
      (3)   The designated official shall keep a record of the cost and the
portion of the cost properly attributable to each lot and parcel of property
abutting on the street or alley on which the work is done and shall report the
information to the City Clerk/Treasurer.
(1986 Code, § 302.07)
§ 92.27 STREET LIGHTING SYSTEM.
   (A)   The City Clerk/Treasurer shall keep a record of the cost of operation
of the street lighting system for the 12 months preceding September 1 of each
year and the portion of the cost properly attributable during that period to
each lot and parcel of property abutting on the street or alley in which the
system is located.
   (B)   All these costs shall be collected in the manner provided by this
chapter.
(1986 Code, § 302.08)
§ 92.28 PERSONAL LIABILITY.
   (A)   The owner of property on which or adjacent to which a current service
has been performed shall be personally liable for the cost of the service.
   (B)   As soon as the service has been completed and the cost determined, the
City Clerk/Treasurer, or other designated official, shall prepare a bill and
mail it to the owner and thereupon the amount shall be immediately due and
payable at the office of the City Clerk/Treasurer.
(1986 Code, § 302.09)
§ 92.29 ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   On or before September 1 of each year, the City Clerk/Treasurer shall
list the total unpaid charges for each type of current service against each
separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this chapter.
   (B)   The Council may then spread the charges against property benefitted as
a special assessment under M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to
time, and other pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor and
collection along with current taxes the following year or in annual
installments, not exceeding ten, as the Council may determine in each case.
(1986 Code, § 302.10)
LOCAL IMPROVEMENT POLICY
§ 92.40 CUT-OFF DATE FOR PETITIONS.
   No petition for construction of public improvements shall be accepted or
acted upon by the Council unless it is filed with the City Clerk/Treasurer on
or before September 1 of the year prior to the year of requested construction.
(1986 Code, § 303.01)
§ 92.41 CLASSIFICATION OF PROJECTS.
   (A)   In general. Public improvements are divided into the 3 classes
specified in the following divisions according to their respective benefit to
the whole city and to property specially served by the improvement and taking
into account past city practice.
   (B)   Class A. Class A improvements are those which are of general benefit
to the city at large, including:
      (1)   Public buildings, except a building which is part of an improvement
described in one of the following subdivision;
      (2)   Any public park, playground or recreational facility;
      (3)   The installation and maintenance of street lighting systems; and
      (4)   Any improvement not described in M.S. § 429.021, Subd. 1, as it may
be amended from time to time. Any like improvement shall be financed from
general city funds and not from special assessments.
   (C)   Class B. Class B improvements are those which are of both general
benefit and special benefit to abutting or nearby property. Class B
improvements include:
      (1)   Trunk water mains larger than 8 inches;
      (2)   Trunk sanitary sewer mains larger than 12 inches;
      (3)   Permanently surfacing arterial streets;
      (4)   Storm sewers; and
      (5)   The construction of off-street parking facilities.
   (D)   Class C. Class C improvements are those which are primarily if not
exclusively of benefit to property abutting or in the area of the improvement,
including:
      (1)   The construction of sidewalks;
      (2)   The construction of water mains no larger than 6 inches in
diameter;
      (3)   The construction of sanitary sewer mains no larger than 8 inches in
diameter;
      (4)   The construction of curbs and gutters;
      (5)   Grading, graveling, oiling and applying non-permanent surfacing to
streets;
      (6)   Permanently surfacing residential street; and
      (7)   The abatement of nuisances and the draining of swamps, marshes and
ponds on public or private property and filling the same.
(1986 Code, § 303.02)
§ 92.42 FINANCING CLASS B AND C IMPROVEMENTS.
   It is the policy of the city to finance Class B and C improvements by the
methods determined by the city. The apportionment of the cost between
benefitted property and the city at large and the method of levying assessments
prescribed in those sections shall be followed in each case unless the Council,
by resolution, finds that because of special circumstances stated in the
resolution, a different policy is necessary or desirable in the particular
case. Any local improvement described in M.S. § 429.02, as it may be amended
from time to time, and not placed in Class A, B or C by shall be financed as
the Council determines to be most feasible and equitable in each case.
(1986 Code, § 303.03)
§ 92.43 ASSESSMENT REGULATIONS FOR CLASS B IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Trunk water mains and sanitary sewers.
      (1)   When a water or sewer main is laid across or adjacent to unplatted
property, the city shall not defer the assessment against the unplatted
property if the assessment would be made for such an improvement in the case of
platted property, but the city shall make the assessment at the time the
assessment against other property is made, apportioning the assessment against
the unplatted property on the basis of area.
      (2)   When a trunk sewer or water main is constructed and is to serve
also as a lateral sewer or water main for abutting property, the abutting
property shall be assessed for the cost of a lateral sewer or water main of 8
inches plus its proportionate share of the cost of the excess capacity.
      (3)   Other property benefitted by the trunk sewer or water main but
unable to utilize it until a lateral connected to the trunk sewer or water main
has been building to serve the property shall not be assessed for its share of
the cost of the trunk sewer or water main until the lateral is built.
      (4)   The assessment for the lateral shall then include the property’s
share of the trunk sewer or water main. The cost of the trunk sewer or water
main in excess of the lateral assessment shall be assessed on the basis of
frontage (area, frontage or other rule) against all properties benefitted.
      (5)   The cost of a lift station shall be assessed on the basis of cost
(area, frontage or other rule) against that property actually benefitted by the
lift station.
   (B)    Storm sewers. One hundred percent of the cost of constructing storm
sewers shall be paid by the city from general funds.
(1986 Code, § 303.04)
§ 92.44 ASSESSMENT RULES FOR CLASS C IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Sidewalks. The cost of the construction of sidewalks shall be assessed
on the basis of frontage against property abutting the side of the street on
which the sidewalk is located.
   (B)   Water and sewer.
      (1)   The cost of lateral water mains not exceeding 2 inches in diameter
and of lateral sanitary sewer mains not exceeding 4 inches in diameter shall be
assessed against abutting property on the basis of frontage.
      (2)   The cost of water mains to be assessed includes the service lines
if furnished, hydrants and valves. The cost of sewer mains includes lines if
furnished.
   (C)   Streets. The cost of construction of curbs and gutters on any street,
of grading, oiling and applying non-permanent surfacing to any street, or of
applying permanent surfaces to residential streets shall be assessed on the
basis of frontage.
   (D)   Nuisances.
      (1)   The cost of abating nuisances and draining of swamps, marshes and
ponds on public or private property and filling the same shall be assessed in a
manner determined by the Council in each case to measure most equitably the
benefit received by the property to be assessed.
      (2)   The assessment in any like case may be made against non-abutting
property to the extent the property is benefitted by the improvement.
(1986 Code, § 303.05)
§ 92.45 SPECIAL RULES.
   (A)   Corner lots.
      (1)   In any assessment made on the basis of frontage, except one for
water or sanitary sewer, corner lots shall be assessed for footage along the
front of the lot plus side footage.
      (2)   In the case of an assessment for a lateral water or sewer main,
Class C, corner lots shall be assessed for the footage along the front side of
the lot and shall be assessed for the footage along the front side of the
street abutting the lot.
   (B)    Intersection.
      (1)   The cost of water and sewer improvements in street intersections
shall be included as part of the total assessable cost.
      (2)   In the case of any kind of street improvement, intersection costs
shall be paid by the city.
   (C)   Adjusted frontage. When the amount of an assessment is determined by
frontage, an equivalent front footage shall be determined according to the
following rules when an irregular lot requires a like adjustment to maintain
fairness in the assessment:
      (1)   Front footage shall be measured at setback on cul-de-sacs and
sharply curved streets and irregularly shaped lots;
      (2)   Equivalent front footage shall be determined by dividing the square
footage of the lot by the general lot depth of the subdivision for pie-shaped
lots and irregular shaped lots where other rules do not apply;
      (3)   Where frontage curves so greatly as to give a general appearance of
a corner, the lot shall be considered a corner lot and equivalent front
footage, as well as side footage where required, determined on the basis of an
irregularly shaped lot; and
      (4)   Where a lot consists of a combination of rectangular and pie-shaped
or irregular portions, the equivalent front footage shall be determined as the
sum of the straight front footage plus the remainder in accordance with
applicable rules.
(1986 Code, § 303.06)
§ 92.46 FEDERAL, STATE AND COUNTY AID USE.
   (A)   If the city receives financial assistance from the federal government,
the state or the county to defray a portion of the cost of a street improvement
project, the aid shall be used first to reduce the share of the project cost
which would be met from general city funds according to the assessment formula
contained in this chapter.
   (B)   If the aid is more than the amount of the improvement cost to be borne
by the city, the remainder of the aid so received shall be used to reduce each
individual assessment proportionately.
(1986 Code, § 303.07)
§ 92.47 PROCEDURAL RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   In general. In addition to conforming to the provisions of M.S. Ch.
429, as it may be amended from time to time, proceedings for a public
improvement to be paid wholly or partly by special assessments shall conform to
the requirements of this section.
   (B)   Findings on market value increase. Before determining proposed special
assessments on any project, the city shall gather as much evidence as is
practical and useful to show that the aggregate benefits to property to be
assessed do not exceed the cost of the project and that each proposed
individual assessment does not exceed the increase in market value on the
property on which the assessment is to be made.
(1986 Code, § 303.08)
§ 92.48 BRANCH SERVICE LINE.
   (A)   Water and sewer lines shall be installed from the main to the front
property line of property to be served before any permanent street surfacing is
constructed in the street.
   (B)   If any property owner fails to put in the water and sewer service
lines within 30 days after notice from the Clerk/Treasurer, the City Council
shall proceed to have water and sewer service installed and to assess the cost
against the property.
(1986 Code, § 303.09)
§ 92.49 PARTIAL PREPAYMENT.
   (A)   After the adoption by the City Council of the assessment roll in any
local improvement proceeding, the owner of any property specially assessed in
the proceeding may, prior to the certification of the assessment or the first
installment to the County Auditor, pay to the City Clerk/Treasurer any portion
of the assessment not less than $100.
   (B)   The remaining unpaid balance shall be spread over the period of time
established by the Council for installment payment of the assessment.
(1986 Code, § 303.10)
§ 92.50 CERTIFICATION OF ASSESSMENTS.
   After the adoption of any special assessment by the Council, the Clerk/
Treasurer shall transmit a certified duplicate of the assessment roll with each
installment, including interest, set forth separately to the County Auditor to
be extended on the proper tax lists of the city.
(1986 Code, § 303.11)
§ 92.51 PERMANENT IMPROVEMENT REVOLVING FUND.
   (A)   Establishment. There is hereby established a permanent improvement
revolving fund of the city to be held and administered by the City Clerk/
Treasurer, separate and apart from all other funds of the city, for the purpose
of financing local improvements.
   (B)   Source of funds. The fund shall be a permanent fund of the city and
the moneys necessary for its maintenance shall be provided by taxation, by the
appropriation of available moneys from other funds of the city, and/or by the
issuance and sale of permanent improvement revolving fund bonds of the city as
deemed necessary from time to time by the Council.
   (C)   Disposition of funds.
      (1)   Moneys in the fund shall be used only as directed by resolution of
the Council for the purpose of advancing to local improvement funds the cost of
improvements for which assessments are to be levied.
      (2)   All moneys so advanced to an improvement fund shall be restored as
soon as sufficient moneys are received in the improvement fund, together with
interest at a rate fixed by the Council during the time for which the moneys
have been so furnished.
   (D)   Investment. Whenever there are moneys in the fund not immediately
needed for local improvements, the moneys shall be invested by the Clerk/
Treasurer under the direction of the Council in any securities authorized for
investment of municipal sinking funds by law.
   (E)   Transfer of surplus. When the fund accumulates encumbered moneys in
excess of any amounts reasonably anticipated to be needed for local improvement
fund advances, the Council may, by resolution adopted by a 4/5 vote, declare
any part of the excess to be surplus and transfer it to the general fund.
(1986 Code, § 303.12)
§ 92.52 ASSESSMENT MANUAL.
   (A)   The Clerk/Treasurer shall prepare an administrative manual specifying
more detailed procedures for the conduct of local improvements and the levy of
special assessments in supplementation of this chapter and consistent
therewith.
   (B)   Upon approval of the Council by resolution, the manual shall be used
with this chapter in the conduct of all local improvements proceedings to which
they apply by their terms.
(1986 Code, § 303.13)
STREET NUMBERS
§ 92.65 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Requirements.
      (1)   All commercial buildings and residential buildings located within
the city shall have a street number.
      (2)   The number shall be located upon the side of each building which
faces the adjacent street. The number shall be visible and capable of being
identified and read from the adjacent street.
      (3)   All numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches tall but not more than 6
inches.
      (4)   Numbers shall be in contrast to the part of the building where
placed.
      (5)   Any building which is located upon a corner lot shall have only 1
number.
   (B)   Number assignment. All numbers shall be assigned by the City Clerk/
Treasurer.
   (C)   Enforcement.
      (1)   This section shall be enforced by the Police Chief.
      (2)   Upon a finding of a violation of this chapter the Police Chief
shall serve upon the owner of the building a notice of the violation.
      (3)   The notice given pursuant to this division shall include the
following:
         (a)   That the owner is in violation of this chapter;
         (b)   A copy of the chapter; and
         (c)   That the owner has 30 days in which to comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   Non-compliance. If after 30 days of the notice given pursuant to
division (C) above, the building continues to be in non-conformance with the
chapter the matter may be prosecuted by the City Attorney.
(1986 Code, § 516.01) (Ord. 106, passed 9-8-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 93: ANIMALS
Section
General Regulations
   
93.01   General prohibition
   
93.02   Areas where keeping prohibited
   
93.03   Treatment
   
93.04   Animals at large
   
93.05   Diseased animals
   
93.06   Manner of keeping
   
93.07   Care of premises
   
93.08   Impounding
Dogs
   
93.20   Running at large prohibited
   
93.21   Licenses
   
93.22   Dog nuisances
   
93.23   Confinement of certain dogs
   
93.24   Quarantine of certain dogs
   
93.25   Muzzling proclamation
   
93.26   Proceedings for destruction of certain dogs
   
93.27   Impounding
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 93.01 GENERAL PROHIBITION.
   No person shall keep any horses, cattle, sheep, pigs or goats in the city or
permit an animal to be kept on premises owned, occupied or controlled by him or
her except under the conditions prescribed by this chapter.
(1986 Code, § 504.01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.02 AREAS WHERE KEEPING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No horses, cattle, sheep, pigs or goats shall be kept in the city
except upon the application or receipt of a conditional use permit in the
manner specified in the Zoning Code.
   (B)   Persons exempt from this section are persons who on a continuing basis
have farm animals on their property. If they discontinue animals for 12
consecutive months they are no longer exempt.
   (C)   The Council shall not issue a permit unless it determines:
      (1)   The permit and use would not create a nuisance or hazard;
      (2)   Diminish the fair market value of the surrounding properties;
      (3)   Unless the applicant has a confinement area of a minimum of 2
acres; or
      (4)   The permit and use would not be inconsistent or contrary to any
other part of this chapter.
(1986 Code, § 504.02) (Am. Ord. 30, passed 11-4-1996)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.03 TREATMENT.
   No person shall treat any animal in a cruel or inhumane manner.
(1986 Code, § 504.03)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.04 ANIMALS AT LARGE.
   (A)   No person shall permit any horse, mule, donkey, pony, cattle, sheep,
goat, swine, rabbit, chicken, geese, duck or turkey of which he or she is the
owner, caretaker or custodian to be at large within the city.
   (B)   Any like animal is deemed to be at large when it is off the premises
owned or rented by the owner or his or her agent and not under his or her
individual restraint.
(1986 Code, § 504.04)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.05 DISEASED ANIMALS.
   Any animal with a contagious disease shall be so confined that it cannot
come within 50 feet of any public roadway or any place where animals belonging
to or harbored by another person are kept.
(1986 Code, § 504.05)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.06 MANNER OF KEEPING.
   No person shall keep any dog, cat or other animal in the city in an
unsanitary place or condition or in a manner resulting in objectionable odors
or in a way so as to constitute a nuisance or disturbance by reason of barking,
howling, fighting or other noise or in a way so as to permit the animal to
annoy, injure or endanger any person or property.
(1986 Code, § 504.06)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.07 CARE OF PREMISES.
   (A)   Every structure and yard in which animals or fowl are kept shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and free of all rodents, vermin
and objectionable odors.
   (B)   The interior walls, ceilings, floors, partitions and appurtenances of
any like structure shall be whitewashed or painted as the Health Officer shall
direct.
   (C)   Upon the complaint of any individual or otherwise, the Health Officer
shall inspect the structure or yard and issue any order as may be reasonably
necessary to carry out the provisions of this subchapter.
(1986 Code, § 504.07)
§ 93.08 IMPOUNDING.
   (A)   Who impounds. The poundmaster or any police officer may take up and
impound in the city pound any animal or foul found running at large in
violation of this chapter and shall provide proper sustenance for every animal
impounded.
   (B)   Notice. He or she may also make a reasonable attempt to give oral or
written notice to the owner where known.
   (C)   Release. No animal impounded shall be released except to a person
displaying a receipt from the Clerk/Treasurer showing payment of the impounding
fee or the sale price.
   (D)   Fees. The fee for impounding shall be $15 plus $3 a day for feeding in
the case of an impounded animal except a dog.
   (E)   Sale. In any impounded animal is not redeemed within 6 days, the
humane society shall give an additional 3-day posted notice, as provided in
division (B) above, of the time and place when and where the animal shall be
sold.
   (F)   Illegal release. No unauthorized person shall break into the pound or
release any animal legally placed therein.
(1986 Code, § 504.08)
Penalty, see § 10.99
DOGS
§ 93.20 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the dog of any person who owns, harbors or
keeps a dog, to run at large.
   (B)   A person, who owns, harbors or keeps a dog which runs at large shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (C)   Dogs on a leash and accompanied by a responsible person or accompanied
by and under the control and direction of a responsible person, so as to be
effectively restrained by command as by leash, shall be permitted in streets or
on public land unless the city has posted an area with signs reading “Dogs
Prohibited.”
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.21 LICENSES.
   (A)   License required. No person shall keep a dog within the city without
securing an annual license therefore from the City Clerk/Treasurer, who shall
keep a record of all licenses issued and shall issue a metal tag for each
license.
   (B)   License fees; expiration. The annual fee shall be set annually by the
Council for each male, female or spayed female dog. Every license shall expire
May 1 of each year. Any applicant for a license shall present acceptable proof
that the dog has been in inoculated for rabies.
   (C)   Affixing tag. The owner shall permanently affix the tag to the collar
of the dog so licensed in a manner so that the tag may be easily seen. The
owner shall see that the tag is constantly worn by the dog.
(1986 Code, § 503.02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.22 DOG NUISANCES.
   (A)   Habitual barking. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or
harbor a dog which habitually barks or cries. HABITUAL BARKING shall be defined
as barking for repeated intervals of at least 5 minutes with less than 1 minute
of interruption. The barking must also be audible off of the owner’s or
caretaker’s premises.
   (B)   Defecating. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow their dog to
defecate on private or public property unless such custodian removes the
remains.
(Am. Ord. 87, passed 8-6-2012)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.23 CONFINEMENT OF CERTAIN DOGS.
   Every female dog in heat shall be confined in a building or other secure
enclosure in a manner so that it cannot come into contact with another dog,
except for planned breeding.
(1986 Code, § 503.04)
§ 93.24 QUARANTINE OF CERTAIN DOGS.
   (A)   Any dog which bites a person shall be quarantined for a time as may be
directed by the City Health Officer.
   (B)   During quarantine the animal shall be securely confined and kept from
contact with any other animal.
   (C)   At the discretion of the Health Officer the quarantine may be on the
premises of the owner; however, if the Health Officer requires other
confinement, the owner shall surrender the animal for the quarantine period to
an animal shelter or shall, at his or her own expense, place it in a veterinary
hospital.
(1986 Code, § 503.05)
§ 93.25 MUZZLING PROCLAMATION.
   (A)   Whenever the prevalence of rabies renders an action necessary to
protect the public health and safety, the Council shall issue a proclamation
ordering every person owning or keeping a dog to muzzle it securely so that it
cannot bite.
   (B)   No person shall violate the proclamation and any unmuzzled dog
unrestrained during the time fixed in the proclamation shall be subject to
impoundment as heretofore provided, and the owner of the dog shall be subject
to the penalty hereinafter provided.
(1986 Code, § 503.06)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.26 PROCEEDINGS FOR DESTRUCTION OF CERTAIN DOGS.
   (A)   Upon sworn complaint to the District Court that any one of the
following facts exist, the judges shall issue a summons directed to the owner
of the dog commanding him or her to appear before the court to show cause why
the dog should not be seized by any police officer, or otherwise disposed of in
the manner authorized in this chapter:
      (1)   That any dog at any time has destroyed property or habitually
trespasses in a damaging manner on the property of persons other than the
owner;
      (2)   That any dog at any time as attacked or bitten a person outside the
owner’s or custodian’s premises;
      (3)   That any dog is vicious or shows vicious habits or molests
pedestrians or interferes with vehicles on the public streets; or
      (4)   That any dog is a public nuisance as heretofore defined.
   (B)   The summons shall be returnable not less than 2 nor more than 6 days
from the date thereof and shall be served at least 2 days before the time of
the scheduled appearance.
   (C)   Upon hearing and finding the facts true as complained of, the court
may either order the dog killed or order the owner or custodian to remove it
from the city, or may order the owner or custodian to keep it confined to a
designated place.
   (D)   If the owner or custodian violates the order, any police officer may
impound the dog described in that order.
   (E)   The provisions of this section are in addition to and supplemental to
other provisions of this part.
(1986 Code, § 503.07)
§ 93.27 IMPOUNDING.
   (A)   Police to impound. Any dog found unlicensed or running at large
contrary to the provisions of this chapter may be impounded by the poundmaster
or any police officer, who shall give notice of the impounding to the owner of
the dog if known. If the dog is not claimed within 5 working days it will be
disposed of.
   (B)   Redemption. Any dog may be redeemed from the pound by the owner within
the time stated in the notice by the payment to the City Clerk/Treasurer of the
license fee for the current year, if unpaid, together with an impounding fee of
$15 and a charge for feeding for each day the dog is impounded.
   (C)   Humane Society. The city contracts with the Humane Society.
(1986 Code, § 503.08)
CHAPTER 94: TREES
Section
Tree Diseases
   
94.01   Declaration of policy
   
94.02   Forester
   
94.03   Epidemic disease program
   
94.04   Nuisances declared
   
94.05   Inspection and investigation
   
94.06   Abatement of Dutch elm disease nuisance
   
94.07   Procedure for removal of infected trees and woods
   
94.08   Spraying elm trees
   
94.09   Transporting elm wood prohibited
   
94.10   Interference prohibited
   
94.11   Planting trees on city property
City Tree Board
   
94.25   Authority and power
   
94.26   Term of office
   
94.27   Applicability
   
94.28   Licensing
   
94.29   Tree planting, maintenance and removal
   
94.30   Care of street trees
   
94.31   Removal or pruning of trees endangering utilities or other public
improvements or on private property
   
94.32   Adjacent landowner responsibility
   
94.33   Interference with the City Tree Board
TREE DISEASES
§ 94.01 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   (A)   The Council of Osakis determines that the health of the elm and oak
trees within the municipal limits is threatened by fatal diseases known as
Dutch elm and oak wilt diseases, and other trees may be threatened by other
epidemic diseases of shade trees. It further determines that the loss of elm,
oak and other trees growing upon public and private property would
substantially depreciate the value of property within the city and impair the
safety, good order, general welfare and convenience of the public.
   (B)   It is declared to be the intention of the Council to control and
prevent the spread of those diseases and this chapter is enacted for that
purpose.
(1986 Code, § 805.01)
§ 94.02 FORESTER.
   (A)   Position created. The position of Forester is hereby created within
the Street Department of the city.
   (B)   Duties of Forester.
      (1)   It is the duty of the Forester to coordinate, under the direction
and control of the Council, all activities of the municipality relating to the
control and prevention of Dutch elm disease and oak wilt disease and other
epidemic diseases of shade trees.
      (2)   He or she shall recommend to the Council the details of a program
for the control of the disease and perform the duties incident to a like
program adopted by the Council.
(1986 Code, § 805.02)
§ 94.03 EPIDEMIC DISEASE PROGRAM.
   (A)   It is the intention of the Council to conduct a program of plant pest
control pursuant to all the powers of this city including the authority granted
by M.S. § 18.022, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   This program is concentrated on, but not limited to, the control and
elimination of Dutch elm disease, fungus, elm bark beetles and the oak wilt
fungus and is undertaken at the recommendation of the Commissioner of
Agriculture.
   (C)   The Forester shall act as coordinator between the Commissioner of
Agriculture and the Council in the conduct of this program.
(1986 Code, § 805.03)
§ 94.04 NUISANCES DECLARED.
   (A)   Trees constitute nuisances. The following are public nuisances
whenever they may be found within the city:
      (1)   Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected to any
degree with Dutch elm disease fungus Ceratocystis Ulmi (Buisman, Moreau) or
which harbors any of the elm bark beetles Scolytus Multistriatus (Eichh) or
Hylungopinus Refipes (Marsh);
      (2)   Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including limbs, branches,
stumps, firewood or other elm material from which the bank has not been removed
and burned or sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle insecticide;
      (3)   Any living or standing oak tree or part thereof infected to any
degree with the oak wilt fungus Ceratocystis fagacearum;
      (4)   Any dead oak tree or part thereof which in the opinion of the
Forester constitutes a hazard, including but not limited to logs, branches,
stumps, roots, firewood or other oak material, which has not been stripped of
its bark and burned or sprayed with an effective fungicide; and
      (5)   Any other shade trees with an epidemic disease.
   (B)   Abatement.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to permit any public nuisance as
defined in division (A) above to remain on any premises owned or controlled by
him or her within the city.
      (2)   Those nuisances may be abated in the manner prescribed in §
90.23 and/or appropriate criminal prosecution may be commenced.
(1986 Code, § 805.04)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.05 INSPECTION AND INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Annual inspection.
      (1)   As often as practicable, the Forester shall inspect all public and
private premises within the city which might harbor any plant pest as defined
in M.S. § 18.46, Subd. 13, as it may be amended from time to time, to determine
whether any condition described in §
94.04 exists thereon.
      (2)   He or she shall investigate all reported incidents of infestation
by Dutch elm fungus, elm bark beetles, oak wilt fungus or any other epidemic
disease of shade trees.
   (B)   Entry on private premises. The Forester or his or her duly authorized
agents may enter upon private premises at any reasonable time for the purpose
of carrying out any of the duties assigned him or her under this chapter.
   (C)   Diagnosis.
      (1)   The Forester shall, upon finding conditions indicating Dutch elm,
oak wilt or other infestation, immediately send appropriate specimens or
samples to the Commissioner of Agriculture for analysis, or take other steps
for diagnosis as may be recommended by the Commissioner.
      (2)   Except as provided in § 802.08, no action to remove infected trees
or wood shall be taken until positive diagnosis of the disease has been made.
(1986 Code, § 805.05)
§ 94.06 ABATEMENT OF DUTCH ELM DISEASE NUISANCE.
   (A)   In abating a nuisance defined in §
94.04, the Forester shall cause the infected tree or wood to be sprayed,
removed, burned or otherwise effectively treated so as to destroy and prevent
as fully as possible the spread of epidemic diseases including Dutch elm
disease and oak wilt disease.
   (B)   He or she shall also take steps as are necessary to prevent root graft
transmission of the disease.
   (C)   The abatement procedures shall be carried out in accordance with
current technical and expert opinions and plans as may be designated by the
Commissioner of Agriculture.
(1986 Code, § 805.06)
§ 94.07 PROCEDURE FOR REMOVAL OF INFECTED TREES AND WOODS.
   (A)   Action by Forester. Whenever the Forester finds with reasonable
certainty that the infestation defined in §
130.04 exists in any tree or wood in any public or private place in the city,
he or she shall proceed as follows:
      (1)   If the Forester finds that the danger of infestation of other elm,
oak or other trees is not imminent because of the dormancy of the infected
trees, he or she shall make a written report of his or her finding to the
Council which shall proceed by:
         (a)   Abating the nuisance as a public improvement under M.S. Ch. 429,
as it may be amended from time to time; or
         (b)   Abating the nuisance as provided in division (B) below.
      (2)   If the Forester finds that danger of infestation of other elm, oak
or other trees is imminent, he or she shall notify the abutting property owner
by certified mail that the nuisance will be abated within a specified time, not
less than 5 days from the date of mailing of the notice. The Forester shall
immediately report that action to the Council, and after the expiration of the
time limit in the notice he or she may abate the nuisance.
   (B)   Action by Council.
      (1)   Upon receipt of the Forester’s report required by division (A)(2)
above, the Council shall be resolution order the nuisance abated.
      (2)   Before action is taken on the resolution, the Council shall publish
notice of its intention to meet to consider taking action to abate the
nuisance.
      (3)   This notice shall be mailed to affected property owners an
published once no less than 1 week prior to the meeting.
      (4)   The notice shall state the time and place of the meeting, the
streets affected, action proposed, the estimated cost of the abatement, and the
proposed basis of assessment, if any, of costs.
      (5)   At the hearing or adjournment thereof, the Council shall hear
property owners with reference to the scope and desirability of the proposed
project.
      (6)   The Council shall thereafter adopt a resolution confirming the
original resolution with modifications as it considers desirable and provide
for the doing of the work by day labor or by contract.
   (C)   Record. The Forester shall keep a record of the costs of abatements
done under this section and shall report monthly to the Clerk/Treasurer all
work done for which assessments are to be made stating and certifying the
description of the land, lots, parcels involved and the amount chargeable to
each.
   (D)   Assessment.
      (1)   On or before September 1 of each year the Clerk/Treasurer shall
list the total unpaid charges for each abatement against each separate lot or
parcel to which they are attributable under this subchapter.
      (2)   The Council may then spread the charges or any portion thereof
against the property involved as a special assessment under M.S. § 429.101, as
it may be amended from time to time, and other pertinent statutes for
certification to the County Auditor and collection the following year along
with current taxes.
(1986 Code, § 805.07)
§ 94.08 SPRAYING ELM TREES.
   (A)   When to spray.
      (1)   Whenever the Forester determines that any elm tree or elm wood
within city is infected with Dutch elm fungus, he or she may spray or treat all
nearby high value elm trees with an effective elm bark beetle destroying
concentrate of fungicide or both.
      (2)   Activities authorized by this sections shall be conducted in
accordance with technical and expert opinions and plans of the Commissioner of
Agriculture and under the supervision of the Commissioner and his or her agents
whenever possible.
   (B)   Notice. The notice provisions of §
94.07 apply to spraying and treatment operations conducted under this section.
(1986 Code, § 805.08)
§ 94.09 TRANSPORTING ELM WOOD PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to transport within the city any bark-
bearing elm or oak wood without having obtained a permit from the Forester.
   (B)   The Forester shall grant permits only when the purpose of this chapter
will be served thereby.
(1986 Code, § 805.09)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.10 INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
Forester or his or her agents while they are engaged in the performance of
duties imposed by this chapter.
(1986 Code, § 805.10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.11 PLANTING TREES ON CITY PROPERTY.
   It is unlawful for any person or corporation to plant trees on public
property, including streets and boulevards, without the written permission of
the City Council.
(Ord. 6, passed 8-3-1992)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CITY TREE BOARD
§ 94.25 AUTHORITY AND POWER.
   There is hereby created and established a City Tree Board for the City of
Osakis which shall consist of 5 members, citizens and residents who shall be
appointed by the City Council Members of the Board shall serve without
compensation and must be from within the post office mailing address of Osakis.
The City Engineer and the City Street Superintendent are members.
(Ord. 22, passed 10-2-1995)
§ 94.26 TERM OF OFFICE.
   (A)   The term of the members approved by the City Council shall be 3 years,
except that the term of two of the members appointed to the first Tree Board
shall be for only 1 year and the term of 2 members of the first Tree Board
shall be 2 years.
   (B)   In the event a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his
or her successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term.
(Ord. 22, passed 10-2-1995)
§ 94.27 APPLICABILITY.
   This subchapter provides full power and authority over all trees, plants and
shrubs located within street rights-of-way, parks and public places of the
city, and to trees, plants and shrubs located on private property that
constitute a hazard or threat as described herein.
(Ord. 22, passed 10-2-1995)
§ 94.28 LICENSING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business
or occupation of pruning, treating or removing street or park trees within the
city without first applying for and procuring a license.
   (B)   The license fee shall be $25 annually in advance; provided, however,
that no license shall be required for any public utility company, or its
agents, or city employee doing work in pursuit of the public service endeavors.
   (C)   Before any license shall be issued, each applicant shall first file
evidence of possession of liability insurance in the minimum amounts of $50,000
for bodily injury, and $100,000 property damage, indemnifying the city or any
person injured, or damage resulting from the pursuit of endeavors such as
herein described.
(Ord. 22, passed 10-2-1995)
§ 94.29 TREE PLANTING, MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL.
   (A)   No species may be planted on public property within the City of Osakis
without prior written permission of the Tree Board.
   (B)   Prior to the Tree Board action, it shall review all request for
planting to assure that the species is appropriate.
   (C)   The Tree Board shall submit written reports to the City Council on
those matters of special requests by the Council prior to taking official
action.
(Ord. 22, passed 10-2-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.30 CARE OF STREET TREES.
   (A)   The City of Osakis shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and
remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys,
avenues, lanes, squares and public ground as may be necessary to ensure the
public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of the public
grounds.
   (B)   No tree planting may be done without the consent of the City Tree
Board.
(Ord. 22, passed 10-2-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.31 REMOVAL OR PRUNING OF TREES ENDANGERING UTILITIES OR OTHER PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS OR ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   The Tree Board may cause or order to be removed any tree or part
thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is
injurious to sewer, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other
public improvement, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other
pest or microorganism.
   (B)   Every tree overhanging any street or right of way within the city
shall be pruned so that the branches shall not obstruct the light from any
street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there
shall be a clear space of at least 10 feet above the street or 8 feet above the
sidewalk. Dead, diseased or hazardous trees or broken or decayed limbs which
endanger the safety of the public shall be removed.
   (C)   The City Tree Board, after approval by the City Council, shall have
the authority to order the trimming, treatment and removal of trees, shrubs or
plants upon private property when that action is necessary to public safety or
to prevent the spread of disease or insects to trees, shrubs or plants located
on public property.
   (D)   Any tree or shrub situated on private property, but so situated as to
extend its branches over the improved portion of a public street or highway
easement, shall be so trimmed by the owner of the real property upon which the
same is located so that there is clear height of at least 10 feet over the
portion of the easement that is used for vehicular traffic and over the portion
of the easement used for pedestrian travel shall be 8 feet; and the persons
shall remove the head or diseased branches or stubs of trees which are or may
become hazardous to the public use of the easement.
   (E)   Any trees obstructing traffic control signs or devices from the view
of the pedestrian or motorist shall be pruned to a height established by the
City Tree Board to ensure proper safety for motorists and pedestrians.
   (F)   All orders to trim, remove or treat trees, shrubs or plants given
pursuant to this section, shall be in writing and shall be served in person or
by the first class mail upon the owner of the property where the trees, shrubs
or plants are located.
   (G)   The orders shall afford the owner of the property not more than 14
days from the date of the mailing of the notice to comply with the order or to
notify Osakis City Hall with their intentions of time span.
   (H)   If the required action is not taken by the property owner within the
specified time, the City Tree Board may cause the trees, shrubs or plants
concerned to be trimmed, removed or treated, with the costs being borne by the
property owner.
   (I)   If not voluntarily paid to the city by the owner, the costs of
trimming, removal or treatment may be recovered by the city by special
assessment upon the property owner.
   (J)   It shall be unlawful practice for any person, firm or city department
to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property without the
authorization from the City Tree Board.
   (K)   TOPPING is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger
than 3 inches in diameter within the tree’s crown, to a degree so as to remove
the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
   (L)   Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees
under utility wires or other obstructions where pruning practices are
impractical may be exempted from this section at the determination of the City
Tree Board.
(Ord. 22, passed 10-2-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.32 ADJACENT LANDOWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   No person shall plant, remove, cut above ground or disturb any tree on
any street, park or other public place without first filing an application and
procuring a permit from the City Tree Board.
   (B)   The person receiving the permit shall abide by the standards set forth
in this subchapter.
   (C)   Owners of property adjacent to tree lawns are required to water and
maintain trees on the tree lawn.
   (D)   The City Tree Board, after approval by the City Council, shall have
the authority to order the trimming, treatment and removal of trees, shrubs or
plants upon private property when the action is necessary to public safety or
to prevent the spread of disease or insects to trees, shrubs or plants located
on private property.
(Ord. 22, passed 10-2-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.33 INTERFERENCE WITH THE CITY TREE BOARD.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for or any person to prevent, delay or interfere
with the City Tree Board, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about
planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any street
trees, park trees or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, remove or destroy any
street tree or park tree without prior authorization of the City Tree Board.
(Ord. 22, passed 10-2-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 95: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
95.01   Purpose
   
95.02   Authority
   
95.03   Definitions
   
95.04   Public use regulations
   
95.05   Conduct; personal behavior
   
95.06   Operation requirements
   
95.07   Protection of property, structures and resources
   
95.08   Recreation activities
   
95.09   Traffic regulations
   
95.10   Enforcement
§ 95.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter, which is enacted pursuant to M.S. Ch. 398, as
it may be amended from time to time, is to secure the quiet, orderly and
suitable use and enjoyment of public park properties by the City Council.
§ 95.02 AUTHORITY.
   The City Council, under M.S. §§ 398.31 to 398.36, as they may be amended
from time to time, in performing its primary duty of the acquisition,
development and maintenance of parks, wildlife sanctuaries, forest and other
reservations and providing the means for public access to historic sites,
lakes, rivers, streams and other natural phenomena is granted full power and
authority to acquire and establish parks and to operate, maintain, protect and
improve a park system and conduct a recreational program. As an aid to the
accomplishment of these duties, the Board is granted the authority to enact
ordinances and to declare that the violation thereof shall be a penal offense.
§ 95.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMUSEMENT CONTRAPTIONS. Any device, contrivance, gadget, machine or
structure designed to test the skill or strength of the user or to provide the
user with any sort of ride, lift, swing or fall experience including, but not
limited to ball throwing contest device, pinball type device, electronic
videos, animal ride devices, dunk tank, ball and hammer devices, trampoline
devices and the like.
   AREA or AREAS. A specified place within a park.
   BEACH. The part of a body of water and shore designated for swimming.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Any drug substance or immediate precursor in M.S. §
152.02, as it may be amended from time to time.
   DIRECTOR. The person appointed by the Board to serve as the Chief
Administrative Officer of the Parks Division.
   MALT LIQUOR. Any beer, ale or other beverage made from malt by fermentation
and containing not less than 0.5% alcohol by volume.
   MOTORIZED RECREATION VEHICLE. Any self-propelled, off the road or all
terrain vehicle including, but not limited to snowmobile, mini-bike, amphibious
vehicle, motorcycle, go-cart, trail bike, dune buggy or all terrain cycle.
   NATURAL RESOURCES. All flora and fauna within the parks and the physical
factors upon which they depend, including air, water, soil and minerals.
   PARK. Any land or water area and all facilities thereon, under the
jurisdiction, control or ownership of the city for the recreational enjoyment
of the public.
   PARKS DIVISION. An operating unit of the Department of Public Works
responsible for the planning, development, operation and maintenance of city
parks.
   PERSON or PERSONS. Individuals, firms, corporations, societies or any group
or gathering whatsoever.
   PET. Any animal that is tamed and domesticated and kept as a companion.
   POLLUTANT. Any substance, solid, liquid or gas, which could cause
contamination of air, land or water so as to create or cause a nuisance or
render unclean or noxious or unpure so as to be actually or potentially harmful
or detrimental or injurious to public health, safety or welfare, or that of
wildlife or vegetation.
   PROPERTY. Any land, waters, facilities or possessions of the city.
   RESOLUTION. Official control promulgated by the Board establishing
additional rules and regulations relative to this chapter, and as on file in
the County Auditor’s Office.
   USE PERMIT. The written permission that must be obtained from the Parks
Division to carry out a given activity.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a roadway, except devices moved by human power or
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
   WATERCRAFT. Any contrivance used or designated for navigation on water other
than seaplanes.
   WEAPON. Any device, including, but not limited to firearms, bows, electronic
weapons, slings and pellet or B-B guns from which a shot or projectile of any
type is discharged or propelled by means of an explosive, gas, compressed air
or other means. An ELECTRONIC WEAPON means a portable device which is designed,
used or intended to be used, offensively or defensively, to immobilize or
incapacitate persons by the use of an electronic current.
   WILDLIFE. Any living creature, not human, wild by nature, endowed with
sensation, power of voluntary motion, including but not limited to mammals,
birds, fish, amphibians, reptiles, crustaceans and mollusks.
   WINE. A vinous beverage containing no more than 14% alcohol by volume.
§ 95.04 PUBLIC USE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Hours of operation.
      (1)   Parks shall be open to the public daily at hours established by the
Board. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain in a park at any
other time without a use permit, except when the park area or facility is
otherwise designated by the Board.
      (2)   The Director or designee is authorized to close any park or portion
thereof at any time for the protection of park property or for the public
health, safety or welfare.
   (B)   Use permits.
      (1)   Use permits shall be required for the exclusive or special use of
all or portions of park areas, buildings or trails; for use of park areas and
facilities when they are closed to the public; to conduct certain activities
not normally permitted as per conditions of this chapter; for regulation of
large group activities, as defined herein; or to reduce or eliminate certain
user fees for groups, as defined herein.
      (2)   Procedures to issue use permits shall be in accordance with
guidelines established by Board resolution.
      (3)   Use permits shall be approved by the Park Director or his or her
authorized designee, or if required by this chapter, by the Board. However, the
Park Director reserves the right to defer any use permit approval to the Board.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful for a person or persons to violate any
provisions of an approved use permit.
      (5)   It shall be unlawful for a person or persons to engage in any
activity requiring a use permit without first obtaining the permit.
   (C)   User and special use fees/modifications.
      (1)   User fees for entrance into parks and special use fees for various
park uses shall be set by Board resolution.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use, without payment, any
facility or area for which a user fee or special use fee is charged, unless
payment is reduced or waived by use permit.
      (3)   Upon group request for reduction or elimination of fees, the
issuing authority shall evaluate the request including, but not limited to the
following factors:
         (a)   Charitable nonprofit;
      (b)   Property or income tax supported; and
         (c)   Educational or religious.
      (4)   Use permits to reduce or eliminate fees shall be approved by the
Park Director or his or her authorized designee. The Park Director reserves the
right to defer any fee modification request to the Board.
   (D)   Use by groups. Use permits shall be required for any entertainment,
tournament, exhibition or any other special use which can reasonably be
expected to have 20 or more persons involved or potentially have a detrimental
effect on park property or other park users.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.05 CONDUCT; PERSONAL BEHAVIOR.
   (A)   Drug and alcohol use. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Use, possess or sell any controlled substance in violation of state
statutes; and/or
      (2)   Serve, possess or consume any alcoholic beverage, except malt
liquor and wine, within a park, except at areas designated by the Board.
   (B)   Gambling. It shall be unlawful for any person to gamble or participate
in any game of chance for a consideration of items of value, except charitable
gambling as approved by the County Board.
   (C)   Disorderly conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in
disorderly conduct as defined in M.S. § 609.72, Subd. 1, as it may be amended
from time to time.
   (D)   Property of others. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Intentionally disturb, harass or interfere with a park visitor’s
property; and/or
      (2)   Leave or store personal property on park property without prior
authorization from the Parks Director, his or her designee or the Board.
   (E)   Littering. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, scatter,
drop or abandon bottles, cans, broken glass, hot coals, ashes, sewage, waste or
other materials in a park, except in receptacles provided for the purposes.
   (F)   Firearms; dangerous weapons; fireworks. It shall be unlawful for any
person to:
      (1)   Have in their possession within a park, fire or discharge, or cause
to be fired or discharged across, in, or into any portion of a park any gun or
firearm, spear, bow and arrow, crossbow, sling shot, air or gas weapon or any
other dangerous weapon or projectile, except for purposes designated by the
Board in areas and at times designated by the Board; and/or
      (2)   Set off or attempt to set off or ignite any firecracker, fireworks,
smoke bombs, rockets, black powder guns or other pyrotechnics without
authorization from the Board.
   (G)   Interference with employee performance of duty. It shall be unlawful
for any person to impersonate any employee of the Parks Division or interfere
with, harass or hinder any employee in the discharge of their duties.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.06 OPERATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Commercial use; solicitation; advertising and photography. It shall be
unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Solicit, sell or otherwise peddle any goods, wares, merchandise,
services, liquids or edibles in a park, except by authorized concession or
written permission granted by the Board;
      (2)   Operate a still, motion picture, video or other camera for
commercial purposes in a park without prior authorization from the Board; and
      (3)   Expose, distribute or place any sign, advertisement, notice, poster
or display in a park without authorization from the Parks Division.
   (B)   Pets in parks. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Bring any dog, cat or other pet into a park, unless caged or kept
on a leash not more than 6 feet in length;
      (2)   Allow any dog, cat or other pet to enter a beach area, nature
center area, refuge area, picnic area, park building or other “no pet”
designated areas within a park;
      (3)   Permit a pet under his or her control to disturb, harass or
interfere with any park visitor, a park visitor’s property or a park employee;
      (4)   Tether any animal to a tree, plant, building or park equipment;
and/or
      (5)   Have custody or control of any dog or domestic pet in a designated
area of a park without possessing an appropriate device for cleaning up pet
feces and disposing of it in a sanitary manner.
   (C)   Noise; amplification of sound.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the prior written
authorization of the Parks Director or his or her designee, to:
         (a)   Install, use or operate within the park a loudspeaker or sound
amplifying equipment in a fixed or movable position or mounted upon any sound
truck for the purposes of giving instructions, directions, talks, addresses,
lectures or transmitting music to any persons or assemblages of persons in or
upon any place within the park without prior authorization from the Board;
         (b)   Use or operate or permit the use or operation of any radio, tape
player, phonograph, television set, music amplifier or other machine or device
for the production or reproduction of sound in a manner as to be disturbing or
a nuisance to reasonable persons of normal sensitivity within the area of
audibility; and/or
         (c)   Willfully make or continue, or cause to be made or continued,
any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which disturbs the peace or quiet within
any park or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable park visitor
of normal sensitivity, except for special programs at dates and times as
authorized by use permit or by the Board.
      (2)   The standards which shall be considered in determining whether a
violation of the provisions of this section exists shall include, but not be
limited to the following:
         (a)   Level of the noise;
         (b)   The intensity of the noise;
         (c)   Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;
         (d)   The level and intensity of the background noise, if any;
         (e)   The type of area within which the noise emanates;
         (f)   The intensity of human use of the area during the time at which
the noise emanates;
         (g)   The time of the day or night the noise occurs;
         (h)   The duration of the noise; and
         (i)   Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant.
   (D)   Fires. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Start a fire in a park, except in a designated area, and then only
in fire rings, portable stoves or grills, except by use permit;
      (2)   Leave a fire unattended or fail to fully extinguish a fire; and/or
      (3)   Scatter or leave unattended lighted matches, ashes, burning
tobacco, paper or other combustible material.
   (E)   Assemblies, meetings and the like. It shall be unlawful for any person
to conduct public meetings, assemblies, worship services, entertainment,
parades or demonstrations within a park without a use permit or prior
authorization from the Board.
   (F)   Amusement contraptions. It shall be unlawful to bring in, set up,
construct, manage or operate any amusement or entertainment contraption, device
or gadget without prior authorization from the Board.
   (G)   Engine-powered models and toys. It shall be unlawful for any person to
start, fly or use any fuel-powered model aircraft, model boat or rocket or like
powered toy or model.
   (H)   Unlawful occupancy. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter in
any way any building, installation or area that may be under construction or
locked or closed to public use or to enter or be upon any building,
installation or area after the posted closing time or before the posted opening
time or contrary to posted notice in any park.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.07 PROTECTION OF PROPERTY, STRUCTURES AND RESOURCES.
   (A)   Disturbance of natural features. It shall be unlawful for any person
to:
      (1)   Intentionally remove, alter, injure or destroy any tree, other
plant, rock, soil or mineral;
      (2)   Dig trenches, holes or other excavations; and/or
      (3)   Introduce any plant, animal or other agent within a park without a
use permit, and other permits as required by state and federal law.
   (B)   Disturbance of wildlife. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Kill, trap, hunt, pursue or in any manner disturb or cause to be
disturbed, any species of wildlife, except in nuisance situations as permitted
by a use permit;
      (2)   Remove any animal, living or dead, from a park without a use permit
and any animal so removed or taken contrary to the provisions of this chapter
or laws of the state, shall be considered contraband and subject to seizure and
confiscation; and/or
      (3)   Release or abandon any animal within a park.
   (C)   Destruction or defacement. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Intentionally deface, vandalize or otherwise cause destruction to
park property; and/or
      (2)   Intentionally deface, destroy, cover, damage or remove any placard,
notice or sign or parts thereof whether permanent or temporary, posted or
exhibited by the Public Works Department.
   (D)   Release of harmful or foreign substances. It shall be unlawful for any
person to:
      (1)   Place any debris or other pollutant in or upon any park lands or
any body of water in or adjacent to a park, or any tributary, stream, storm
sewer or drain flowing into the waters; and/or
      (2)   Discharge waste water or any other wastes in a park, except into
designated containers, drains or dumping stations.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.08 RECREATION ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Camping. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Camp in a park, except in areas provided and designated for that
purpose;
      (2)   Camp without a use permit from the park system;
      (3)   Occupy camp sites in a park contrary to a permit or otherwise
violate provisions of a use permit;
      (4)   Operate any vehicle within a campground during posted quiet hours,
except in emergencies;
      (5)   Camp overnight in a park if under 18 years of age, unless
accompanied by parent or legal guardian, or possessing written permission from
a parent or legal guardian;
      (6)   Camp in a park longer than 10 consecutive days; and/or
      (7)   Camp in a park more than 14 days in a calendar month without
approval of the Parks Director or his designee.
   (B)   Picnicking. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Assume exclusive use of a reservation picnic site without a use
permit;
      (2)   Use a portion of a reservation picnic area without a permit if the
area is reserved by permitted group;
      (3)   Conduct picnic activity at reservation picnic sites contrary to a
use permit or otherwise violate provisions of a use permit; and/or
      (4)   Set up temporary shelters, such as tents, tarps, canopies and other
devices other than in designated camping areas without authorization by a use
permit.
   (C)   Swimming. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Wade or swim within a park, except at beaches designated for the
use and only at the times when an authorized lifeguard is on duty unless
otherwise explicitly signed and designated by the Board;
      (2)   Wade, swim or use any beach in a park without proper attire;
      (3)   Take glass bottles or glass containers of any kind into designated
beach areas;
      (4)   Use outside of a beach area so designated, any innertube, life raft
or other inflatable or buoyant object or flotation device intended to support a
person, except persons are permitted to use a U.S. Coast Guard approved life
jacket or vest when properly attached; and/or
      (5)   Fail to obey posted beach safety rules as established by Board
resolution for each park system beach.
   (D)   Boating. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Launch or land any watercraft upon any waters within a park, except
at designated locations and times;
      (2)   Leave any watercraft unattended on land or in the water, except in
designated areas;
      (3)   Operate any watercraft in a designated swimming area or other
prohibited area;
      (4)   Operate a watercraft in a park; and/or
      (5)   Tow a person on water skis, surf board, knee board, innertube or
jet ski in a designated swimming area, boat launching area or other
unauthorized area or enter a designated swimming area on the device.
   (E)   Fishing. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Fish in a park in violation of any provision; and/or
      (2)   Fish in a prohibited area.
   (F)   Horses and horseback riding. It shall be unlawful for any person to
ride, lead or allow a horse within a park except as authorized by the Board for
park patrolling and by use permit.
   (G)   Bicycling. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Operate a bicycle, except on roadways and designated trails and
except as close to the right side of roadways and designated trails as
conditions permit;
      (2)   Operate a bicycle in violation of M.S. Ch. 169, as it may be
amended from time to time;
      (3)   Ride or operate a bicycle, except in a prudent and careful manner
and at speed faster than is reasonable and safe with regard to the safety of
the operator and other persons in the immediate area; and/or
      (4)   Park a bicycle at any park beach except at a bicycle rack if the
rack is provided.
   (H)   Snowmobiling. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Operate a snowmobile anywhere in a park, except on designated
trails and then only on the right-hand side of the trail;
      (2)   Operate a snowmobile in a park contrary to rules and regulations
issued by the Board;
      (3)   Operate a snowmobile in a park in excess of posted speed limits
when present or at a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under
current conditions, or in a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to
endanger the person or property of another or to cause injury or damage
thereto;
      (4)   Operate a snowmobile in violation of M.S. §§ 84.81 to 84.90, as
they may be amended from time to time. All rules and regulations therein
pertaining to public land and water shall apply on park system property; and/or
      (5)   Tow another person or thing, except through the use of a rigid tow
bar attached to the rear of the snowmobile, except in emergencies.
   (I)   Cross-country skiing. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Cross-country ski in any park, except on designated trails at
designated times when weather and grounds conditions permit;
      (2)   Conduct an organized meet or race on park cross-country ski trails
without a use permit;
      (3)   Cross-country ski in a park in violation of M.S. §§ 85.40 to 85.45,
as they may be amended from time to time; and/or
      (4)   Operate a dog sled or any motorized recreation vehicle on cross-
country ski trails.
   (J)   Other special activity uses. It shall be unlawful for any person to
participate in or conduct any activity, except those uses for which a park area
or facility has been planned or promoted by the Parks Division, without a use
permit.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.09 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Motorized recreation vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate a motorized recreation vehicle within a park, except in areas and at
times as designated by the Board.
   (B)   Vehicle operation. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Operate a vehicle at a speed in excess of 25 mph or posted speed
limits;
      (2)   Operate any vehicle within a park, except upon roadways, parking
areas or other designated locations therefore;
      (3)   Operate a vehicle within a park in violation of posted regulations,
M.S. Ch. 169, as it may be amended from time to time, or municipal traffic
codes or orders or directions of traffic officers authorized to direct traffic;
      (4)   Operate a vehicle in a careless or reckless manner;
      (5)   Operate a vehicle which emits excessive or unusual noise, noxious
fumes, dense smoke or other pollutants; and/or
      (6)   Fail to yield right of way to pedestrians and other trail users.
   (C)   Parking vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Park or leave a vehicle standing, except in a designated area and
then only in a manner so as not to restrict normal traffic flow;
      (2)   Leave a vehicle standing after posted closing hours without a valid
use permit;
      (3)   Park in a space designated for handicapped parking only, except
with handicapped vehicle license or permit;
      (4)   Park or leave a vehicle without a boat trailer in a parking space
designated for vehicles with boat trailers; and/or
      (5)   Park a vehicle with a boat trailer, except in designated vehicle/
boat-trailer parking areas.
   (D)   Maintenance of personal vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person
to wash, polish, grease, change oil or perform other maintenance on any vehicle
on park property, except in emergencies.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.10 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The County Sheriff’s Department, local law enforcement agencies and
agents of the State Department of Natural Resources, in connection with duties
imposed by law, shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and may issue
citations, and eject from any park persons acting in violation of the
provisions of this chapter. The above agencies shall have the authority to
seize, confiscate and impound any substance, plant, animal, vehicle or other
article which upon probable cause, is found to be used or possessed in
violation of this chapter.
   (B)   The Board shall have the right to adopt by resolution additional rules
and regulations relative to this chapter.
   (C)   The County Sheriff’s Department or local law enforcement agencies
shall have the authority to impound pets found in violation of this chapter and
shall collect an impoundment fee, plus a per diem fee, specified in contract
for impounding of animals which may be in force within an animal control
service district.
   (D)   The Parks Division or the Board shall have the authority to revoke for
good cause any use permit. Any permit or reservation may be revoked upon
violation by the permittee of any ordinance, rules or regulation of the city.
   (E)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent employees or agents of the Parks
Division from performing their assigned duties.
CHAPTER 96: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
96.01   Title
   
96.02   Purpose and scope
   
96.03   Definitions
   
96.04   Compliance
   
96.05   User fees; exemptions
   
96.06   Enforcement
§ 96.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the Alarm Systems
Chapter, except as herein referred to as this chapter.
§ 96.02 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public safety services which
serve the city from misuse and to provide for the maximum possible service to
alarm users. This chapter provides regulation for the use of burglary, robbery,
fire and medical alarms and establishes a system of administration and an
alarms user’s fee.
§ 96.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM SYSTEM. Any equipment or device which emits an audible, visual or
electronic signal upon the detection of a potential burglary, robbery, fire,
medical emergency, trespass or property, intrusion. The term ALARM SYSTEM does
not include anti-theft or tampering alarms installed in any motor vehicle.
   ALARM USER. Any person in control of any building structure, facility or
tract of land wherein or whereon an alarm system is used or maintained within
the city.
   FALSE ALARMS. An alarm signal eliciting a response by public safety
personnel when a situation requiring a response does not exist, and which is
caused by the activation of the alarm system through mechanical failure, alarm
malfunction improper installation or the inadvertence of the owner or lessee of
the alarm system or of his or her employees or agents. FALSE ALARMS do not
include alarms caused by climatic conditions such as tornadoes, thunderstorms,
utility line mishaps, violent conditions of nature or any other conditions
which are clearly beyond the control of the alarm manufacturer, installer or
alarm user.
   OSAKIS POLICE. The Osakis Police or its designee.
   PERSON. Any human being, corporation, partnership, firm, association or
other organization, any receiver, trustee, association, agent or other legal
representative of any of the foregoing or any other legal entity.
   PUBLIC SAFETY ANSWERING POINT. The central facility used to receive
emergency results for public safety services and general information from the
public to be dispatched to public safety personnel.
   PUBLIC SAFETY PERSONNEL. All personnel employed by any law enforcement
agency and any firefighting personnel and any ambulance personnel.
§ 96.04 COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   No person shall locate, install construct, alter, repair, use or
maintain any alarm system within the city, except in full compliance with this
chapter and the standards adopted herein.
   (B)   All audible alarms shall meet the following requirements:
      (1)   Every person maintaining an alarm system with an audible alarm
signal shall post a notice containing the name and telephone number of a person
to be notified to render repairs or service to the alarm system during any hour
of the day or night upon activation of the alarm system. The notice shall be
posted at the main entrance to the premises or near the alarm in a position as
to be legible from the ground level adjacent to the building;
      (2)   Alarm systems with audible alarm signals that sound like police or
fire sirens are prohibited; and
      (3)   All alarm systems with audible alarm signal, except for fire
alarms, shall have an automatic
which will silence the audible alarm signal within a period not to exceed 15
minutes.
   (C)   (1)   All persons using or maintaining any alarm system within the
city shall register the alarm system with the Osakis Police, utilizing
registration forms to be furnished by the Osakis Police, no later than the
later of the following dates:
         (a)   The sixtieth day after the effective date of this chapter; or
         (b)   The thirtieth day after the installation of the alarm system.
      (2)   Any alteration or modification of previously registered alarm
system shall be registered with the Osakis Police, utilizing registration forms
to be furnished by the Osakis Police, within 30 days of the commencement of the
alteration or modification.
   (D)   Financial institutions having an alarm system with a robbery signal
feature shall have an on-premises annunciator panel providing specific
annunciation of the sensors at a private monitoring location on the premises.
When, in the judgment of the Osakis Police, no on-premises monitoring location
is feasible, the requirements of this section may be waived by the Osakis
Police. All alarm systems installed in financial institutions after the
effective date of this chapter shall have annunciator panels when installed.
All alarm systems currently used by financial institutions shall have the
annunciator panels installed within one year from the effective date of this
chapter.
   (E)   Alarm systems that have more than 1 alarm signal function must report
specifically which of the functions has been violated, when reporting to the
Public Safety Answering Point for the purpose of dispatching public safety
personnel to the site of the alarm system.
   (F)   No alarm system shall connect directly to the Public Safety Answering
Point, except financial institutions and/or public buildings. All other alarms
must report to the Public Safety Answering Point in some other manner. No
automatic telephone dialing device shall be allowed to dial direct or be
programmed so that it dials directly into the Public Safety Answering Point.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.05 USER FEES; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   An alarm user fee is hereby imposed upon any alarm user from whose
alarm system emanates more than 3 false alarms within any 12 consecutive month
period. The fees payable under this section shall be set from time to time by
Board ordinance.
   (B)   (1)   All federal, state, county and/or municipal buildings and all
public schools shall be exempt from the alarm user’s fee.
      (2)   All newly installed alarm systems are hereby granted a 30-day
probationary period, commencing on the date of first operational use thereof,
during which period false alarms will not be counted for the purpose of
computing the amount of any alarm user fee imposed by this chapter.
      (3)   All alarm systems which are altered by the addition to any new
alarm feature are hereby granted a 15-day probationary period, commencing on
the date of first operational use of the new feature, during which period false
alarms will not be counted for the purpose of computing the amount of any alarm
user fee imposed by this chapter.
   (C)   Subsequent to any false alarm, the Osakis Police shall notify the
affected alarm user in writing of the date of the false alarm, the apparent
reason therefor and the alarm user fee imposed pursuant to this chapter. It
shall be the duty of each alarm user to pay all alarm user fees imposed by this
chapter to the Osakis Police within 30 days of the date of mailing of the
Osakis Police’s fee statement specifying the amount of the alarm user fees. For
the purpose of mailing the Osakis Police’s fee statement under this section,
the statement shall be mailed to the affected alarm user at his, her or its
address shown on the registration form required by §
96.04(B).
   (D)   One-half of all alarm user fees collected by the Osakis Police shall
be remitted to the city to defray its administrative and prosecution costs
incurred in connection with the enforcement of this chapter. The other half of
the alarm user fees shall be retained by the Osakis Police to defray his or her
administrative costs incurred in enforcing this chapter.
§ 96.06 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   If in the judgment of public safety personnel at the scene of an
alarm, it is determined that the alarm user should appear at the location of
any alarm for the purpose of admitting public safety personnel to the subject
premises to investigate any alarm system signal, for the purposes of
deactivating any alarm system signal or for the purpose of identifying third
parties found on the subject premises during the investigation of any alarm
system signal, the alarm user shall appear immediately if so requested by the
Osakis Police.
   (B)   If an alarm user has had more than 3 false alarms in a 12-month
period, the alarm user, upon the written request of the Osakis Police, shall be
required to submit in written form a description of any steps being taken to
remedy any problems with false alarms emanating from the alarm user’s location.
   (C)   The Osakis Police shall promulgate the rules and regulations as
necessary for the implementation and/or administration of this chapter.
CHAPTER 97: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
97.01   Declaration of policy
   
97.02   Definitions
   
97.03   Prohibited acts in regard to housing
   
97.04   Enforcement procedures
   
97.05   Statute of limitations
   
97.06   Civil enforcement procedure
§ 97.01 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   (A)   Discrimination with regard to housing on the basis of race, sex,
creed, religion, marital status, and disability adversely affects the health,
welfare, peace and safety of the community.
   (B)   Persons subject to discrimination suffer depressed living conditions
and create conditions which endanger the public peace and order.
   (C)   The public policy of the city is declared to be to foster equal
opportunity for all to obtain decent, safe and sanitary housing without regard
to their race, creed, color, national origin, marital status, disability
status, sex and strictly in accord with their individual merits as human
beings.
   (D)   It is also the policy of the city to protect all persons from all
unfounded charges of discrimination.
§ 97.02 DEFINITIONS.  
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISABILITY. Any condition or characteristic that renders a person a disabled
person. A disabled person is any person who:
      (1)   Has a physical, sensory or mental impairment which materially
limits one or more major life activities;
      (2)   Has a record of like impairment; or
      (3)   Is regarded as having a like impairment.
   DISCRIMINATE or DISCRIMINATION. Includes segregate or separate.
   MARITAL STATUS. Whether a person is single, married, remarried, divorced,
separated or a surviving spouse and in employment cases, includes protection
against discrimination on the basis of the identity, situation, actions or
beliefs of a former spouse.
§ 97.03 PROHIBITED ACTS IN REGARD TO HOUSING.
   It is unlawful:
   (A)   For any person to discriminate on grounds of race, creed, religion,
color, sex, marital status, status with regard to public assistance, national
origin, age or disability in the sale, lease, or rental of any housing unit or
units;
   (B)   For any broker, agent, salesperson or other person acting in behalf of
another to so discriminate in the sale, lease or rental of any housing unit or
units belonging to the other person;
   (C)   For any person engaged in the business of financing the purchase,
rehabilitation, remodeling or repair of housing units or in the business of
selling insurance with respect to housing units to refuse to provide the
financing or insurance or to discriminate with regard to the terms or
conditions thereof by reason of the race, color, sex, religion, creed, national
origin, marital status, status with regard to public assistance, age or
disability of the applicant or because of the location of the unit or units in
areas of the city occupied by persons of a particular race, color, sex,
religion, creed, national origin, marital status, status with regard to public
assistance, age or disability; or to discriminate by treating differently any
person or group of persons who desire to purchase, lease, acquire, construct,
rehabilitate, repair or maintain real property in a specific urban area because
of social, economic or environmental conditions of the area in the granting,
withholding, extending, modifying, or renewing, or in the rates, terms,
conditions or privileges of any financial assistance or in the extension of
services in connection therewith. The bona fide programs of federal, state or
local governmental units or agencies, however structured or authorized to
upgrade or improve in any manner a specific urban area, shall not be deemed to
be a violation of this section;
   (D)   For any person, having sold, leased or rented a housing unit or units
to any person to discriminate with respect to facilities, services or
privileges of occupancy by reason of race, color, sex, creed, religion,
national origin, age or disability, marital status or status with regard to
public assistance;
   (E)   For any person to make or publish any statement evidencing an intent
to discriminate on grounds of race, creed, religion, color, sex, national
origin or ancestry, marital status, status with regard to public assistance,
age or disability in the sale, lease or rental of a housing unit or units;
   (F)   For any person to make any inquiry regarding race, color, sex, creed,
religion, national origin, marital status, status with regard to public
assistance, age or disability or to keep any record or use any form of
application designed to elicit the information in connection with the sale,
lease, rental or financing of a housing unit or units;
   (G)   For any person for the purpose of inducing a real estate transaction
from which he or she may benefit financially:
      (1)   To represent that a change has occurred or will or may occur in the
composition of the block, neighborhood, or area in which the property is
located, in respect of the race, color, sex, creed, religion, national origin,
marital status, status with regard to public assistance, age or disability of
those living there; or
      (2)   To represent that this change will or may result in the lowering of
property values, an increase in crime, or antisocial behavior or a decline in
the quality of schools in the block, neighborhood, or area concerned.
   (H)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any person or
group of persons selling, renting or leasing property to modify the property in
any way or exercise a higher degree of care for a person having a disability
than for a person who does not have a disability; nor shall this section be
construed to relieve any person or persons of any obligations generally imposed
on all persons regardless of any disability in a written lease, rental
agreement or contract or purchase or sale, or to forbid distinctions based on
the inability to fulfill the terms and conditions, including financial
obligations of the lease, agreement or contract;
   (I)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   The rental of a portion of a dwelling containing accommodations for
2 families, one of which is occupied by the owner; or
      (2)   The rental by an owner or occupier of a one-family accommodation in
which he or she resides of a room or rooms in accommodation to another person
or persons if the discrimination is by sex, marital status, status with regard
to public assistance or disability.
   (J)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require any person or
group of persons selling, renting or leasing property to modify the property in
any way or exercise a higher degree of care for a person having a disability
than for a person who does not have a disability; nor shall this section be
construed to relieve any person or persons of any obligations generally imposed
on all persons regardless of any disability in a written lease, rental
agreement or contract of purchase or sale or to forbid distinctions based on
the inability to fulfill the terms and conditions, including financial
obligations, of the lease, agreement or contract.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 97.04 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Housing and Redevelopment Authority in and for the city (HRA) is
designated as the enforcement agency for this chapter and shall have the power
to receive, hear and determine complaints as provided herein.
   (B)   The HRA Executive Director shall promptly investigate, upon complaint
or upon his or her own motion, any violations of this chapter.
   (C)   If after investigation he or she shall have reason to believe a
violation has occurred, he or she may refer the matter to the City Attorney for
criminal prosecution, initiate civil enforcement procedures as herein provided,
or enter into a settlement agreement which, when approved by the HRA Board of
Commissioners, shall have the same force as an HRA Board of Commissioners
order.
§ 97.05 STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.
   No action may be brought for civil enforcement or criminal prosecution
unless the charge of alleged discriminatory practice was filed with the HRA
within 180 days from the occurrence of the practice.
§ 97.06 CIVIL ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE.
   Civil enforcement procedures shall be prosecuted by the HRA Executive
Director before the HRA Board of Commissioners in the following manner.
   (A)   The HRA Executive Director shall serve upon the respondent by
certified mail a complaint, signed by him or her, which shall set forth a clear
and concise statement of the facts constituting the violation, set a time and
place for hearing, and advise the respondent of his or her right to file an
answer to appear in person or by an attorney and to examine and cross-examine
witnesses.
   (B)   The hearing shall not be less than 20 days after service of the
complaint. At any time prior to the hearing the respondent may file an answer.
Facts not denied by answer shall be deemed admitted. If the answer sets out new
matter, it shall be deemed denied by the Executive Director.
   (C)   The complaint or answer may be amended at any given time prior to the
hearing with the consent of the opposing party.
   (D)   Hearings shall be before the HRA Board of Commissioners.
   (E)   The HRA Executive Director may obtain subpoenas from the District
Court to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents at
any hearing.
   (F)   If, after hearing, the panel shall conclude that a violation has
occurred, it shall prepare an order which may contain any provision deemed
desirable to do justice to the complainant or to prevent further violations. It
may include provisions which require the respondent to rent, sell or lease
particular housing to the complainant or to do any other thing as may be just.
   (G)   The panel’s findings of fact and order shall be served on the
respondent and each member of the HRA Board of Commissioners (herewith referred
to as the HRA Board) by mail shall become the findings and order of the HRA
Board unless, within 10 days after mailing of the findings and order, the HRA
Board shall revoke or amend the order, but any order of a panel may be modified
by the HRA Board at any time.
CHAPTER 98: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
General Provisions
   
98.01   Open burning of dried leaves
Firewood Storage
   
98.20   Statement of policy
   
98.21   Scope
   
98.22   Conditions of storage
   
98.23   Exemptions
   
98.24   Existing wood piles
Open Burning
   
98.35   Definitions
   
98.36   Prohibited materials
   
98.37   Permit required for open burning
   
98.38   Purposes allowed for open burning
   
98.39   Permit application for open burning; permit fees
   
98.40   (Reserved)
   
98.41   Permit holder responsibility
   
98.42   Revocation of open burning permit
   
98.43   Denial of open burning permit
   
98.44   Burning ban or air quality alert
   
98.45   Rules and laws adopted by reference
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 98.01 OPEN BURNING OF DRIED LEAVES.
   (A)   The open burning of leaves, tree branches or limbs is allowed; the
open burning of diseased trees, their branches and limbs is permissible after
first obtaining a burning permit from the Police Chief. The Police Chief may by
rule and regulation control and restrict the issuance of the burning permits.
The fee for the issuance of the burning permits shall be set by the Council
from time to time by resolution.
   (B)   The burning of rubbish, trash or other material is prohibited.
FIREWOOD STORAGE
§ 98.20 STATEMENT OF POLICY.
   The Council finds that the use of renewable resources including wood is
increasing. The Council recognizes that to protect public health and safety,
wood piles must be erected, located and maintained in a safe and orderly
fashion.
§ 98.21 SCOPE.
   This subchapter applies to the storage of wood on properties within the city
except for the exemptions noted below. This subchapter shall apply to any wood
or wood product usually used or intended to be used as firewood.
§ 98.22 CONDITIONS OF STORAGE.
    Firewood shall be stored in the following fashion:
   (A)   In neat, safe and secure stacks to a maximum of 6 feet in height;
   (B)   Elevated in a manner and location to minimize possible problems of rat
or other pest infestation;
   (C)   No wood shall be stored in a front yard or yard that is commonly
considered the front yard;
   (D)   The maximum amount of wood that may be stored within an R zone shall
not exceed the lot coverage requirements as per the zoning ordinance;
   (E)   The maximum amount of wood that may be stored within all other zones
shall be as approved by the Building Official and Fire Marshal;
   (F)   All persons storing firewood for resale purposes shall first submit
application to the Planning Commission and Council for approval;
   (G)   All storage of firewood shall meet the requirements of this code;
   (H)   Stored firewood that is abandoned or declared a public nuisance by the
Building Official or Fire Marshal shall be removed; and
   (I)   No wood shall be stored within the required minimum area of setback
from a street right-of-way or property line.
§ 98.23 EXEMPTIONS.
   Wood storage under the following circumstances shall be exempt from the
conditions outlined above:
    (A)   Wood stored or kept in a completely enclosed structure impervious to
the elements;
   (B)   Temporary storage of logs for up to 15 days outside of the required
areas of setback from property lines and the street is allowed for the purpose
of cutting and splitting logs to a size usable in the residence’s wood burning
device.
§ 98.24 EXISTING WOOD PILES.  
   (A)   Any wood pile in existence as of the effective date of this
subchapter, which does not comply with the provisions of this subchapter must
be removed or placed in compliance with the provisions of this subchapter
within 90 days of adoption of this subchapter, or upon written notice to comply
by the Building Official and Fire Marshal.
   (B)   The notice shall be in writing and shall be served upon the property
owner either in person or by mail.
OPEN BURNING
§ 98.35 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIRE CHIEF, FIRE MARSHAL and ASSISTANT FIRE MARSHALS. The Fire Chief, Fire
Marshal and Assistant Fire Marshals of the Fire Department which provides fire
protection services to the city.
   OPEN BURNING. The burning of any matter if the resultant combustion products
are emitted directly to the atmosphere without passing through a stack, duct or
chimney, except a recreational fire as defined herein. Mobile cooking devices
such as manufactured hibachis, charcoal grills, wood smokers, and propane or
natural gas devices are not defined as OPEN BURNING.
   RECREATIONAL FIRE.
      (1)   A fire set with approved starter fuel no more than 3 feet in
height, contained within the border of a recreational fire site using dry,
clean wood; producing little detectable smoke, odor or soot beyond the property
line; conducted with an adult tending the fire at all times; for recreational,
ceremonial, food preparation for social purposes; extinguished completely
before quitting the occasion; and respecting weather conditions, neighbors,
burning bans and air quality so that nuisance, health or safety hazards will
not be created.
      (2)   No more than 1 RECREATIONAL FIRE is allowed on any property at 1
time.
   RECREATIONAL FIRE SITE. An area of no more than a 3-foot diameter circle
(measured from the inside of the fire ring or border); completely surrounded by
non-combustible and non-smoke or odor producing material, either of natural
rock, cement, brick, tile or blocks or ferrous metal only an which area is
depressed below ground, on the ground, or on a raised bed. Included are
permanent outdoor wood burning fireplaces. Burning barrels are not a RECREATION
FIRE SITE as defined herein. RECREATIONAL FIRE SITES shall not be located
closer than 25 feet to any structure.
   STARTER FUELS. Dry, untreated, unpainted, kindling, branches, cardboard or
charcoal fire starter. Paraffin candles and alcohols are permitted as starter
fuels and as aids to ignition only. Propane gas torches or other clean gas
burning devices causing minimal pollution must be used to start an open burn.
   WOOD. Dry, clean fuel only such as twigs, branches, limbs, presto logs,
charcoal, cord wood or untreated dimensional lumber. The term does not include
wood that is green with leaves or needles, rotten, wet, oil soaked or treated
with paint, glue or preservatives. Clean pallets may be used for recreational
fires when cut into 3-foot lengths.
§ 98.36 PROHIBITED MATERIALS.
   (A)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning oils, petro
fuels, rubber, plastics, chemically treated materials, or other materials which
produce excessive or noxious smoke such as tires, railroad ties, treated,
painted or glued wood composite shingles, tar paper, insulation, composition
board, sheet rock, wiring, paint or paint fillers.
   (B)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of hazardous
waste or salvage operations, open burning of solid waste generated from an
industrial or manufacturing process or from a service or commercial
establishment or building material generated from demolition of commercial or
institutional structures.
   (C)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of discarded
material resulting from the handling, processing, storage, preparation, serving
or consumption of food.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 98.37 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR OPEN BURNING.
   No person shall start or allow any open burning on any property in the city
without first having obtained an open burn permit, except that a permit is not
required for any fire which is a recreational fire as defined in §
98.35 above.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 98.38 PURPOSES ALLOWED FOR OPEN BURNING.
   (A)   Open burn permits may be issued only for the following purposes:
      (1)   Elimination of fire of health hazard that cannot be abated by other
practical means;
      (2)   Ground thawing for utility repair and construction;
      (3)   Disposal of vegetative matter for managing forest, prairie or
wildlife habitat, and in the development and maintenance of land and rights-of-
way where chipping, composting, landspreading or other alternative methods are
not practical;
      (4)   Disposal of diseased trees generated on-site, diseased or infected
nursery stock, diseased bee hives; and
      (5)   Disposal of unpainted, untreated, non-glued lumber and wood shakes
generated from construction, where recycling, reuse, removal or other
alternative disposal methods are not practical.
   (B)   Fire training permits can only issued by the Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 98.39 PERMIT APPLICATION FOR OPEN BURNING; PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Open burning permits shall be obtained by making application on a form
prescribed the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and adopted by the Police
Department. The permit application shall be presented to the Police Chief for
reviewing and processing those applications.
   (B)   An open burning permit shall require the payment of a fee. Permit fees
shall be in the amount established by the City Council.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 98.40 (RESERVED).
§ 98.41 PERMIT HOLDER RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Prior to starting an open burn, the permit holder shall be responsible
for confirming that no burning ban or air quality alert is in effect. Every
open burn event shall be constantly attended by the permit holder or his or her
competent representative. The open burning site shall have available,
appropriate communication and fire suppression equipment as set out in the fire
safety plan.
   (B)   Burning will only be allowed between the hours of 4:00 p.m. to 10:00
p.m.
   (C)   The open burn fire shall be completely extinguished before the permit
holder or his or her representative leaves the site at 10:00 p.m. No fire may
be allowed to smolder with no person present. It is the responsibility of the
permit holder to have a valid permit, as required by this subchapter, available
for inspection on the site by the Police Department, Fire Department, MPCA
representative or DNR forest officer.
   (D)   The permit holder is responsible for compliance and implementation of
all general conditions, special conditions, and the burn event safety plan as
established in the permit issued. The permit holder shall be responsible for
all costs incurred as a result of the burn, including but not limited to fire
suppression and administrative fees.
   (E)   The burning of leaves, light brush and garden material is prohibited
on city streets, boulevards, lake shores or any public property by private
citizens.
   (F)   Burning shall be prohibited within 100 feet of the ordinary high water
level of a general development and recreational development lake. A wood
burning campfire less than 3 feet in diameter, designed to enclose ash for
removal would be exempt from this rule as well as agricultural zoned lands.
(Am. Ord. 66, passed 8-7-2006)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 98.42 REVOCATION OF OPEN BURNING PERMIT.
   (A)   The open burning permit is subject to revocation at the discretion of
DNR forest officer, the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal or Assistant Fire Marshals and
Police Chief.
   (B)   Reasons for revocation include but are not limited to a fire hazard
existing or developing during the course of the burn, any of the conditions of
the permit being violated during the course of the burn, pollution or nuisance
conditions developing during the course of the burn, or a fire smoldering with
no flame present.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 98.43 DENIAL OF OPEN BURNING PERMIT.
   If established criteria for the issuance of an open burning permit are not
met during review of the application, it is determined that a practical
alternative method for disposal of the material exists, or a pollution or
nuisance condition would result, or if a burn event safety plan cannot be
drafted to the satisfaction of the Police Chief he or she may deny the
application for the open burn permit.
§ 98.44 BURNING BAN OR AIR QUALITY ALERT.
   No recreational fire or open burn will be permitted when the city or DNR has
officially declared a burning ban due to potential hazardous fire conditions or
when the MPCA has declared an Air Quality Alert.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 98.45 RULES AND LAWS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The provisions of M.S. §§ 88.16 to 88.22, as these statutes may be amended
from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
subchapter as if fully set forth at this point.
CHAPTER 99: MAILBOXES
Section
   
99.01   Definitions
   
99.02   United States Postal Service regulations
   
99.03   Placement of mailboxes in right-of-way
   
99.04   Snowplowing; damage
   
99.98   Violations
§ 99.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY CLERK/ADMINISTRATOR. The Clerk/Administrator of the City of Osakis or
designee.
   MAILBOX. A receptacle intended for the receipt or delivery of mail meeting
United States Postal Service standards.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. As used in this chapter the term right-of-way means all
dedicated streets, alleys and public rights-of-way, and easements and public
streets or alleys.
§ 99.02 UNITED STATES POSTAL SERVICE REGULATIONS.
   All mailboxes shall comply with regulations promulgated from time to time by
the United States Postal Service governing mailboxes, including amendments
thereto. To the extent those regulations conflict with the provisions of this
chapter, those regulations shall control.
§ 99.03 PLACEMENT OF MAILBOXES IN RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Location of support structure.
      (1)   No portion of a mailbox support shall be closer than 12 inches to
the vertical plane of the face of the curb.
      (2)   In areas where there is a roll curb the mailbox support shall be at
least 12 inches from the vertical plane of the outer edge of the curb.
      (3)   In areas where there is no curb the support shall be at least 12
inches from the graded portion of the right-of-way.
   (B)   Height. The bottom of the mailbox itself shall be not less than 38
inches and not more than 45 inches above the level of the street at the point
at which the support setback is determined.
   (C)   Mailbox location . Mailboxes shall be located as described by the post
master of the city. The mailboxes shall be displayed in groups of 2 or more
between the adjacent property owners.
   (D)   Interference with traffic. Notwithstanding any provision set forth
herein, no mailbox shall be placed in a location where it interferes with
vehicular traffic, including access to private driveways. Mailboxes shall not
interfere with intersection sight lines.
   (E)   Gopher State One Call. Any person installing a mailbox shall comply
with the requirements of the Gopher State One-Call System.
   (F)   Exceptions. Temporary mailbox installation not in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter may be allowed during construction or reconstruction
of a street.
   (G)   Newspaper boxes. No additional boxes shall be allowed attached to the
mailbox or post. Any such boxes must be placed outside of the city right-of-
way.
   (H)   Culs-de-sac. Mailboxes shall be placed in groups of 2 or more except
in the cul-de-sac circle. The boxes in the circle shall be placed in a manner
as described by the postmaster of the city.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 99.04 SNOWPLOWING; DAMAGE.
   (A)   Claims. Any claim for damage to a mailbox by employees or agents of
the city shall be submitted to the City Clerk/Treasurer in writing on a form
prepared by the city.
   (B)   Limited liability.
      (1)   The city will not be responsible for damages to mailboxes placed in
the right-of-way in violation of this chapter, nor will the city be responsible
for damages resulting only from flying snow.
      (2)   The city and public utility franchises may remove any mailboxes and
mailbox supports if necessary to construct, maintain or repair facilities in
the right-of-way. In the event of damage to a mailbox resulting from the
mailbox or support structure being struck by snowplowing equipment operated by
the city or its agents, the city shall be responsible for reasonable repairs up
to and including replacement.
      (3)   The City Clerk/Treasurer shall determine reasonable repairs. The
decision of the City Clerk/Treasurer may be appealed to the City Council by
submitting the appeal in writing within 30 days of the City Clerk/Treasurer’s
decision.
   (C)   Snow clearance. The city plows the streets. It is the responsibility
of the postal customer to keep the approach to the mailbox clear of
obstructions to allow safe access for delivery.
§ 99.98 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The owner of any mailbox placed in violation of this chapter may be
ordered to remove the same by the City Clerk/Treasurer. The City Clerk/
Treasurer’s order may be appealed to the City Council by filing a written
appeal specifying the grounds therefore within ten days of the date of the City
Clerk/Treasurer’s order.
   (B)   The city may remove any mailbox or support structure which constitutes
a hazard or otherwise interferes with the use of the public right-of-way. The
costs of removal are the responsibility of the owner and may be assessed
against the real estate for collection with the real estate taxes as provided
by law.
   (C)   Any violation of this chapter, including failure to comply with an
order of the City Clerk/Treasurer which has become final by failure to appeal,
is a petty misdemeanor.
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 100: CLANDESTINE DRUG LABS
Section
   
100.01   Clandestine drug lab sites
§ 100.01 CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITES.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The City Council finds that the existence of clandestine drug lag
sites and chemical dump sites in the city pose a serious health and safety
threat to members of the public, particularly minors and person of child
bearing age, through the exposure to hazardous chemicals and chemical residue.
      (2)   The Council has therefore determined that the regulation and proper
removal of those sites is necessary for the protection of the public health,
safety and general welfare.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purposes of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply:
      CHEMICAL DUMP SITE. Any place or location where chemicals and/or other
hazardous waste material used in a clandestine drug lab have been deposited.
      CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Chief Building Official for the city or the
official’s designee.
      CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB. The unlawful manufacture or attempt to manufacture
controlled substances.
      CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITE. Any place or location where conditions
associated with the operation of a clandestine drug lab are found to exist and
may include dwellings, accessory buildings or structures, mobile homes,
motorized vehicles or any parcels of land.
      CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Any drug, chemical, substance or immediate
precursor thereto ad defined by M.S. § 152.02, Schedules I through V, as they
may be amended from time to time, but does not include distilled spirits, wine,
malt beverages, intoxicating liquors or tobacco.
      HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any chemicals or other substances used in the
manufacture of controlled substances in a clandestine drug lab and the
resulting by-products therefrom which pose a risk to the health, safety and
welfare of occupants, visitors or neighbors of the site.
      MANUFACTURE. The production, cultivation, quality control and
standardization, in locations other than a pharmacy, of controlled substances
by mechanical, physical, chemical or pharmaceutical means, and the packing,
repacking, tablet producing, encapsulating, labeling, refilling or other
similar process relating to like substances.
      MDH. The Minnesota Department of Health or any successor thereto.
      MINOR. Any person under the age of 18 years.
      MPCA. The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency or any successor thereto.
      OWNER. Any person, firm, partnership, company, corporation or other
entity that owns or has title to in full or in part, the land, buildings,
structures or other property associated with a clandestine drug lab site or
chemical dump site, a risk to the health, safety and welfare exists for any
persons who occupy, visit or neighbor on the location.
      SITE. Any defined location including buildings, structures or other
property, where appropriate tests have determined that, due to the existence of
a clandestine drug lab site or chemical dump site, a risk to the health, safety
and welfare exists for any persons who occupy, visit or neighbor on the
location.
   (C)   Public nuisance. Existence and maintenance of a clandestine drug lab
site or chemical dump site in the city constitutes a public nuisance subject to
the regulations of this chapter in addition to any and all applicable federal,
state or local laws and ordinances.
   (D)   Notice to other authorities. 
      (1)   Law enforcement agencies that identified conditions associated with
a clandestine drug lab site or chemical dump site which place neighbors,
visitors or present and future occupants of the site at risk for exposure to
harmful chemicals or other contaminants must promptly notify the Osakis Chief
of Police, the Chief Building Official, appropriate child protection agencies
and the appropriate health authorities.
      (2)   The notice must, at a minimum, identify the location of the site,
the site owner, if known, and the conditions found on the site.
   (E)   Notice to concerned parties. 
      (1)    Upon receipt of the notice provided for in division (D) above, the
Chief Building Official must promptly notify the following parties by
registered or certified mail:
         (a)   The owner of the property, if known;
         (b)   Occupants of the property;
         (c)   Any neighbors determined to be at risk; and
         (d)   Other appropriate state and local authorities including, but not
limited to, the MDH and the MPCA, which are known to have applicable public and
environmental protection responsibilities.
      (2)   The notice must, at a minimum, include the location of the site,
the name of the property owner, if known, the type and nature of the
contamination, and the extent of the contamination.
      (3)   The Chief Building Official must also cause a copy of the notice to
be posted at each appropriate access point to the site.
   (F)   Issuance of order.
      (1)   In addition to the required notices, the Chief Building Official
will issue an order to the property owner to abate the public nuisance. The
order must include at a minimum the following:
         (a)   A description of the site and all portions thereof that are
determined to be contaminated. The description may be in any form that readily
identifies the contaminated portion of the site;
         (b)   That all portions of the site that are determined to be
contaminated and a risk to occupants or visitors are immediately vacated;
         (c)   That the owner commence and complete all testing and clean up
procedures and other required remedial actions on the site by date specified in
the order or other dates agreed to by the city;
         (d)   That the site may not be re-occupied or used in any manner until
it has been completely cleaned in accordance with the guidelines established by
the MDH;
         (e)   That if the owner does not commence testing and complete the
clean up procedures by the dates established in the order, the city, its
officials, employees, or agents will enter the property and provide for the
testing and clean up services at the owner’s expense; and
         (f)   That the owner is responsible for all costs associated with the
clean up of the site including all costs incurred by the city and other public
agencies, and that if the owner does not promptly pay those costs, they will be
assessed against the property and collected in the manner of a special tax.
      (2)   The order must be served upon the owner by personal service or by
registered or certified mail and posted at appropriate access points to the
site.
      (3)   If, after due diligence, the owner cannot be located, the order in
addition to being posted, must be published once in the official newspaper of
the city.
   (G)   Responsibilities of the owner.
      (1)   Upon receipt of the notice and order, the owner will be responsible
for the following:
         (a)   Ensure that the site and all surrounding areas determined to be
at risk are properly vacated;
         (b)   Engage an appropriate environmental testing firm to assess the
extent of the contamination, monitor the clean up process, provide follow up
testing after the completion of the clean up process, and certify that the
risks of contamination have been sufficiently reduced to allow safe occupancy
of the site;
         (c)   Engage an appropriate contractor to properly clean the site in
accordance with the guidelines of the MDH;
         (d)   Provide the city with copies of all testing results and the
clean up plan;
         (e)   Keep the city regularly advised through the process of the
testing and clean up; and
         (f)   Upon completion of the clean up process, provide the city with a
copy of the final certification from the testing firm that the site is fit for
human habitation, and a written, signed statement that the clean up met all MDH
guidelines.
      (2)   If the owner, after due diligence, cannot be located or has not
commenced appropriate action toward the clean up of the site on or before the
commencement date established by the order, or has not completed the process by
the completion date established by the order, the city, its officials,
employees and agents, are hereby authorized to enter the property for the
purpose of abating the public nuisance through vacating, testing and cleaning
the site, or completing that process, in accordance with the requirements of
this section. When appropriate, the abatement process may include the
demolition and removal of any hazardous building or structure.
   (H)   Responsibility for costs.
      (1)   The owner of the site is responsible for any and all costs incurred
in the clean up of that site including, but not limited to, the costs of
vacating the site and surrounding areas, testing, clean up and public expenses.
      (2)   Public expenses will include all costs that may be incurred by the
city and other public agencies such as:
         (a)   Laboratory fees;
         (b)   Preparing and serving notices;
         (c)   Preparing and serving the order;
         (d)   Posting the site;
         (e)   Vacating the site and other necessary properties;
         (f)   Testing services;
         (g)   Clean up services;
         (h)   Expenses incurred in recovering costs including all special
assessment expenses;
         (i)   Administrative fees; and
         (j)   All other costs associated with the clean up of the site.
   (I)   Recovery of city costs.
      (1)   Within 30 days after receipt of an invoice from the city, the owner
will submit payment in full of all city costs associated with the clean up
project.
      (2)   If the city has been unable to locate the owner, or the owner fails
to submit timely payment to the city, the city is authorized to collect its
costs by assessing those costs against the property in the same manner as a
special assessment which will be certified and collected in the manner of a
special tax in accordance with applicable law.
   (J)   Removal of public nuisance designation. Upon receipt of the
appropriate certification that the site has been clean in accordance with MDH
guidelines and is not longer a risk to occupants of the site or others, the
Chief Building Official will remove the public nuisance designation of the site
and will so notify in writing the owner and all parties previously notified.
The Chief Building Official will also promptly cause all postings on the site
to be removed.
   (K)   Violations. Any person who violates the provisions of this subchapter,
including, but not limited to, the unauthorized removal of any official
postings at the site, is guilty of a misdemeanor in a addition to any other
sanctions and obligations imposed herein.
   (L)   Relationship to other laws and regulations. If any regulation,
standard, condition or requirement imposed by this subchapter is determined to
be either more or less restrictive than comparable provisions of any other law,
statute, ordinance, rule or regulations, whether federal, state or local, the
more restrictive provision, or the one providing for the higher standards or
requirements will prevail.
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 101: PARADES AND ATHLETIC EVENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
101.01   Purpose
   
101.02   Definitions
   
101.03   Administration by Director of Community Development
   
101.04   Permit required
   
101.05   Permit application contents
   
101.06   Indemnification agreement
   
101.07   Liability insurance
   
101.08   Permit application filing period
   
101.09   Permit application fee
   
101.10   Reimbursement of costs
Specific Provisions
   
101.25   Action on permit application
   
101.26   Permit; grounds for denial
   
101.27   Issuance or denial notice
   
101.28   Contents of permit
   
101.29   Cordoning off the route or site of an event
   
101.30   Public conduct during an authorized event
   
101.31   Appeal
   
101.32   Revocation of permit
   
101.33   Emergency suspension of authorized event
   
101.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 101.01 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is adopted for the purpose of regulating parades and athletic
events occurring on or within a city street, parking facility, sidewalk or
other public right-of-way which obstruct, delay or otherwise interfere with the
normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or which do not comply with
applicable traffic laws or controls.
§ 101.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGGRIEVED PERSON. Any person who is adversely affected by a determination
made by a city officer or employee pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
in a manner significantly greater than the public generally, including but not
limited to any applicant whose request for a permit under this chapter is
denied.
   ATHLETIC EVENT. Any event in which a group of persons collectively engage in
a sport or form of physical exercise on or within a city street, parking
facility, sidewalk or other public right-of-way which obstructs, impairs or
interferes with the public’s free use of a street, parking facility, sidewalk
or other public property, including but not limited to jogging, running,
walking, bicycling, rollerblading and rollerskating, but excluding
participation in a parade.
   EVENT. Any parade or athletic event.
   FREE SPEECH RIGHTS. Expressive activity protected by the First Amendment of
the United States Constitution provided that the activity is the principal
purpose of the event.
   PARADE. Any organized march, celebration, demonstration or procession of
animals, vehicles or persons on or within a city street, parking facility,
sidewalk or other public right-of-way which obstructs, impairs or interferes
with the public’s free use of a street, parking facility, sidewalk or other
public property, but excluding participation in an athletic event.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
§ 101.03 ADMINISTRATION BY DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT.
   There is conferred upon the Director of Community Development those powers
and duties necessary for the administration of this chapter including but not
limited to acting on all applications for a permit required by this chapter,
authority to revoke a permit issued pursuant to this chapter in the manner
provided for herein, and the authority to designate city officers and employees
as may be required to carry out the purpose of this chapter.
§ 101.04 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, participate in, aid,
form, conduct, sponsor or start any parade or athletic event, unless and until
a permit for the event has been approved and issued by the Director of
Community Development.
   (B)   This chapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   Funeral processions;
      (2)   Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities, provided the conduct is under the immediate supervision
and direction of the proper school authorities; or
      (3)   A governmental agency, and its employees, acting within the scope
of its functions.
Penalty, see § 101.99
§ 101.05 PERMIT APPLICATION CONTENTS.
   (A)   Applications for a permit authorizing an event shall be filed with the
Director of Community Development on forms provided by the city and shall
contain all of the following information:
      (1)   The name, address and daytime and evening telephone numbers of the
person filing the application;
      (2)   If the event is to be conducted by an organization, the name,
mailing address and telephone number of the organization, the name, mailing
address and telephone number of the president, leader or other head of the
organization and written documentation of the authority under which the
applicant is applying for the permit on behalf of the organization;
      (3)   The name, mailing address, and telephone number of the person who
will be present and in charge of the event on the day of the event;
      (4)   The name, mailing address and daytime and evening telephone numbers
of an alternate person to contact if an emergency arises and the applicant is
unavailable;
      (5)   The proposed date and estimated starting and ending time of the
event;
      (6)   The proposed location of the event, including its boundaries;
      (7)   The estimated number of participants in the event;
      (8)   The type and estimated number of vehicles, animals and structures
that will be used in the event;
      (9)   A description of any sound amplification equipment to be employed
at the event;
      (10)   The parking requirements for the event;
      (11)   The location of any water, first aid or comfort stations to be
provided at the event; and
      (12)   A statement as to whether a permit has been requested or obtained
from any other city within which the event shall commence, terminate or occur
in part.
   (B)   Additional information required for parades:
      (1)   The location by streets of any proposed assembly points for the
parade and the time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any
such assembly areas;
      (2)   The proposed parade route;
      (3)   The interval space to be maintained between units of the parade;
and
      (4)   The number, type and size of floats or other vehicles.
§ 101.06 INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENT.
   (A)   Indemnification requirements.
      (1)   As a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit authorizing an
event, the permittee shall enter into an agreement with the city in a form
approved by the City Attorney which shall set forth the undertaking of the
permittee to indemnify the city, hold the city harmless and reimburse the city
from and for any liability, damage or loss occurring during the course of the
event authorized by the permit where the liability damage or loss is
proximately caused by the negligent or intentional act or omission of the
permittee, or any person who is under the permittee’s legal control.
      (2)   Additionally, the agreement shall provide that in the event a claim
is made against the city, arising out of the negligent or intentional act or
admission, the permittee shall defend the city and shall indemnify the city for
any judgment rendered against it or any sums paid out in settlement or
otherwise. The agreement shall be filed with the Director of Community
Development prior to the issuance of the permit.
   (B)   Exception. Any event involving the exercise of free speech rights
shall be exempt from the indemnification requirements set forth in this
section.
§ 101.07 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   (A)   Insurance requirements.
      (1)   As a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit authorizing an
event, the permittee shall obtain public liability insurance from an insurance
company licensed to do business in the State of Minnesota and having a
financial rating in Best’s Insurance Guide of at least “B.”
      (2)   The insurance shall provide “occurrence” coverage against
liabilities for death, personal injury or property damage arising out of or in
any way connected with the event.
      (3)   The insurance shall be in the amount of at least $1,000,000,
combined single limit, and shall name the city and the city’s officers,
employees and agents as additional insured under the coverage afforded.
      (4)   Also, the insurance shall be primary and noncontributing with
respect to any other insurance available to the city and shall include a
severability of interest (cross liability) clause. Proof of the insurance, in a
form approved by the Director of Community Development, shall be filed with him
or her prior to the issuance of the permit and the insurance shall be
maintained throughout the course of the event authorized by the permit.
   (B)   Exception. Any event involving the exercise of free speech rights
shall be exempt from the insurance requirements set forth in this section.
§ 101.08 PERMIT APPLICATION FILING PERIOD.
   (A)   An application for a permit shall be filed with the Director of
Community Development at least 15 working days prior to the date of the
proposed event.
   (B)   The Director of Community Development, where good cause is shown,
shall allow the filing of an application less than 15 working days prior to the
date of the proposed event.
   (C)   Good cause exists where the applicant sets forth facts showing
circumstances sufficient to justify the delay based on a reasonably prudent
person standard. Lack of knowledge of the filing period does not constitute
good cause.
§ 101.09 PERMIT APPLICATION FEE.
   Unless waived by the City Council, every application for a permit
authorizing an event shall be accompanied by an application fee in the amount
of $60; provided that no fee shall be charged where the event involves an
exercise of free speech rights.
§ 101.10 REIMBURSEMENT OF COSTS.
   (A)   As a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit authorizing an
event, the permittee shall make a deposit in an amount designated by the
Director of Community Development with the city for the reimbursement of the
reasonable costs incurred by the city for traffic control and other functions
related to the event.
   (B)   If the city’s actual expenses should later prove to be more than the
amount deposited, the difference shall be paid to the city by the permittee. If
the city’s actual expenses should later prove to be less than the amount
deposited, the excess of the deposit shall be refunded to the permittee.
   (C)   Any event involving the exercise of free speech rights shall be exempt
from paying a deposit and reimbursing the city’s costs as set forth in this
section.
SPECIFIC PROVISIONS
§ 101.25 ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   The Director of Community Development shall approve or deny an
application permit within 2 working days after receipt of the application.
   (B)   If the Director finds that grounds for denying the permit pursuant to
§
101.26 below do not exist, he or she shall approve the application.
§ 101.26 PERMIT; GROUNDS FOR DENIAL.
   The Director of Community Development shall deny the application for a
permit if he or she finds any one of the following:
   (A)   The person applying for the permit has failed to complete the
application, including the failure to submit the application fee where required
pursuant to §
101.09 above;
   (B)   The information contained in the application is found to be false in
any material respect;
   (C)   An application for another event to be held on the same date as that
requested by the applicant has been previously filed or approved, and the other
event is so close in time and location to the event proposed by the applicant
as to cause undue traffic congestion or to place the city in a position of
being unable to meet the need for police services for both events;
   (D)   The time, route or size of the event will substantially interrupt the
safe and orderly movement of traffic contiguous to the site or route of the
event or disrupt the use of a street at its peak traffic time;
   (E)   The concentration of persons, animals or vehicles at the site of the
event or at the site of an assembly or disbanding area around the event will
prevent proper police, fire or ambulance services from reaching areas
contiguous to the event;
   (F)   The size of the event will require the diversion of so many police
officers to ensure that participants stay within the boundaries or route of the
event and to protect participants in the event that police protection to the
rest of the city will be seriously jeopardized;
   (G)   The event consists of a parade that will not move from its point of
origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable
delays;
   (H)   The location of the event will substantially interfere with
construction or maintenance work previously scheduled to take place on or along
the city street, parking facility, sidewalk or other public right-of-way to be
occupied by the event;
   (I)   The event will occur at a time when a school is in session and along a
route or at a location adjacent to the school or a class thereof, and the noise
created by the event will substantially disrupt the educational activity of the
school or class;
   (J)   The material on parade floats is not noncombustible or flame
retardant, or motorized parade floats and towing apparatus are not provided
with a minimum 2-A, 10-B:C rated portable fire extinguisher readily accessible
to the operator, as provided in Uniform Fire Code § 11.304; or
   (K)   The application is not timely submitted and there is insufficient time
to investigate and process the application pursuant to the time lines of this
chapter.
§ 101.27 ISSUANCE OR DENIAL NOTICE.
   (A)   After the Director of Community Development has determined whether an
application for a permit should be approved or denied, he or she shall
immediately attempt to notify the applicant orally and shall immediately notify
the applicant and the City Attorney in writing of the decision.
   (B)   Both the oral and the written notifications shall describe, with
particularity the facts and reasons for any denial.
   (C)   If the application is approved, the Director shall immediately send a
copy of the permit to the following:
      (1)   Applicant;
      (2)   Police Chief of the City of Osakis;
      (3)   Director of Public Works;
      (4)   Other public officials responsible for functions deemed likely to
be affected by the event; and
      (5)   Any public transportation or other utility, the regular routes of
whose vehicles will be affected by the route of the proposed event.
§ 101.28 CONTENTS OF PERMIT.
   Each permit shall state the following:
   (A)   Starting time;
   (B)   Maximum and minimum speed;
   (C)   Maximum and minimum intervals of space to be maintained between units
of the event;
   (D)   The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by
the event; and
   (E)   Maximum length of the event in miles or fractions thereof.
§ 101.29 CORDONING OFF THE ROUTE OR SITE OF AN EVENT.
   (A)   The Director of Public Works is authorized to place barricades on or
within the city’s streets, parking facilities, sidewalks or other public
rights-of-ways and to undertake other action as may be necessary to cordon off
the route or site of an event authorized by a permit.
   (B)   In addition the Director of Public Works is authorized to post the
route or site of the event as a no-parking zone for the duration of the event,
and may do so sufficiently in advance of the event as may be necessary to
prevent vehicles from parking along the route or at the site of the event.
§ 101.30 PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING AN AUTHORIZED EVENT.
   (A)   No person shall physically obstruct, impede, hamper or otherwise
interfere with any event authorized by a permit or with any person, animal or
vehicle participating in or used in the event.
   (B)   No person shall drive a vehicle between vehicles or persons traversing
the routes of a parade or athletic event authorized by a permit when the
vehicles or persons are in motion.
   (C)   No person shall park along or within any portion of the route or site
of an event authorized by a permit, when the route or site has been posted as a
no-parking zone by the city in the manner authorized by this chapter.
Penalty, see § 101.99
§ 101.31 APPEAL.
   (A)   Any aggrieved person may appeal the Director of Community
Development’s decision to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal with
the City Clerk/Treasurer within 48 hours of oral or written notification of the
Director’s decision, whichever occurs first.
   (B)   The notice of appeal shall be on a form provided by the City Clerk/
Treasurer and shall state the reasons why the appellant believes that the
decision does not comply with the provisions of this chapter, and shall set
forth the relief requested.
   (C)   The appeal shall be heard and decided by the City Council at its first
regular or adjourned regular meeting on or after the day following the filing
of the notice of appeal. The City Council’s decision shall be final.
§ 101.32 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Mandatory revocation. The Director of Community Development shall
revoke a permit authorizing an event if he or she finds that there were grounds
for denying the permit, as set forth in §
101.26 above, which were first disclosed or otherwise made known to the
Director after issuance of the permit and the facts were not discoverable by
the exercise of due diligence by the Director prior to the issuance of the
permit.
   (B)   Discretionary revocation. The Director of Community Development may
revoke a permit authorizing an event if he or she determines that the event is
being conducted in violation of the terms of the permit or that event
participants have violated any applicable law or regulation; provided that this
division shall not authorize the revocation of a permit because of the need to
protect participants from the conduct of others unless there are insufficient
resources available to provide necessary police protection; and provided
further that the Director shall not revoke a permit pursuant to this division
unless and until he or she advises the permittee or responsible event
participants of the violation and provides a reasonable opportunity to correct
the violation.
   (C)   Notice of revocation. When the Director of Community Development finds
grounds to revoke permit prior to the date of the event, he or she shall
immediately serve a written notice of the decision on the permittee and shall
provide copies of the notice to the City Manager, the Mayor, the City Attorney
and all other city officers charged with carrying out any responsibilities
under this chapter. However, where the Director of Community Development learns
of the facts justifying revocation within 24 hours of the event, he or she
shall announce the decision to revoke the permit at the site of the event.
Thereafter, the Director of Community Development shall deliver written notice
of the action to the permittee, the City Manager, the Mayor and the City
Attorney.
   (D)   Hearing on revocation. The permittee shall have a right to a hearing
before the City Council at its first regular or adjourned regular meeting on or
after the day following the filing of a notice appealing the revocation,
provided that the event is scheduled at least 48 hours after the notice of
appeal is filed. The City Council shall issue a final decision orally at the
conclusion of the hearing and shall also notify the permittee in writing of its
decision.
   (E)   Content of notice of revocation. Any notification of action by the
Director of Community Development taken pursuant to this section, whether oral
or written, shall describe with particularity the facts and reasons for the
decision.
§ 101.33 EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF AUTHORIZED EVENT.
   (A)   The Director of Community Development shall temporarily suspend an
event authorized by a permit whenever there is a fire or other emergency that
requires the event to be temporarily suspended to protect public safety.
   (B)   When an event is temporarily suspended pursuant to this section, the
Director of Community Development shall notify in writing the applicant, the
City Manager, the Mayor and the City Attorney within 24 hours after the
suspension, describing with particularity the facts and the reasons for the
suspension.
§ 101.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter, including any violation of
the terms of a permit approved and issued in the manner provided by this
chapter, shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor.
Penalty, see § 10.99
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
   
110.   GENERAL LICENSING AND PERMIT PROVISIONS
   
111.   REGULATING LAWFUL GAMBLING
   
112.   ENTERTAINMENT
   
113.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
   
114.   BUILDING MOVERS
   
115.   RESTAURANTS
   
116.   TAXIES AND LIVERIES
   
117.   AUTOMOBILE WASHING ESTABLISHMENTS
   
118.   LIQUOR REGULATIONS
   
119.   CIGARETTE SALES
   
120.   TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING
   
121.   GARAGE AND RUMMAGE SALES
   
122.   DANCES AND SPECIAL EVENTS
   
123.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
   
124.   LOCAL LODGING TAX
   
125.   CANNABIS BUSINESSES
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL LICENSING AND PERMIT PROVISIONS
Section
   
110.01   License and permits
   
110.02   Fees
   
110.03   Duration of license
   
110.04   Transfers
   
110.05   Inspection
   
110.06   Duties of licensee
   
110.07   Suspension or revocation
§ 110.01 LICENSE AND PERMITS.
   (A)   General rule. Except as otherwise provided in this code, all licenses
and permits granted by the city shall be governed by the provisions of this
part.
   (B)   Acts prohibited. No person shall conduct any activity or use any
property for which a license or permit is required by law or this code without
a currently valid license or permit for that activity or use.
   (C)   Application.
      (1)   Every application for a license shall be made to the Clerk/
Treasurer on a form provided by him or her.
      (2)   It shall be accompanied by payment to the Clerk/Treasurer of the
prescribed fee.
      (3)   If, after investigation, the Clerk/Treasurer is satisfied that all
requirements of law and this code have been met, he or she shall present the
application to the Council for action or, if the license or permit does not
require Council approval, he or she shall issue the license or permit.
   (D)   Bond.
      (1)   Where a bond is required for any license or permit, the bond shall
be a corporate surety bond executed on a form approved by the City Attorney and
shall be filed with the Clerk/Treasurer before the license or permit is issued.
      (2)   Except where otherwise provided, a bond shall be in the amount of
$5,000 conditioned that the licensee or permittee shall comply with the
applicable ordinance and laws pertaining to the licensed or permitted actively
and that the licensee or permittee will indemnify the city and save it harmless
from all loss or damage by reason of inadequate work performed by him or her or
by reason of accident caused by the negligence of the licensee or permittee,
his or her agents or employees.
   (E)   Insurance.
      (1)   When a licensee or permittee is required to have in force a policy
of insurance, the policy shall be approved as to substance and form by the City
Attorney.
      (2)   The policy shall provide that it is non-cancellable without 15-
days’ notice to the city, and the coverage shall be for the term of the license
or permit.
      (3)   Satisfactory evidence of coverage by insurance shall be filed with
the Clerk/Treasurer before the license or permit is issued.
      (4)   Each license or permit shall terminate upon termination of the
required insurance coverage.
      (5)   Unless otherwise provided, a required policy of liability insurance
shall provide for protection in at least the following amounts:
         (a)   For injuries including death therefrom sustained by any person:
$100,000;
         (b)   For injuries including death resulting therefrom sustained by 2
or more persons as the result of any 1 occurrence: $250,000; and
         (c)   For property damage: $50,000.
(1986 Code, § 501.01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.02 FEES.
   (A)   Fee established.
      (1)   License fees are in the amounts established in the governing
sections of this chapter or as otherwise provided in this code.
      (2)   The license and permit fees as set forth in the various sections of
this code are the official and controlling provisions.
   (B)   Prorated fees. License fees shall not be prorated unless otherwise
specified by this code or by law.
   (C)   Refunds. License fees shall not be refunded in whole or in part unless
otherwise specified by this code or by law.
(1986 Code, § 501.02)
§ 110.03 DURATION OF LICENSE.
   Unless otherwise specified, a license shall be valid for a calendar year or
the part of the year for which it is issued and shall expire January 15.
(1986 Code, § 501.03)
§ 110.04 TRANSFERS.
   No license issued under this code may be transferred to any other person.
Where a license relates to specific premises, the license shall not be changed
to another location without approval of the Council or other licensing
authority.
(1986 Code, § 501.04)
§ 110.05 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Authorized personnel.
      (1)   Any city official or employee having a duty to perform with
reference to a license under this code and any police officer may inspect and
examine any licensee, his or her business, or premises to enforce compliance
with applicable provisions of this code.
      (2)   Subject to the provisions of division (B) below, he or she may, at
any reasonable time enter any licensed premises or premise for which a license
is required in order to enforce compliance with this code.
   (B)   Search warrants. If the license objects to the inspection of his or
her premises, the city official or employee charged with the duty of enforcing
the provisions of this code shall procure a valid search warrant before
conducting the inspection.
(1986 Code, § 501.05)
§ 110.06 DUTIES OF LICENSEE.
   (A)   Compliance required. Every licensee and permittee shall have the
duties set forth in this section.
   (B)   Inspection. He or she shall permit at reasonable times inspections of
his or her business and examination of his or her or her books and records by
authorized officers or employees.
   (C)   Compliance with law. He or she shall comply with laws, ordinances and
regulations applicable to the licensed business, activity or property.
   (D)   Display of license.
      (1)   He or she shall display the license or other insignia given him or
her as evidence of the license in a conspicuous place on the premises, vehicle
or device to which the license relates.
      (2)   If the license is not so related, the license shall be carried on
the licensee’s person whenever he or she is carrying on the licensed activity.
   (E)   Unlawful disposition. The license shall not lend or give to any other
person his or her license or license insignia.
(1986 Code, § 501.06)
§ 110.07 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Council may suspend for a period not exceeding 60 days or revoke
any license or permit for violation of any provision of law, ordinance or
regulation applicable to the licensed or permitted activity or property.
   (B)   Except where mandatory revocation is provided by law without notice
and hearing and except where suspension may be made without a hearing, the
holder of the license or permit shall be granted a hearing upon at least 10-
days’ notice before revocation or suspension is ordered.
   (C)   The notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the
nature of the charges against the licensee.
(1986 Code, § 501.07)
CHAPTER 111: REGULATING LAWFUL GAMBLING
Section
   
111.01   Adoption of state law by reference
   
111.02   City may be more restrictive than state law
   
111.03   Purpose
   
111.04   Definitions
   
111.05   Applicability
   
111.06   Lawful gambling permitted
   
111.07   Council approval
   
111.08   Application and local approval of premises permits
   
111.09   Local permits
   
111.10   Revocation and suspension of local permit
   
111.11   License and permit display
   
111.12   Notification of material changes to application
   
111.13   Contribution of net profits to fund administered by city
   
111.14   Designated trade area
   
111.15   Records and reporting
   
111.16   Hours of operation
   
111.17   Severability
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.
   The provisions of M.S. Ch. 349, as they may be amended from time to time,
with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation, provisions
relating to sales, and all other matters pertaining to lawful gambling, are
hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of this chapter as if set out
in full. It is the intention of the Council that all future amendments of M.S.
Ch. 349 are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been in
existence at the time this chapter was adopted.
§ 111.02 CITY MAY BE MORE RESTRICTIVE THAN STATE LAW.
   The Council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. § 349.213, as it may be
amended from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in this chapter,
additional restrictions on gambling within its limits beyond those contained in
M.S. Ch. 349, as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 111.03 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate lawful gambling within the city,
to prevent its commercialization, to ensure the integrity of operations, and to
provide for the use of net profits only for lawful purposes.
§ 111.04 DEFINITIONS.
   In addition to the definitions contained in M.S. § 349.12, as it may be
amended from time to time, the following terms are defined for purposes of this
chapter:
   BOARD. The State of Minnesota Gambling Control Board.
   LICENSED ORGANIZATION. An organization licensed by the Board.
   LOCAL PERMIT. A permit issued by the city.
   TRADE AREA. This city and each city and township contiguous to this city.
§ 111.05 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall be construed to regulate all forms of lawful gambling
within the city except:
   (A)   Bingo conducted within a nursing home or a senior citizen housing
project or by a senior citizen organization if: the prizes for a single bingo
game do not exceed $10; total prizes awarded at a single bingo occasion do not
exceed $200; no more than 2 bingo occasions are held by the organization or at
the facility each week; only members of the organization or residents of the
nursing home or housing project are allowed to play in a bingo game; no
compensation is paid for any persons who conduct the bingo; and a manager is
appointed to supervise the bingo.
   (B)   Raffles, if the value of all prizes awarded by the organization in a
calendar year does not exceed $750.
§ 111.06 LAWFUL GAMBLING PERMITTED.
   Lawful gambling is permitted within the city if the Council, by resolution
adopted by a majority of its members authorizes lawful gambling to occur,
provided it is conducted in accordance with M.S. §§ 609.75 to 609.763,
inclusive, as they may be amended from time to time; M.S. §§ 349.11 to 349.23,
inclusive, as they may be amended from time to time, and this chapter.
§ 111.07 COUNCIL APPROVAL.
   Lawful gambling authorized by M.S. §§ 349.11 to 349.23, inclusive, as they
may be amended from time to time, shall not be conducted unless approved by the
Council, subject to the provisions of this chapter and state law.
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.08 APPLICATION AND LOCAL APPROVAL OF PREMISES PERMITS.
   (A)   A license shall be issued only to a fraternal, religious or veterans
organization and to any corporation, trust or association organized for
exclusively scientific, literary, charitable, educations or artistic purposes,
and any club which is organized and operated exclusively for pleasure or
recreation.
(1986 Code, § 507.03)
   (B)   Any organization seeking to obtain a premises permit or bingo hall
license or renewal of a premises permit or bingo hall license from the Board
shall file with the City Clerk an executed, complete duplicate application
together with all exhibits and documents accompanying the application as filed
with the Board. The application and accompanying exhibits and documents shall
be filed not later than 3 days after they have been filed with the Board.
   (C)   Upon receipt of an application for issuance or renewal of a premises
permit or bingo hall license, the City Clerk shall transmit the application to
the Chief of Police, or the Sheriff of the county in which this city is
located, for review and recommendation.
   (D)   The Chief of Police or Sheriff shall investigate the matter and make a
review and recommendation to the City Council as soon as possible, but in no
event later than 45 days following receipt of the notification by the city.
   (E)   Organizations or bingo halls applying for a state-issued premises
permit or bingo hall license shall pay the city a $100 investigation fee. This
fee shall be refunded if the application is withdrawn before the investigation
is commenced.
   (F)   The applicant shall be notified in writing of the date on which the
Council will consider the recommendation.
   (G)   The Council shall receive the Police Chief's or Sheriff's report and
consider the application within 45 days of the date the application was
submitted to the City Clerk.
   (H)   The Council shall, by resolution, approve or disapprove the
application within 60 days of receipt of the application.
   (I)   The Council shall disapprove an application for issuance or renewal of
a premises permit for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   Violation by the gambling organization of any state statute, state
rule or city ordinance relating to gambling within the last 3 years.
      (2)   Violation by the on-sale establishment or organization leasing its
premises for gambling of any state statute, state rule or city ordinance
relating to the operation of the establishment, including, but not limited to,
laws relating to alcoholic beverages, gambling, controlled substances,
suppression of vice, and protection of public safety within the last 3 years.
      (3)   Lawful gambling would be conducted at premises other than those for
which an on-sale liquor license has been issued.
      (4)   Lawful gambling would be conducted at more than 1 premises within
the city. The city may limit the number of premises where lawful gambling may
be conducted.
      (5)   An organization would be permitted to conduct lawful gambling
activities at more than 1 premises in the city.
      (6)   More than 1 licensed organization would be permitted to conduct
lawful gambling activities at 1 premises.
      (7)   Failure of the applicant to pay any investigation fee provided by
division (D) of this section within the prescribed time limit.
      (8)   Operation of gambling at the site would be detrimental to health,
safety, and welfare of the community.
   Otherwise the Council shall pass a resolution approving the application.
§ 111.09 LOCAL PERMITS.
   (A)   No organization shall conduct lawful gambling excluded or exempted
from state licensure requirements by M.S. § 349.166, as it may be amended from
time to time, without a valid local permit. This section shall not apply to
lawful gambling exempted from local regulation by §
111.05.
   (B)   Applications for issuance or renewal of a local permit shall be on a
form prescribed by the city. The application shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   Name and address of the organization requesting the permit.
      (2)   Name and address of the officers and person accounting for
receipts, expenses, and profits for the event.
      (3)   Dates of gambling occasion for which permit is requested.
      (4)   Address of premises where event will occur.
      (5)   Copy of rental or leasing arrangement, if any, connected with the
event, including rental to be charged to organization.
      (6)   Estimated value of prizes to be awarded.
   (C)   The fee for a local permit shall be set by Council from time to time.
The fee shall be submitted with the application for a local permit. This fee
shall be refunded if the application is withdrawn before the investigation is
commenced.
   (D)   Upon receipt of an application for issuance or renewal of a local
permit, the City Clerk shall transmit the notification to the Chief of Police
or Sheriff for review and recommendation.
   (E)   The Chief of Police or Sheriff shall investigate the matter and make
review and recommendation to the City Council as soon as possible, but in no
event later than 45 days following receipt of the notification by the city.
   (F)   The applicant shall be notified in writing of the date on which the
Council will consider the recommendation.
   (G)   The Council shall receive the Police Chief's or Sheriff's report and
consider the application within 45 days of the date the application was
submitted to the City Clerk.
   (H)   The Council shall disapprove an application for issuance or renewal of
a premises permit for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   Violation by the gambling organization of any state statute, state
rule or city ordinance relating to gambling within the last 3 years.
      (2)   Violation by the on-sale establishment or organization leasing its
premises for gambling of any state statute, state rule or city ordinance
relating to the operation of the establishment, including, but not limited to,
laws relating to the operation of the establishment, laws relating to alcoholic
beverages, gambling, controlled substances, suppression of vice, and protection
of public safety within the last 3 years.
      (3)   The organization has not been in existence in the city for at least
3 consecutive years prior to the date of application.
      (4)   The organization does not have at least 30 active members.
      (5)   Exempted or excluded lawful gambling will not take place at a
premises the organization owns or rents.
      (6)   Exempted or excluded lawful gambling will not be limited to a
premises for which an on- sale liquor license has been issued.
      (7)   An organization will have a permit to conduct exempted or excluded
lawful gambling activities on more than 1 premises in the city.
      (8)   More than 1 licensed, qualified organization will be conducting
exempted or excluded lawful gambling activities at any 1 premises.
      (9)   Failure of the applicant to pay permit fee provided by division (C)
of this section within the prescribed time limit.
      (10)   Operation of gambling at the site would be detrimental to health,
safety, and welfare of the community.
   Otherwise the council shall approve the application.
   (I)   Local permits shall be valid for 1 year after the date of issuance
unless suspended or revoked.
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.10 REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION OF LOCAL PERMIT.
   (A)   A local permit may be revoked or temporarily suspended for a violation
by the gambling organization of any state statute, state rule or city ordinance
relating to gambling.
   (B)   A license shall not be revoked or suspended until notice and an
opportunity for a hearing have first been given to the permitted person. The
notice shall be personally served and shall state the provision reasonably
believed to be violated. The notice shall also state that the permitted person
may demand a hearing on the matter, in which case the permit will not be
suspended until after the hearing is held. If the permitted person requests a
hearing, the Council shall hold a hearing on the matter at least 1 week after
the date on which the request is made. If, as a result of the hearing, the
Council finds that an ordinance violation exists, then the Council may suspend
or revoke the permit.
§ 111.11 LICENSE AND PERMIT DISPLAY.
   All permits issued under state law or this chapter shall be prominently
displayed during the permit year at the premises where gambling is conducted.
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.12 NOTIFICATION OF MATERIAL CHANGES TO APPLICATION.
   An organization holding a state-issued premises permit or a local permit
shall notify the city in writing whenever any material change in the
information submitted in the application occurs within 10 days of the change.
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.13 CONTRIBUTION OF NET PROFITS TO FUND ADMINISTERED BY CITY.
   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct lawful gambling within the city
pursuant to M.S. § 349.16, as it may be amended from time to time, shall
contribute 10% of its net profits derived from lawful gambling in the city to a
fund administered and regulated by the city without cost to the fund. The city
shall disburse the funds for lawful purposes as defined by M.S. § 349.12, Subd.
25, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Payment under this section shall be made on the last day of each
month.
   (C)   The city's use of these funds shall be determined at the time of
adoption of the city's annual budget or when the budget is amended.
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.14 DESIGNATED TRADE AREA.
   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct gambling within the city shall
expend 100% of its lawful purpose expenditures on lawful purposes conducted
within the city's trade area.
   (B)   This section applies only to lawful purpose expenditures of gross
profits derived from gambling conducted at a premises within the city's
jurisdiction.
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.15 RECORDS AND REPORTING.
   (A)   Organizations conducting lawful gambling shall file with the City
Clerk 1 copy of all records and reports required to be filed with the Board,
pursuant to M.S. Ch. 349, as it may be amended from time to time, and rules
adopted pursuant thereto, as they may be amended from time to time. The records
and reports shall be filed on or before the day they are required to be filed
with the Board.
   (B)   Organizations licensed by the Board shall file a report with the city
proving compliance with the trade area spending requirements imposed by §
111.14. Such report shall be made on a form prescribed by the city and shall be
submitted annually and in advance of application for renewal.
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.16 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   Lawful gambling shall not be conducted between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on
any day of the week.
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.17 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this chapter is found to be invalid for any reason by a
court of competent jurisdiction, the validity of the remaining provisions shall
not be affected.
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates:
   (A)   Any provision of this chapter;
   (B)   M.S. §§ 609.75 to 609.763, inclusive, as they may be amended from time
to time; or
   (C)   M.S. §§ 349.11 to 349.21, as they may be amended from time to time, or
any rules promulgated under those sections, as they may be amended from time to
time; shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in §
10.99
CHAPTER 112: ENTERTAINMENT
Section
   
112.01   License requirements
   
112.02   Application
   
112.03   License fees
   
112.04   Restrictions
§ 112.01 LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
   No person shall give or exhibit any show or public entertainment, circus,
carnival, game or concert, or operate any merry-go-round, or similar amusement
ride or apparatus, or conduct any show whether admission is to be charged or
not, at any place in this City of Osakis unless a license therefore has been
obtained from the City Recorder.
(1986 Code, § 510.01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.02 APPLICATION.
   Applications for licenses shall state the nature of the entertainment, and
the time and place thereof.
(1986 Code, § 510.02)
§ 112.03 LICENSE FEES.
   The fee for every license shall be set annually by the Council.
(1986 Code, § 510.03)
§ 112.04 RESTRICTIONS.
   No license shall be issued for obscene, impure or immodest performances or
for entertainments which in the opinion of the City Council will disturb the
public health, safety, morals or welfare. No license shall be necessary for any
entertainment given by amateurs, or in which the performers do not receive any
pay, or which is given solely for the benefit for any school, church or
benevolent institution, or any charitable purpose.
(1986 Code, § 510.04)
CHAPTER 113: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   Exceptions to definitions
   
113.03   Licensing; exemptions
   
113.04   License ineligibility
   
113.05   License suspension and revocation
   
113.06   License transferability
   
113.07   Registration
   
113.08   Prohibited activities
   
113.09   Exclusion by placard
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms
shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this
chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLER. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-
business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place, for the
purpose of offering for sale, displaying or exposing for sale, selling or
attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares,
products, merchandise or other personnel property that the person is carrying
or otherwise transporting. The term PEDDLER shall mean the same as the term
HAWKER.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation,
partnership or association. As applied to groups, organizations, corporations,
partnerships and associations, the term shall include each member, officer,
partner, associate, agent or employee.
   REGULAR BUSINESS DAY. Any day during which the city hall is normally open
for the purpose of conducting public business. Holidays defined by state law
shall not be counted as REGULAR BUSINESS DAYS.
   SOLICITOR. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-
business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place, for the
purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares, products,
merchandise, other personal property or services of which he or she  may be
carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog or by
other means, and for which delivery or performance shall occur at a later time.
The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person from the scope of
this provision if the actual purpose of the person’s activity is to obtain or
attempt to obtain orders as discussed above. The term shall mean the same as
the term CANVASSER.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. A person who temporarily sets up business out of a
vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, other portable shelter or empty store front for
the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling or attempting to sell,
and delivering, goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal property
and who does not remain or intend to remain in any 1 location for more than 14
consecutive days.
§ 113.02 EXCEPTIONS TO DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of the requirements of this chapter, the terms
PEDDLER, SOLICITOR and TRANSIENT MERCHANT shall not apply to any person selling
or attempting to sell at wholesale any goods, wares, products, merchandise or
other personal property to a retailer of the items being sold by the
wholesaler. The terms also shall not apply to any person who makes initial
contacts with other people for the purpose of establishing or trying to
establish a regular customer delivery route for the delivery of perishable food
and dairy products such as baked goods and milk, nor shall they apply to any
person making deliveries of perishable food and dairy products to the customers
on his or her established regular delivery route.
   (B)   In addition, persons conducting the type of sales commonly known as
garage sales, rummage sales, or estate sales, as well as those persons
participating in an organized multi-person bazaar or flea market, shall be
exempt from the definitions of PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS and TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, as
shall be anyone conducting an auction as a properly licensed auctioneer, or any
officer of the court conducting a court-ordered sale. Exemption from the
definitions for the scope of this chapter shall not excuse any person from
complying with any other applicable statutory provision or local ordinance.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to prohibit or restrict
door-to-door advocacy. Persons engaging in door-to-door advocacy shall not be
required to register as solicitors under §
113.07. The term DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCACY includes door-to-door canvassing and
pamphleteering as vehicles for the dissemination of religious, political and
other ideas.
§ 113.03 LICENSING; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   County license required. No person shall conduct business as a
peddler, solicitor or transient merchant within the city limits without first
having obtained the appropriate license from the county as required by M.S. Ch.
329 as it may be amended from time to time, if the county issues a license for
the activity.
   (B)   City license required. Except as otherwise provided for by this
chapter, no person shall conduct business as either a peddler or a transient
merchant without first having obtained a license from the city. Solicitors need
not be licensed, but are still required to register pursuant to §
113.07.
   (C)   Application. Application for a city license to conduct business as a
peddler or transient merchant shall be made at least 14 regular business days
before the applicant desires to begin conducting business. Application for a
license shall be made on a form approved by the City Council and available from
the office of the City Clerk/Treasurer. All applications shall be signed by the
applicant. All applications shall include the following information:
      (1)   Applicant’s full legal name;
      (2)   All other names under which the applicant conducts business or to
which applicant officially answers;
      (3)   A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye color,
height, weight, distinguishing marks and features, and the like);
      (4)   Full address of applicant’s permanent residence;
      (5)   Telephone number of applicant’s permanent residence;
      (6)   Full legal name of any and all business operations owned, managed
or operated by applicant, or for which the applicant is an employee or agent;
      (7)   Full address of applicant’s regular place of business (if any);
      (8)   Any and all business related telephone numbers of the applicant;
      (9)   The type of business for which the applicant is applying for a
license;
      (10)   Whether the applicant is applying for an annual or daily license;
      (11)   The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct business,
and if the applicant is applying for a daily license, the number of days he or
she will be conducting business in the city (maximum 14 consecutive days);
      (12)   Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the applicant
can be reached while conducting business within the city, including the
location where a transient merchant intends to set up business;
      (13)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
within the last 5 years of any felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor for
violation of any state or federal statute or any local ordinance, other than
traffic offenses;
      (14)   A list of the 3 most recent locations where the applicant has
conducted business as a peddler or transient merchant;
      (15)   Proof of any requested county license;
      (16)   Written permission of the property owner or the property owner’s
agent for any property to be used by a transient merchant;
      (17)   A general description of the items to be sold or services to be
provided;
      (18)   All additional information deemed necessary by the City Council;
      (19)   The applicant’s driver’s license number or other acceptable form
of identification; and
      (20)   The license plate number, registration information and vehicle
identification number for any vehicle to be used in conjunction with the
licensed business and a description of the vehicle.
   (D)   Fee. All applications for a license under this chapter shall be
accompanied by the fee in an amount as set by Council from time to time.
   (E)   Procedure.
      (1)   Upon receipt of the completed application and payment of the
license fee, the City Clerk/Treasurer, within 2 regular business days, must
determine if the application is complete.
      (2)   An application is determined to be complete only if all required
information is provided. If the City Clerk/Treasurer determines that the
application is incomplete, the City Clerk/Treasurer must inform the applicant
of the required necessary information that is missing.
      (3)   If the application is complete, the City Clerk/Treasurer must order
any investigation, including background checks, necessary to verify the
information provided with the application. Within 10 regular business days of
receiving a complete application the City Clerk/Treasurer must issue the
license unless there exist grounds for denying the license under §
113.04, in which case the Clerk/Treasurer must deny the license.
      (4)   If the City Clerk/Treasurer denies the license, the applicant must
be notified in writing of the decision, the reason for denial, and of the
applicant’s right to appeal the denial by requesting, within 20 days of
receiving notice of rejection, a public hearing before the City Council.
      (5)   The City Council shall hear the appeal within 20 days of the date
of the request. The decision of the City Council following the public hearing
can be appealed by petitioning the Minnesota Court of Appeals for a writ of
certiorari.
   (F)   Duration.
      (1)   An annual license granted under this chapter shall be valid for 1
calendar year from the date of issue.
      (2)   All other licenses granted under this chapter shall be valid only
during the time period indicated on the license.
   (G)   License exemptions.
      (1)   No license shall be required for any person to sell or attempt to
sell, or to take or attempt to take orders for, any product grown, produced,
cultivated or raised on any farm.
      (2)   No license shall be required of any person going from house-to-
house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or other type of
place-to-place when the activity is for the purpose of exercising that person’s
State or Federal Constitutional rights such as the freedom of speech, press,
religion and the like, except that this exemption may be lost if the person’s
exercise of Constitutional rights is merely incidental to a commercial
activity.
      (3)   Professional fund raisers working on behalf of an otherwise exempt
person or group shall not be exempt from the licensing requirements of this
chapter.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.04 LICENSE INELIGIBILITY.
   The following shall be grounds for denying a license under this chapter:
   (A)   The failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of having
obtained any required county license;
   (B)   The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the
information requested by the city as a part of the application, or the failure
to sign the application, or the failure to pay the required fee at the time of
application;
   (C)   The conviction of the applicant within the past 5 years from the date
of application for any violation of any federal or state statute or regulation,
or of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects on the person’s ability to
conduct the business for which the license is being sought in an honest and
legal manner. Those violations shall include but not be limited to burglary,
theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, and any form of
actual or threatened physical harm against another person;
   (D)   The revocation within the past 5 years of any license issued to the
applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or
transient merchant; or
   (E)   The applicant is found to have a bad business reputation. Evidence of
a bad business reputation shall include, but not be limited to, the existence
of more than 3 complaints against the applicant with the Better Business
Bureau, the Attorney General’s Office, or other similar business or consumer
rights office or agency, within the preceding 12 months, or 3 complaints filed
against the applicant within the preceding 5 years.
§ 113.05 LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Generally. Any license issued under this section may be suspended or
revoked at the discretion of the City Council for violation of any of the
following:
      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statements on the application
form;
      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made during the course
of the licensed activity;
      (3)   Conviction of any offense for which granting of a license could
have been denied under §
113.04; or
      (4)   Violation of any provision of this chapter.
   (B)   Multiple persons under one license. The suspension or revocation of
any license issued for the purpose of authorizing multiple persons to conduct
business as peddlers or transient merchants on behalf of the licensee shall
serve as a suspension or revocation of each authorized person’s authority to
conduct business as a peddler or transient merchant on behalf of the licensee
whose license is suspended or revoked.
   (C)   Notice.
      (1)   Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued under this
chapter, the city shall provide the license holder with written notice of the
alleged violations and inform the licensee of his or her right to a hearing on
the alleged violation.
      (2)   Notice shall be delivered in person or by mail to the permanent
residential address listed on the license application, or if no residential
address is listed, to the business address provided on the license application.
   (D)   Public hearing.
      (1)   Upon receiving the notice provided in division (C) above, the
licensee shall have the right to request a public hearing.
      (2)   If no request for a hearing is received by the City Clerk/Treasurer
within 10 regular business days following the service of the notice, the city
may proceed with the suspension or revocation.
      (3)   For the purpose of mailed notices, service shall be considered
complete as of the date the notice is placed in the mail.
      (4)   If a public hearing is requested within the stated time frame, a
hearing shall be scheduled within 20 days from the date of the request.
      (5)   Within 3 regular business days of the hearing, the City Council
shall notify the licensee of its decision.
   (E)   Emergency. If, in the discretion of the City Council, imminent harm to
the health or safety of the public may occur because of the actions of a
peddler or transient merchant licensed under this chapter, the City Council may
immediately suspend the person’s license and provide notice of the right to
hold a subsequent public hearing as prescribed in division (C) above.
   (F)   Appeals. Any person whose license is suspended or revoked under this
section shall have the right to appeal that decision in court.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.06 LICENSE TRANSFERABILITY.
   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred to any person
other than the person to whom the license was issued.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.07 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   All solicitors, and any person exempt from the licensing requirements
of this chapter under §
113.03, shall be required to register with the city.
   (B)   Persons engaging in door-to-door advocacy shall not be required to
register.
   (C)   The term DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCACY includes door-to-door canvassing and
pamphleteering as vehicles for the dissemination of religious, political and
other ideas.
   (D)   Registration shall be made on the same form required for a license
application, but no fee shall be required.
   (E)   Immediately upon completion of the registration form, the City Clerk/
Treasurer shall issue to the registrant a certificate of registration as proof
of the registration.
   (F)   Certificates of registration shall be non-transferable.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.08 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall conduct business in any of
the following manners:
   (A)   Calling attention to his or her business or items to be sold by means
of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out or by any other
noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed structure;
   (B)   Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on
any street, alley, sidewalk or other public right-of-way;
   (C)   Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the health,
safety and welfare of any individual or the general public;
   (D)   Conducting business before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.;
   (E)   Failing to provide proof of license or registration, and
identification, when requested; or using the license or registration of another
person;
   (F)   Making any false or misleading statements about the product or service
being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement. No peddler, solicitor
or transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the city solely
based on the city having issued a license or certificate of registration to
that person; or
   (G)   Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave, or to
otherwise conduct business in a manner a reasonable person would find obscene,
threatening, intimidating or abusive.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.09 EXCLUSION BY PLACARD.
   (A)   No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant, unless invited to do so
by the property owner or tenant, shall enter the property of another for the
purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant
when the property is marked with a sign or placard at least 4 inches long and 4
inches wide with print of at least 48 point in size stating “No Peddlers,
Solicitors or Transient Merchants,” or “Peddlers, Solicitors and Transient
Merchants Prohibited” or other comparable statement.
   (B)   No person other than the property owner or tenant shall remove, deface
or otherwise tamper with any sign or placard under this section.
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 114: BUILDING MOVERS
Section
   
114.01   License required
   
114.02   License fee
   
114.03   Bond
   
114.04   Application
   
114.05   Restriction
   
114.06   Damages and repairs
   
114.07   Obstruction
§ 114.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall move any building or structure upon or over any of the
streets, alleys or other public property of the City of Osakis without first
securing from the Council a license to do so.
(1986 Code, § 512.01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.02 LICENSE FEE.
   The fee for a license shall be set annually by the Council.
(1986 Code, § 512.02)
§ 114.03 BOND.
   (A)   The Council may in its discretion require the applicant to file a bond
in the sum of $10,000 conditioned upon the satisfactory repair or payment of
any damage caused to any street, alleys or public grounds due to moving.
   (B)   The Council may, in its discretion, except a reasonable cash money
deposit in lieu of a bond.
(1986 Code, § 512.03)
§ 114.04 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any person desiring a license shall make application therefore in
writing to the Street Commissioner.
   (B)   The application shall set forth the name and address of the applicant,
a description and location of the building or structure to be moved, the
location where it is to be moved, and the streets, alleys or other public
property over which it is to be moved; also a description of the equipment
which will be used in the moving.
(1986 Code, § 512.04)
§ 114.05 RESTRICTION.
   No license shall be issued except upon approval of the City Council after
recommendation by the Street Commissioner who shall make a determination as to
whether the applicant is responsible and has the proper equipment to perform
the move.
(1986 Code, § 512.05)
§ 114.06 DAMAGES AND REPAIRS.
   (A)   Any person causing damage to the city streets, alleys or other public
property as a result of moving, shall repair the same to the satisfaction and
approval of the Street Commissioner.
   (B)   Upon failure to do so, after reasonable notice, the Street
Commissioner shall cause all repairs to be made as are necessary at expense of
the licensee.
(1986 Code, § 512.06)
§ 114.07 OBSTRUCTION.
   (A)   No person moving a building or structure shall obstruct traffic over
any street, alleys or public grounds so used.
   (B)   No building or structure shall be left standing in a street, alley or
other public grounds without barricades, which during the night shall be
sufficiently lighted by warning lights.
(1986 Code, § 512.07)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 115: RESTAURANTS
Section
   
115.01   License requirements
   
115.02   Inspection
   
115.03   Requirements and conditions of license
   
115.04   Revocation
   
115.05   Good enforcement
§ 115.01 LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
   No person shall operate or conduct a restaurant, café, lunchroom, inn,
tavern or other public place wherein meals, lunches, ice cream or other food is
prepared and served to the public, without first having secured a license to do
so from the County/State Health Department.
(1986 Code, § 513.01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.02 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Every place of business licensed hereunder shall be open to inspection
at all times during business hours by the Sanitary Inspector, Health Officer or
other member of the Board of Health.
   (B)   The Sanitary Inspector shall inspect each place so licensed once every
3 months, and if upon the inspection it shall appear that the requirements of
this chapter and the regulations of the Board of Health are not complied with,
he or she shall report thereon to the County/State health Department.
(1986 Code, § 513.04)
§ 115.03 REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS OF LICENSES.
   Every license granted hereunder shall be subject to the following conditions
and requirements:
   (A)   No license shall be issued for the conduct of business in any business
not equipped with running water, toilets and washrooms, for the accommodations
of employees and guests;
   (B)   No accumulations of garbage, or other waste shall be permitted on the
premises; all garbage shall be disposed of, in a sanitary manner, daily;
   (C)   All refrigerators and ice boxes shall be cleaned and purified at least
every 3 days;
   (D)   Floors shall be smooth and free from crevices in which dirt or filth
may accumulate, and shall be cleaned daily;
   (E)   Tableware and dishes used in the conduct of the business shall be
sterilized after being used;
   (F)   Kitchen and dining room shall be screened, and protected from flies,
mice, rats and other vermin. Rooms used in the preparation of food shall be
light, airy, clean and sanitary;
   (G)   All equipment used in dispensing malt beverages shall be sterilized at
least once a week;
   (H)   No person afflicted with any communicable disease shall be employed in
any capacity in any place licensed hereunder;
   (I)   Every place licensed for the sale of malt beverage on the premises
shall be equipped with separate toilets and wash rooms for men and women; and
   (J)   The premises shall be kept clean and sanitary, and shall comply with
all regulations of the Board of Health and all ordinances of the city as to
sanitation, cleanliness and prevention of disease.
(1986 Code, § 513.05)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.04 REVOCATION.
   Any license issued hereunder may be revoked for violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, or any regulation or order of the Board of Health.
(1986 Code, § 513.06)
§ 115.05 GOOD ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The city may use civil remedies to enforce the provisions of this
section.
   (B)   Those civil remedies shall include, but are not limited to temporary
or permanent injunctions, actions for damages, declaratory judgment or any
other civil action available by statute.
   (C)   In any civil action the City of Osakis may recover costs or
prosecution to include attorneys’ fees upon a finding of a violation of this
chapter.
(1986 Code, § 513.07)
CHAPTER 116: TAXIES AND LIVERIES
Section
   
116.01   License requirement
   
116.02   Definition
   
116.03   License fee
   
116.04   Application
   
116.05   License revocation
§ 116.01 LICENSE REQUIREMENT.
   No person, association or corporation shall conduct the business of taxi
livery in the City of Osakis without obtaining a license therefrom as
hereinafter provided.
(1986 Code, § 514.01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 116.02 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   TAXIES or LIVERIES. The business of transporting persons in a motor vehicle
for hire.
(1986 Code, § 514.02)
§ 116.03 LICENSE FEE.
   Fee for licenses under this section shall be set annually by the Council.
(1986 Code, § 514.03)
§ 116.04 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application for a license should be made to the City Council and shall
show the name of the applicant and all persons associated with him or her in
the business or having an interest therein, the place where the business is to
be conducted, and the names of 2 or more responsible residents of the City of
Osakis who favorably recommend the integrity and business ability of the
applicant.
   (B)   There shall also accompany the application for approval an insurance
policy taken out by the applicant in good and substantial casualty company for
public liability coverage to the extent of $100,000 for 1 person and $250,000
for more than 1 person and property damage coverage to the extent of $50,000.
   (C)   Any application not accompanied by the policy for approval shall not
be accepted by the City Clerk/Treasurer’s Office or considered by the Council.
(1986 Code, § 514.04)
§ 116.05 LICENSE REVOCATION.
   Licenses issued hereunder may be revoked for good cause, without notice by
the City Council whenever in their opinion, the good order or welfare of the
City of Osakis required it.
(1986 Code, § 514.05)
CHAPTER 117: AUTOMOBILE WASHING ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
117.01   License requirement
   
117.02   License fee
   
117.03   Definition
   
117.04   Restrictions
   
117.05   Good enforcement
§ 117.01 LICENSE REQUIREMENT.
   No person, firm, corporation or organization shall hereafter build, rebuild,
enlarge, alter, keep, use or maintain within the City of Osakis any structure
or premises for the operation of a car wash establishment as herein defined
unless a license therefore has been obtained from the Council in application to
the Clerk/Treasurer.
(1986 Code, § 515.01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 117.02 LICENSE FEE.
   The fee for every license shall be set annually by the Council. Every
license shall expire on January 14 of the following year.
(1986 Code, § 515.02)
§ 117.03 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAR WASH, AUTOMOBILE WASH or AUTOMOBILE WASHING ESTABLISHMENT.
      (1)   A premise used primarily for the washing of automobiles.
      (2)   It shall not include garages, or filling stations, where the
washing of automobiles is merely incidental to the business; nor premises is
used for a short and intermittent period of time.
(1986 Code, § 515.03)
§ 117.04 RESTRICTIONS.
   No license shall be issued except upon compliance with the following minimum
condition:
   (A)   Facilities for off-street parking to provide parking for at least 3
automobiles for each wash stall;
   (B)   Each wash stall shall have a trap below the washing area to trap sand,
dirt, sediment and other wastes which will effectively prevent the substances
from entering into the sewage system of the city;
   (C)   All drains shall be connected with the sanitary sewer system of the
city in accordance with regulations as which shall from time to time be
established by the City Council; and
   (D)   The car wash establishment shall be permitted only in the commercial
or industrial zone districts of the city.
(1986 Code, § 515.04)
§ 117.05 GOOD ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The city may use civil remedies to enforce the provisions of this
section.
   (B)   Those civil remedies shall include, but are not limited to temporary
or permanent injunctions, actions for damages, declaratory judgment or any
other civil action available by statute.
   (C)   In any civil action, the City of Osakis may recover costs of
prosecution to include attorneys’ fees upon a finding of a violation of this
chapter.
(1986 Code, § 515.05)
CHAPTER 118: LIQUOR REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
118.01   Adoption of state law by reference
   
118.02   City may be more restrictive than state law
   
118.03   Definitions
   
118.04   Nudity on the premises of licensed establishments prohibited
   
118.05   Consumption in public places
Licensing
   
118.20   Number of licenses which may be issued
   
118.21   Term and expiration of licenses
   
118.22   License fees; pro rata
   
118.23   Council discretion to grant or deny a license
   
118.24   Application for license
   
118.25   Description of premises
   
118.26   Applications for renewal
   
118.27   Transfer of license
   
118.28   Investigation
   
118.29   Hearing and issuance
   
118.30   Restrictions on issuance
   
118.31   Conditions of license
   
118.32   Hours and days of sale
   
118.33   Minors on premises
   
118.34   Restrictions on purchase and consumption
   
118.35   Suspension and revocation
Municipal Liquor Stores
   
118.50   Application of this subchapter
   
118.51   Existing municipal stores continued
   
118.52   Location
   
118.53   Operation
   
118.54   Proof of financial responsibility
   
118.55   Issuance of other licenses
   
118.99   Penalties
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 118.01 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.
   The provisions of M.S. Ch. 340A, as they may be amended from time to time,
with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation,
restrictions on consumption, provisions relating to sales, hours of sale, and
all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and consumption
of intoxicating liquor and 3.2% malt liquor are hereby adopted by reference and
are made a part of this Chapter as if set out in full. It is the intention of
the City Council that all future amendments to M.S. Ch. 340A are hereby adopted
by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this
Chapter is adopted.
§ 118.02 CITY MAY BE MORE RESTRICTIVE THAN STATE LAW.
   The Council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. § 340A.509, as it may be
amended from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in this chapter,
additional restrictions on the sale and possession of alcoholic beverages
within its limits beyond those contained in M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended
from time to time.
§ 118.03 DEFINITIONS.
   In addition to the definitions contained in M.S. § 340A.101, as it may be
amended from time to time, the following terms are defined for purposes of this
chapter:
   LIQUOR. As used in this chapter, without modification by the words
“intoxicating” or “3.2% malt,” includes both INTOXICATING LIQUOR and 3.2% MALT
LIQUOR.
   RESTAURANT. An eating facility, other than a hotel, under the control of a
single proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the
premises, where full waitress/waiter table service is provided, where a
customer orders food from printed menus and where the main food course is
served and consumed while seated at a single location. To be a RESTAURANT as
defined by this section, an establishment shall have a license from the state
as required by M.S. § 157.16, as it may be amended from time to time, and meet
the definition of either a “small establishment,” “medium establishment” or
“large establishment” as defined in M.S. § 157.16, Subd. 3d, as it may be
amended from time to time. An establishment which serves prepackaged food that
receives heat treatment and is served in the package or frozen pizza that is
heated and served, shall not be considered to be a restaurant for purposes of
this chapter unless it meets the definitions of “small establishment”, “medium
establishment” or “large establishment.”
§ 118.04 NUDITY ON THE PREMISES OF LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The City Council finds that it is in the best interests of the public
health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city that nudity is
prohibited as provided in this section on the premises of any establishment
licensed under this chapter. This is to protect and assist the owners,
operators, and employees of the establishment, as well as patrons and the
public in general, from harm stemming from the physical immediacy and
combination of alcohol, nudity, and sex. The Council especially intends to
prevent any subliminal endorsement of sexual harassment or activities likely to
lead to the possibility of various criminal conduct, including prostitution,
sexual assault, and disorderly conduct. The Council also finds that the
prohibition of nudity on the premises of any establishment licensed under this
chapter, as set forth in this section, reflects the prevailing community
standards of the city.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person or
persons on the licensed premises when the person does not have his or her
buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a non- transparent material.
It is unlawful for any person to be on the licensed premises when the person
does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a
non-transparent material.
   (C) A violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable as provided by
law, and is justification for revocation or suspension of any liquor, wine, or
3.2% malt liquor license or the imposition of a civil penalty under the
provisions of §
118.99(B).
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.05 CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall consume intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor in a public
park, on any public street, sidewalk, parking lot or alley, or in any public
place other than on the premises of an establishment licensed under this
chapter, in a municipal liquor dispensary if one exists in the city, or where
the consumption and display of liquor is lawfully permitted.
Penalty, see § 118.99
LICENSING
§ 118.20 NUMBER OF LICENSES WHICH MAY BE ISSUED.
   State law establishes the number of liquor licenses that a city may issue,
as provided under M.S. § 340A.413, as it may be amended from time to time. The
Council in its sound discretion may provide by ordinance that a larger number
of licenses may be issued up to the number of licenses authorized by M.S. Ch.
340A, as it may be amended from time to time. If a larger number of licenses in
a particular category has been authorized by a referendum held under the
provisions of M.S. § 340A.413, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time,
but not all of them have been issued, the larger number of licenses is no
longer in effect until the Council by ordinance determines that any or all of
the licenses may be issued. The Council is not required to issue the full
number of licenses that it has available.
(Am. Ord. 88, passed 2-4-2013)
§ 118.21 TERM AND EXPIRATION OF LICENSES.
   Each license shall be issued for a maximum period of 1 year. All licenses,
except temporary licenses, shall expire on January 14 of each year unless
another date is provided by ordinance. All licenses shall expire on the same
date. Temporary licenses expire according to their terms. Consumption and
display permits issued by the Commissioner of Public Safety, and the
accompanying city consent to the permit, shall expire on March 31 of each year.
§ 118.22 LICENSE FEES; PRO RATA.
   (A)   No license or other fee established by the city shall exceed any limit
established by M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, for a
liquor license. Temporary “on-sale” licenses shall be granted only to bona fide
clubs and charitable, religious, and non-profit organizations for the sale of
beer for consumption on the premises only.
   (B)   The Council may establish from time to time in the Ordinance
Establishing Fees and Charges the fee for any of the liquor licenses it is
authorized to issue. The license fee may not exceed the cost of issuing the
license and other costs directly related to the enforcement of the liquor laws
and this chapter. No liquor license fee shall be increased without providing
mailed notice of a hearing on the proposed increase to all affected licensees
at least 30 days before the hearing.
   (C)   The fee for all licenses, except temporary licenses, granted after the
commencement of the license year shall be prorated on a quarterly basis.
   (D)   All license fees shall be paid in full at the time the application is
filed with the city. If the application is denied, the license fee shall be
returned to the applicant.
   (E)   A refund of a pro rata share of an annual license fee may occur only
if authorized by M.S. § 340A.408, Subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to
time.
(Am. Ord. 1-2008, passed 3-3-2008)
§ 118.23 COUNCIL DISCRETION TO GRANT OR DENY A LICENSE.
   The Council in its sound discretion may either grant or deny the application
for any license or for the transfer or renewal of any license. No applicant has
a right to a license under this chapter.
§ 118.24 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Form. Every application for a license issued under this chapter shall
be on a form provided by the city. Every application shall state the name of
the applicant, the applicant's age, representations as to the applicant's
character, with references as the Council may require, the type of license
applied for, the business in connection with which the proposed license will
operate and its location, a description of the premises, whether the applicant
is owner and operator of the business, how long the applicant has been in that
business at that place, and other information as the Council may require from
time to time. An application for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license shall
be in the form prescribed by the Commissioner of Public Safety and shall also
contain the information required in this section. The form shall be verified
and filed with the city. No person shall make a false statement in an
application.
   (B)   Financial responsibility. Prior to the issuance of any license under
this chapter, the applicant shall demonstrate proof of financial responsibility
as defined in M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time, with
regard to liability under M.S. § 340A.801, as it may be amended from time to
time. This proof will be filed with the city and the Commissioner of Public
Safety. Any liability insurance policy filed as proof of financial
responsibility under this section shall conform to M.S. § 340A.409, as it may
be amended from time to time. Operation of a business which is required to be
licensed by this chapter without having on file with the city at all times
effective proof of financial responsibility is a cause for revocation of the
license.
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.25 DESCRIPTION OF PREMISES.
   The application shall specifically describe the compact and contiguous
premises within which liquor may be dispensed and consumed. The description may
not include any parking lot or sidewalk.
§ 118.26 APPLICATIONS FOR RENEWAL.
   At least 30 days before a license issued under this chapter is to be
renewed, an application for renewal shall be filed with the city. The decision
whether or not to renew a license rests within the sound discretion of the
Council. No licensee has a right to have the license renewed.
(Am. Ord. 88, passed 2-4-2013)
§ 118.27 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   No license issued under this chapter may be transferred without the approval
of the Council. Any transfer of stock of a corporate licensee is deemed to be a
transfer of the license, and a transfer of stock without prior Council approval
is a ground for revocation of the license. An application to transfer a license
shall be treated the same as an application for a new license, and all of the
provisions of this code applying to applications for a license shall apply.
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.28 INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Preliminary background and financial investigation. On an initial
application for a license, on an application for transfer of a license and, in
the sound discretion of the Council that it is in the public interest to do so,
on an application for renewal of a license, the city shall conduct a
preliminary background and financial investigation of the applicant or it may
contract with the Commissioner of Public Safety for the investigation. The
applicant shall pay with the application an investigation fee of $500 which
shall be in addition to any license fee. If the cost of the preliminary
investigation is less than $500, the unused balance shall be returned to the
applicant. The results of the preliminary investigation shall be sent to the
Commissioner of Public Safety if the application is for an on-sale intoxicating
liquor license or an on-sale wine license.
   (B)   Comprehensive background and financial investigation. If the results
of a preliminary investigation warrant, in the sound discretion of the Council,
a comprehensive background and financial investigation, the Council may either
conduct the investigation itself or contract with the Commissioner of Public
Safety for the investigation. The investigation fee for this comprehensive
background and financial investigation to be paid by the applicant shall be
$500, less any amount paid for the initial investigation if the investigation
is to be conducted within the state, and $10,000, less any amount paid for the
initial investigation, if the investigation is required outside the state. The
unused balance of the fee shall be returned to the applicant whether or not the
application is denied. The fee shall be paid in advance of any investigation
and the amount actually expended on the investigation shall not be refundable
in the event the application is denied. The results of the comprehensive
investigation shall be sent to the Commissioner of Public Safety if the
application is for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license or an on-sale wine
license.
§ 118.29 HEARING AND ISSUANCE.
   The Council shall investigate all facts set out in the application and not
investigated in the preliminary or comprehensive background and financial
investigations. Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or
against the granting of the license. After the investigation and hearing, the
Council shall in its sound discretion grant or deny the application. No license
shall become effective until the proof of financial security has been approved
by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
§ 118.30 RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Each license shall be issued only to the applicant for the premises
described in the application.
   (B)   Not more than 1 license shall be directly or indirectly issued within
the city to any 1 person.
   (C)   No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any premises
on which taxes, assessments, utility charges, service charges, or other
financial claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid.
   (D)   No license shall be issued for any place or any business ineligible
for a license under state law.
   (E)   No license shall be issued to any person who is not a resident of the
state. If the applicant is a corporation, all of the shareholders shall be
residents of the state. The provisions of this division (E) shall not apply to
any license existing on the effective date of this chapter or to the renewal of
an existing license.
(Am. Ord. 88, passed 2-4-2013)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.31 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   The failure of a licensee to meet any one of the conditions of the license
specified below shall result in a suspension of the license until the condition
is met.
   (A)   Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of the place of business
and the conditions of sobriety and order in it. The act of any employee on the
licensed premises is deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the licensee
shall be liable to all penalties provided by this chapter and the law equally
with the employee.
   (B)   Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health officer, city
employee, or any other person designated by the Council to conduct compliance
checks and to otherwise enter, inspect, and search the premises of the licensee
during business hours, and after business hours during the time when customers
remain on the premises, without a warrant.
   (C)   No on-sale establishment shall display liquor to the public during
hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited.
   (D)   Compliance with financial responsibility requirements of state law and
of this chapter is a continuing condition of any license.
(Am. Ord. 109, passed 6-6-2016; Am. Ord. 132, passed 4-11-2022) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.32 HOURS AND DAYS OF SALE.
   (A)   The hours of operation and days of sale shall be those set by M.S. §
340A.504, as it may be amended from time to time, except that the City Council
may, by resolution or ordinance, provide for more restrictive hours than state
law allows.
   (B)   No off-sale shall be made before 8:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on any
day. No person shall consume nor shall any on-sale licensee permit any
consumption of intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor in an on-sale licensed
premises more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.
   (C)   No sale of beer shall be made on any Sunday between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 8:00 a.m. No sale shall be made between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:
00 a.m. on any other day. No on-sale licensee shall permit any glass, bottle,
or other container containing intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor to remain
upon any table, bar, stool, or other place where customers are served, more
than 30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.
   (D)   No person, other than the licensee and any employee, shall remain on
the on-sale licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale
can legally occur.
   (E)   Any violation of any condition of this section may be grounds for
revocation or suspension of the license.
(Am. Ord. 71, passed 9-4-2007; Am. Ord. 72, passed 9-4-2007; Am. Ord. 88,
passed 2-4-2013; Am. Ord. 101, passed 6-1-2015) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.33 MINORS ON PREMISES.
   (A)   No person under the age of 18 years shall be employed in any rooms
constituting the place in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2% malt liquor are
sold at retail on sale, except that persons under the age of 18 may be employed
as musicians or to perform the duties of a bus person or dishwashing services
in places defined as a restaurant, hotel, motel or other multi-purpose building
serving food in rooms in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2% malt liquor are
sold at retail on sale.
   (B)   No person under the age of 21 years may enter a licensed establishment
except to work, consume meals on premises that qualify as a restaurant, or
attend social functions that are held in a portion of the premises where liquor
is not sold.
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.34 RESTRICTIONS ON PURCHASE AND CONSUMPTION.
   No person shall mix or prepare liquor for consumption in any public place of
business unless it has a license to sell on-sale, or a permit from the
Commissioner of Public Safety under the provisions of M.S. § 340A.414, as it
may be amended from time to time, which has been approved by the Council, and
no person shall consume liquor in any such place.
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.35 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Council shall either suspend for a period not to exceed 60 days or
revoke any liquor license upon finding that the licensee has failed to comply
with any applicable statute, regulation, or provision of this chapter relating
to liquor. Except in cases of lapse of proof of financial responsibility, no
suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been afforded
an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act,
M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.70, as it may be amended from time to time. The Council may
act as the hearing body under that act, or it may contract with the Office of
Hearing Examiners for a hearing officer.
   (B)   The following are the minimum periods of suspension or revocation
which shall be imposed by the Council for violations of the provisions of this
chapter or M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time or any rules
promulgated under that chapter as they may be amended from time to time:
      (1)   For commission of a felony related to the licensed activity, sale
of alcoholic beverages while the license is under suspension, sale of
intoxicating liquor where the only license is for 3.2% malt liquor, or
violation of §
118.04, the license shall be revoked.
      (2)   The license shall be suspended by the Council after a finding under
division (A) that the licensee has failed to comply with any applicable
statute, rule, or provision of this chapter for at least the minimum periods as
follows:
         (a)   For the first violation within any 3-year period, at least 1-day
suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed.
         (b)   For a second violation within any 3-year period, at least 3
consecutive days’ suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties
which may be imposed.
         (c)   For the third violation within any 3-year period, at least 7
consecutive days’ suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties
which may be imposed.
         (d)   For a fourth violation within any 3-year period, the license
shall be revoked.
      (3)   The Council shall select the day or days during which the license
will be suspended.
   (C)   Lapse of required proof of financial responsibility shall effect an
immediate suspension of any license issued pursuant to this chapter or state
law without further action of the Council. Notice of cancellation or lapse of a
current liquor liability policy shall also constitute notice to the licensee of
the impending suspension of the license. The holder of a license who has
received notice of lapse of required insurance or of suspension or revocation
of a license may request a hearing thereon and, if a request is made in writing
to the Clerk, a hearing before the Council shall be granted within 10 days. Any
suspension under this division (B) shall continue until the Council determines
that the financial responsibility requirements of state law and this chapter
have again been met.
   (D)   The provisions of §
118.99 pertaining to administrative penalty may be imposed in addition to or in
lieu of any suspension or revocation under this chapter.
Penalty, see § 118.99
MUNICIPAL LIQUOR STORES
§ 118.50 APPLICATION OF THIS SUBCHAPTER.
   This subchapter, consisting of §§
118.50 through
118.55, applies only to a city that has in existence on the effective date of
this chapter a municipal liquor store.
§ 118.51 EXISTING MUNICIPAL STORES CONTINUED.
   If the city has in existence on the effective date of this chapter a
municipal liquor store for the sale of intoxicating liquor, the store is
continued. Except as provided in §
118.55, no intoxicating liquor may be sold at retail elsewhere in the city.
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.52 LOCATION. 
   The municipal liquor store shall be located at a suitable place in the city
as the Council determines by motion. However, no premises upon which taxes,
assessments, or other public charges are delinquent shall be leased for
municipal liquor store purposes. The Council shall have the right to establish
additional off-sale and on-sale stores at other locations as it may, from time
to time, by motion, determine.
§ 118.53 OPERATION.
   (A)   Manager. The municipal liquor store shall be in the immediate charge
of a Liquor Store Manager selected by the Council and paid compensation as is
fixed by the Council. The Manager shall not be a person who would be prohibited
by law or any provision of this chapter from being eligible for an intoxicating
liquor license. The Manager shall furnish a surety bond to the city,
conditioned upon the faithful discharge of the duties of the office, in a sum
as specified by the Council. The bond premium may be paid by the city or the
Manager, in the discretion of the Council. The Manager shall operate the
municipal liquor store under the Council's direction and shall perform those
duties in connection with the store as may be established by the Council. The
Manager shall be responsible to the Council for the conduct of the store in
full compliance with this chapter and with the laws relating to the sale of
intoxicating liquor and 3.2% malt liquor.
   (B)   Other employees. The Council may also appoint additional employees as
may be required and shall fix their compensation. All employees, including the
Manager, shall hold their positions at the pleasure of the Council. No person
under the age of 18 shall be employed in the store. The Council may require the
employees to furnish surety bonds conditioned for the faithful discharge of
their duties in a sum as specified by the Council. The premium on the bond may
be paid by the city or the employees, as the Council determines.
   (C)   Municipal liquor store fund. All of the revenues received from the
operation of a municipal liquor store shall be deposited in a municipal liquor
store fund from which all ordinary operating expenses, including compensation
of the Manager and employees, shall be paid. Surpluses accumulating in the fund
may be transferred to the general fund of the city or to any other appropriate
fund of the city by resolution of the Council, and may be expended for any
municipal purpose. The handling of municipal liquor store receipts and
disbursements shall comply with the procedure prescribed by law and charter for
the receipts and disbursements of city funds generally.
   (D)   Financial statement. The Council shall provide within 90 days
following the end of the calendar year for publication a balance sheet using
generally accepted accounting procedures and a statement of operations of the
municipal liquor store for that year. The balance sheet and statement shall be
published in accordance with the provisions of M.S. § 471.6985, as it may be
amended from time to time.
   (E)   Hours of operation. The hours during which the sale of intoxicating
liquor may be sold shall be as provided in §
118.32. No person, other than the Manager or a store employee, may remain in
the municipal liquor store longer than 1/2 hour after the time when the sale of
intoxicating liquor must cease.
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.54 PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   The city shall demonstrate proof of financial responsibility required by
licensees of retail intoxicating liquor establishments under the provisions of
M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 118.55 ISSUANCE OF OTHER LICENSES.
   (A)   On-sale licenses for the sale of intoxicating liquor. The Council may
issue in its sound discretion on-sale licenses to a club under M.S. § 340A.404,
Subd. 1(4), as it may be amended from time to time. If the voters have
authorized their issuance at a special election called for that purpose, the
Council may issue in its sound discretion on-sale liquor licenses to hotels and
restaurants. The number of on-sale licenses issued under this section is
governed by M.S. § 340A.413, as it may be amended from time to time, as limited
by the provisions of this chapter. The issuance of these licenses is governed
by the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Off-sale licenses for the sale of intoxicating liquor. State law does
not authorize the issuance of off-sale licenses for the sale of intoxicating
liquor by cities which operate a municipal liquor dispensary.
   (C)   On- and off-sale 3.2% malt liquor licenses. The Council may issue 3.2%
malt liquor licenses in its sound discretion as provided in this chapter.
   (D)   Wine licenses. The Council may issue in its sound discretion wine
licenses to a restaurant under M.S. § 340A.404, Subd. 5, as it may be amended
from time to time. Any such wine licenses issued by the Council shall authorize
the sale of wine all days of the week, including Sunday. For purposes of this
section, WINE shall be defined as wine of up to 14% alcohol by volume that is
served with the consumption of food. Any restaurant licensed to sell wine under
this section may permit a person purchasing a full bottle of wine in
conjunction with a purchase of a meal to remove the bottle upon leaving the
licensed premises, provided that the bottle has been opened and its contents
partially consumed.
   (E)   Off-sale license. A microdistillery may be issued a license by the
local licensing authority for off-sale of distilled spirits. The license may
allow the sale of one .375 milliliter bottle per customer per day of product
manufactured on-site, subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   No off-sale shall be made before 8:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on
any day. No off-sale shall be made on Sundays.
      (2)   No brand of distilled spirits may be sold pursuant to this section
unless the brand is also available for distribution by wholesalers.
   (F)   Cocktail room license. A microdistillery may be issued a cocktail room
license by the local licensing authority for the on-sale of distilled liquor
produced by the microdistiller for consumption on the premises or adjacent to
the distillery location owned by the distiller, subject to the following
requirements:
      (1)   Such a license will remain subject to the provisions of M.S. Ch.
340A and other applicable city licenses.
      (2)   A distiller may only have one cocktail room license granted by the
licensing authority.
      (3)   The licensing authority shall impose a licensing fee on the
distiller holding a microdistillery cocktail room license.
(Am. Ord. 95, passed 5-5-2014; Am. Ord. 101, passed 6-1-2015; Am. Ord. 111,
passed 3-6-2017)
§ 118.99 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or M.S. Ch. 340A
as it may be amended from time to time or any rules promulgated under that
chapter as they may be amended from time to time is guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction shall be punished as provided by law.
   (B)   The Council shall impose a civil penalty of up to $2,000 for each
violation of M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, and of this
chapter. Conviction of a violation in a court of law is not required in order
for the Council to impose the civil penalty. A hearing under the Administrative
Procedures Act, M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.70, as it may be amended from time to time,
is not required before the penalty is imposed, but the Council shall hold a
hearing on the proposed violation and the proposed penalty and hear any person
who wishes to speak. Non-payment of the penalty is grounds for suspension or
revocation of the license. The following is the minimum schedule of presumptive
civil penalties which must be imposed in addition to any suspension unless the
licenses is revoked:
      (1)   For the first violation within any 3-year period, $500.
      (2)   For the second violation within any 3-year period, $1,000.
      (3)   For the third and subsequent violations within any 3-year period,
$2,000.
   (C)   The term “violation” as used in this section includes any and all
violations of the provisions of this chapter, or of M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be
amended from time to time or any rules promulgated under that chapter as they
may be amended from time to time. The number of violations shall be determined
on the basis of the history of violations for the preceding 3-year period.
Revocation shall occur within 60 days following a violation for which
revocation is imposed.
CHAPTER 119: CIGARETTE SALES
Section
   
119.01   License required
   
119.02   License fee
   
119.03   Restrictions
§ 119.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall directly or indirectly or by means of any device keep for
retail sale, sell at retail or otherwise dispose of any cigarette, cigarette
paper or cigarette wrapper at any place in the City of Osakis unless a license
therefor has been obtained from the Council on application to the Clerk/
Treasurer.
(Am. Ord. 37, passed 12-1-1997)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 119.02 LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   The fee for every license shall be set by the City Council from time
to time.
   (B)   Every license shall expire on January 15 in each year; provided that
if application is made after January 1, the fee shall be prorated in accordance
with the number of months left in the year, but in no event shall the fee be
less than 1/2 of the regular annual fee.
   (C)   All licenses so granted shall expire on the following January 15.
(Am. Ord. 37, passed 12-1-1997)
§ 119.03 RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No license shall be issued except to a person of good moral character.
No license shall be issued for the sale of cigarettes at a movable place of
business, nor shall any 1 license be issued for the sale of cigarettes at more
than 1 place of business. No person shall sell or give away, or permit any
vending machine to be used to sell, any cigarettes, cigarette paper or
cigarette wrapper to any person below the age of 18 years.
   (B)   One unannounced compliance check will be conducted each year for each
license holder. A minor between the ages of 15 and 18 will be involved in the
compliance check, with permission of parent or guardian.
   (C)   Vending machines are prohibited in all locations where minors are
permitted to enter.
   (D)   Open displays of single packages of cigarettes and smoking tobacco are
not permitted without the assistance of employees of license holder.
(Am. Ord. 37, passed 12-1-1997)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 120: TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING
Section
   
120.01   Definitions
   
120.02   Prohibitions
   
120.03   Application for license; fees; issuance
   
120.04   Inspection of facilities
   
120.05   Suspension or revocation of license
   
120.06   Consent for performing procedures on persons under 18
   
120.07   Prohibitions relating to persons under 18
   
120.08   Defenses to violations
   120.09   Training standards; records; safety and sanitation; equipment
§ 120.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD OF HEALTH.
      (1)   A Board of Health established under the provisions of M.S. §
145A.03, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   If the city does not have a BOARD OF HEALTH, then this term means
the authority having the duties of a BOARD OF HEALTH in the city, including but
not limited to the COUNTY BOARD OF HEALTH.
   BODY PIERCING. Includes ear piercing except when the ear piercing procedure
is performed with an ear piercing gun.
   BUSINESS. Any entity that provides services for compensation.
   EAR PIERCING GUN. A mechanical device that pierces the ear by forcing a
disposable single-use stud or solid needle through the ear.
   PARENT or GUARDIAN. Parent, guardian or other adult person having the
primary care or custody of the minor.
   TATTOO. Has the same meaning given in M.S. § 609.2246, Subd. 2, as it may be
amended from time to time.
§ 120.02 PROHIBITIONS.
   No person shall do any of the following:
   (A)   Operate a business that offers tattooing or body piercing services
unless the City Council issues it a license to do so;
   (B)   Perform a tattooing or body piercing procedure in a manner that does
not meet the safety and sanitation standards established by this chapter and
any federal, state or local laws, rules or regulations; or
   (C)   Perform a tattooing procedure, body piercing procedure, or ear
piercing procedure with an ear piercing gun in a manner that does not meet the
standards for appropriate disinfection and sterilization of invasive equipment
or parts of equipment used in performing the procedures established by this
chapter and any federal, state or local laws, rules or regulations.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 120.03 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEES; ISSUANCE.
   (A)   A person seeking approval to operate a business that offers tattooing
or body piercing services shall apply to the city on forms the city or the
Board of Health shall prescribe and provide.
   (B)   The applicant shall submit all information the city and the Board of
Health determines is necessary to process the application.
   (C)   The applicant shall include the fee in an amount as set by Council
from time to time, or as established by the Board of Health.
   (D)   To receive approval to offer tattooing or body piercing services, a
business must demonstrate to the Board of Health the ability to meet the
requirements established by this chapter and any federal, state or local laws,
rules or regulations for safe performance of the tattooing or body piercing
procedures, training of the individuals who perform the procedures, and
maintenance of records.
   (E)   If the Board of Health determines, following an inspection conducted
under §
120.04, that a business meets the requirements for approval, it shall so advise
the city.
   (F)   The City Council may either approve or deny the license, or it may
delay action for a reasonable period of time as necessary to complete any
investigation of the application or the applicant it deems necessary.
   (G)   If the City Council shall approve the license, the City Clerk/
Treasurer shall issue the license to the applicant.
   (H)   If the City Council denies the license, notice of the denial shall be
given to the applicant along with notice of the applicant’s right to appeal the
City Council’s decision.
   (I)   Approval remains valid for 1 year unless earlier suspended or revoked
under §
120.05 and shall expire each year on January 15.
   (J)   A business’s approval may be renewed. Approval is not transferable.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 120.04 INSPECTION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   The Board of Health, or a person or another body designed by the city,
shall conduct at least 1 inspection of a business prior to approving the
business under §
120.03 to offer tattooing or body piercing services.
   (B)   The Board may conduct additional inspections as necessary for the
approval process.
   (C)   The Board of Health may inspect an approved business at any time the
Board considers necessary.
   (D)   In an inspection, the Board of Health shall be given access to the
business’s premises and to all records relevant to the inspection.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 120.05 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The City Council may suspend or revoke the approval of a business to
offer tattooing or body piercing services at any time it determines that the
business is being operated in violation of this chapter or any federal, state
or local laws, rules or regulations.
   (B)   Proceedings for suspensions and revocations shall be conducted in
accordance with rules adopted in
Chapter 110 for the suspension or revocation of business licenses.
§ 120.06 CONSENT FOR PERFORMING PROCEDURES ON PERSONS UNDER 18.
   (A)   No person shall perform a tattooing procedure, body piercing
procedure, or ear piercing procedure with an ear piercing gun on an individual
who is under 18 years of age unless consent has been given by the individual’s
parent, guardian or custodian in accordance with division (C) below.
   (B)   The consent must include both the custodial and non-custodial parents,
where applicable.
   (C)   A parent, guardian or custodian of an individual under age 18 who
desires to give consent to a business to perform on the individual under age 18
a tattooing procedure, body piercing procedure, or ear piercing procedure
performed with an ear piercing gun shall do both of the following:
      (1)   Appear in person at the business at the time the procedure is
performed; and
      (2)   Sign a document provided by the business that explains the manner
in which the procedure will be performed and methods for proper care of the
affected body area following performance of the procedure.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 120.07 PROHIBITIONS RELATING TO PERSONS UNDER 18.
   (A)   (1)   Unless consent has been given in accordance with §
120.06, no individual who is under age 18 shall obtain or attempt to obtain a
tattooing service, body piercing service, or ear piercing service performed
with an ear piercing gun.
      (2)   No individual who is under age 18 shall knowingly show or give
false information concerning the individual’s name, age, or other
identification for the purpose of obtaining a tattooing service, body piercing
service, or ear piercing service performed with an ear piercing gun.
   (B)   (1)   No individual shall knowingly show or give any false information
as to the name, age, or other identification of an individual who is under age
18 for the purpose of obtaining for the individual under age 18 a tattooing
service, body piercing service, or ear piercing service performed with an ear
piercing gun.
      (2)   No individual shall impersonate the parent, guardian or custodian
of an individual who is under age 18 for the purpose of obtaining for the
individual under age 18 a tattooing service, body piercing service, or ear
piercing service performed with an ear piercing gun.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 120.08 DEFENSES TO VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   An operator or employee of a business that performs tattooing
services, body piercing services, or ear piercing services performed with an
ear piercing gun may not be found guilty of a violation of §
120.06(A) or any federal, state or local laws, rules or regulations in which
age is an element of the provisions if:
      (1)   The individual obtaining a tattooing service, body piercing
service, or ear piercing service performed with an ear piercing gun, at the
time of so doing, exhibited to the operator or employee of the tattooing, body
piercing or ear piercing business a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
an identification card issued under state law showing that the individual was
then at least age 18;
      (2)   The operator or employee made a bona fide effort to ascertain the
true age of the individual obtaining a tattooing, body piercing, or ear
piercing service by checking the identification presented, at the time of the
service, to ascertain that the description on the identification compared with
the appearance of the individual and that the identification had not been
altered in any way; and
      (3)   The operator or employee had reason to believe that the individual
obtaining a tattooing, body piercing, or ear piercing service was at least age
18.
   (B)   In any action or proceeding before a court of record in which a
defense is raised under this section, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or the
Registrar’s Deputy who issued a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the
records, in the Registrar’s or Deputy’s possession, of the issuance in lieu of
the testimony of the personnel of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles at the hearing,
action or proceeding.
§ 12.09 TRAINING STANDARDS; RECORDS; SAFETY AND SANITATION; EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Each operator of a business that offers tattooing or body piercing
services shall do all of the following:
      (1)   Maintain procedures for ensuring that the individuals who perform
tattooing or body piercing procedures are adequately trained to perform the
procedures properly;
      (2)   With respect to tattooing services, maintain written records that
include the color, manufacturer and lot number of each pigment used for each
tattoo performed;
      (3)   Comply with the safety and sanitation requirements for preventing
transmission of infectious diseases, as established in any federal, state or
local laws, rules or regulations;
      (4)   Require the individuals who perform tattooing and body piercing
procedures to disinfect and sterilize all invasive equipment or parts of
equipment used in performing the procedures by using methods that meet the
disinfection and sterilization requirements established in any federal, state
or local laws, rules or regulations; and
      (5)   Ensure that weekly tests of the business’s heat sterilization
devices are performed to determine whether the devices are functioning
properly. In having the devices tested, the operator of the business shall use
a biological monitoring system that indicates whether the devices are killing
microorganisms. If a test indicates that a device is not functioning properly,
the operator shall take immediate remedial action to ensure that heat
sterilization is being accomplished. The operator shall maintain documentation
that the weekly tests are being performed. To comply with the documentation
requirement, the documents must consist of a log that indicates the date on
which each test is performed and the name of the person who performed the test
or, if a test was conducted by an independent testing entity, a copy of the
entity’s testing report. The operator shall maintain records of each test
performed for at least 2 years.
   (B)   Each operator of a business that offers ear piercing services
performed with an ear piercing gun shall require the individuals who perform
the ear piercing services to disinfect and sterilize the ear piercing gun by
using chemical solutions that meet the disinfection and sterilization
requirements established in any federal, state or local laws, rules or
regulations.
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 121: GARAGE AND RUMMAGE SALES
Section
   
121.01   Definition
   
121.02   Restrictions and prohibitions
   
121.03   Exceptions
§ 121.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARAGE OR RUMMAGE SALE. Any display and sale of personal property, conducted
on premises located in any residentially-zoned district by the occupant and
which garage or rummage sale does not require a business license or make
taxable sales, leases or services.
§ 121.02 RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   None of the items offered for sale shall have been obtained for resale
or received on consignment for sale.
   (B)   Any garage or rummage sale (community or neighborhood sale) shall be
conducted solely within the boundaries of the property owned or occupied by the
occupant who is conducting the sale.
   (C)   There shall be no more than 4 garage or rummage sales conducted at any
1 premises during any period of 12 calendar months.
   (D)   No garage or rummage sale shall be conducted during any part of more
than 3 consecutive days.
   (E)   No garage or rummage sale may be conducted before 7:00 a.m. or after
8:00 p.m.
   (F)   Any related signage shall be limited to the premises and to other
residential property, provided permission from the property owner is obtained,
and shall be removed at the termination of the sale. Signs shall be limited to
4 square feet.
   (G)   There shall be no more than 2 consecutive sales with 30-day separation
between all others.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 121.03 EXCEPTIONS.
   This chapter shall not apply to any sale under court order, nor to any bona
fide auction sale, nor to a sale of farm or garden products by the person
producing same.
CHAPTER 122: DANCES AND SPECIAL EVENTS
Section
Public Dances
   
122.01   Regulation of public dances
   
122.02   Definitions
   
122.03   Application for permit
   
122.04   Insurance
   
122.05   Location
   
122.06   Permit to be posted
   
122.07   Liquor license required
   
122.08   Licensed police officer presence
   
122.09   Hours
   
122.10   Minors prohibited
   
122.11   Certain behavior prohibited
   
122.12   Lighting
   
122.13   Noise
Special Events
   
122.25   Purpose and findings
   
122.26   Definitions
   
122.27   Permit required
   
122.28   Application for permit
   
122.29   Issuance of permit, conditions and posting
   
122.30   Exceptions to the permit
PUBLIC DANCES
§ 122.01 REGULATION OF PUBLIC DANCES.
   All public dances held in this city shall be conducted in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 122.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PUBLIC DANCE. Any dance where the general public may participate, whether or
not a charge for admission for dancing is made.
   PUBLIC DANCING PLACE. Any room or space or other area, whether indoors or
outside, which is open to the general public for the purpose of participating
in public dancing.
§ 122.03 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   Any person desiring a permit to hold a public dance in this city shall
submit an application for a permit on the form provided by the City Clerk/
Treasurer, submitted to the City Clerk/Treasurer at least ten days before the
date of the proposed dance.
   (B)   The application shall set forth the name and address of the applicant,
who shall be the person responsible for conducting the public dance, and any
business, committee or organization sponsoring the dance, the place where the
dance is to be held, the date of the dance and the time of its beginning and
end.
   (C)   Proof of all insurance required by this chapter shall be submitted
with the application and no permit shall be issued until proof of insurance has
been received. A request for any use of a city building or other city property
shall be included with the permit application, and no permit shall be issued
until the fees for the use of the city building or other city property have
also been paid.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 122.04 INSURANCE.
   All insurance policies required for the event, including any insurance
required by law for the sale of alcoholic beverages, shall list the city as a
named insured and provide a provision to defend, indemnify and hold harmless
the city and any of its employees from any claims arising from the event.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 122.05 LOCATION.
   The applicant shall make sure that adequate parking is available for the
persons wishing to attend the dance and make sure that the location is safe and
accessible. This information shall also be provided to the City Clerk/Treasurer
before a permit shall be issued.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 122.06 PERMIT TO BE POSTED.
   When a permit is issued, the holder of the permit shall post the permit in a
prominent location on the premises on which the dance is to be held during the
time the dance is occurring. The applicant shall be present at all times while
the dance is occurring.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 122.07 LIQUOR LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall give, hold, conduct or permit any public dance where liquor
will be served, as defined in M.S. Ch. 340A, without obtaining a license from
the city.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 122.08 LICENSED PEACE OFFICER PRESENCE.
   No public dance shall occur without at least one licensed peace officer or
more, if more are required under the criteria established by the City Council,
who shall be present at the public dancing place during the duration of the
dance and after the dance, until all of the participants have left the public
dancing place.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 122.09 HOURS.
   No public dance shall occur between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 122.10 MINORS PROHIBITED.
   No person under the age of 21 shall be allowed to be present by the permit
holder or any peace officer at a public dance where alcohol is sold or
consumed, unless accompanied by a parent or guardian.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 122.11 CERTAIN BEHAVIOR PROHIBITED.
   No person present at any public dance shall engage in any disorderly
conduct, as defined by M.S. § 609.72, as it may be amended from time to time,
and any disorderly person shall be immediately removed from the dance by the
peace officer present at the public dancing place. Should a substantial number
of persons at the public dance engage in disorderly conduct, the peace officer
present shall terminate the dance and remove all persons from the public
dancing place.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 122.12 LIGHTING.
   (A)   In order to protect the safety of persons attending a public dance,
public dancing places shall be adequately illuminated and dancing therein while
lights are extinguished, dimmed or turned low so as to give inadequate or
imperfect illumination is hereby prohibited.
   (B)   All exit areas shall be illuminated at all times during the public
dance with light having intensity of not less than 1 footcandle at floor level.
Illumination of less than 0.5 foot-candles in any area where dancing is
occurring, permitted or encouraged is prohibited.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 122.13 NOISE.
   All public dances shall be subject to the provisions of this code regulating
noise.
Penalty, see § 10.99
SPECIAL EVENTS
§ 122.25 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of this city by regulating the time, place and manner
of conduct of special events and by establishing permit requirements for
conducting special events as such are herein defined.
   (B)   The City Council finds that special events often exceed the city’s
capacity to provide usual city services. These city services include, but are
not limited to sanitary, fire, police and utility services.
   (C)   The City Council also finds these regulations necessary to ensure that
events are conducted with sufficient consideration given to public safety
issues, including, among other things, the impact of these events on parking
and vehicular traffic within the city.
§ 122.26 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. A natural person, association, organization, club, group formed for
a common purpose, partnership of any kind, limited liability company,
corporation or any other legal entity.
   SPECIAL EVENTS. An outdoor gathering of at least 25 individuals, whether on
public or private property, assembled with a common purpose for a period of 1
hour or longer. SPECIAL EVENTS include, but are not limited to concerts, fairs,
carnivals, circuses, parades, flea markets, marathons, walkathons, festivals,
races, bicycle events, celebrations or any other gathering or events of similar
nature. SPECIAL EVENTS do not include noncommercial events held on private
property, such as graduation parties or social parties.
§ 122.27 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall hold, conduct or participate in a special event within the
city, unless a permit has been issued for the event upon timely written
application made to the city.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 122.28 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   Written application for special event permits must be made at least 30
days in advance of the event’s proposed date in a form prescribed by the City
Council.
   (B)   This application period shall not begin to run until a complete
application has been filed with the city.
   (C)   Application forms shall be made available in the office of the City
Administrator.
   (D)   In addition to the fee, the applicant shall pay all additional costs
incurred by the city as a direct result of the special event. Failure to
provide a complete application or to pay the fee, as herein required, is
sufficient reason to deny the special event permit.
§ 122.29 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT, CONDITIONS AND POSTING.
   (A)   Special event permits will be issued upon City Council approval. The
Council may attach reasonable conditions to the permit as are deemed necessary
to protect the health, safety and welfare. These conditions may pertain to any
of the following:
      (1)   Location and hours during which the event may be held;
      (2)   Sanitation/availability of potable water;
      (3)   Security/crowd management;
      (4)   Parking and traffic issues;
      (5)   Emergency and medical services;
      (6)   Clean-up of premises and surrounding area/trash disposal;
      (7)   Insurance;
      (8)   Lighting;
      (9)   Fire service/safety;
      (10)   Temporary construction, barricades/fencing;
      (11)   Removal of advertising/promotional materials;
      (12)   Noise levels;
      (13)   Alcohol consumption; and
      (14)   Any other conditions which the Council deems necessary.
   (B)   Upon Council approval, the City Clerk/Treasurer shall issue a permit
to the person(s) named in the permit application.
   (C)   The permit shall clearly state the conditions, if any, imposed by the
Council.
   (D)   Copies of the permit shall be posted in 3 prominent locations during
the special event.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 122.30 EXCEPTIONS TO THE PERMIT.
   The permit requirement contained in this chapter does not apply to the
following:
   (A)   Special events sponsored and managed by the city;
   (B)   Funerals and funeral processions;
   (C)   The grounds of any school, playground, place of worship, hotel
conference center, stadium, athletic field, arena, auditorium or similar
permanent place of assembly when used for regularly established assembly
purposes.
CHAPTER 123: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
   
123.01   Purpose
   
123.02   Definitions
   
123.98   Violation
§ 123.01 PURPOSE.
   It is declared to be the purpose and intent of this chapter to protect the
public health, safety, welfare and morals of the community as those interests
relate to adult uses as defined herein.
(Ord. 806, passed 12-5-1994)
§ 123.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE. A building or portion of a building used for the barter,
rental or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides,
records, audiotape, videotape or motion picture film if a substantial or
significant portion of those items are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas or the barter, rental or sale of instruments,
devices or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified
sexual activities. SUBSTANTIAL OR SIGNIFICANT PORTION OF ITEMS for purposes of
this chapter, is more than 15% of usable floor area.
   ADULT CABARET. A building or portion of a building used for providing
dancing or other live entertainment, if the building or portion of a building
excludes minors by virtue of age, or if dancing or other live entertainment is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the presentation, display,
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
   ADULT CONVERSATION/RAP PARLOR. A conversation/rap parlor which excludes
minors by reason of age, or which provides the service of engaging in or
listening to conversation, talk or discussion, if the service is distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
   ADULT HEALTH/SPORTS CLUB. A health/sports club which excludes minors by
reason of age, or if the club is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR. A massage parlor which restricts minors by reason of
age, or which provides the service of massage, if the service is distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
   ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A building or portion of a building with
a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material if the
building or portion of a building as a prevailing practice excludes minors by
virtue of age, or if the material is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A building or portion of a building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material is the building or
portion of a building as a prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of
age, or if the material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas for observation by patrons therein.
   ADULT STEAM ROOM/BATHHOUSE FACILITY. A building or portion of a building
used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of
pleasure, bathing, relaxation or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a
cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the building or portion of a building
restricts minors by reason of age or if the service provided by the steam room/
bathhouse facility is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT USES. Adult uses include adult bookstores, adult motion picture
theaters, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult massage parlors, adult
steam room/bathhouse facilities, adult enterprises, businesses or places open
to some or all members of the public at or in which there is an emphasis on the
presentation, display, depiction or description of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas which are capable of being seen by members of the
public.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered:
         (a)   Human genitals;
         (b)   Pubic region;
         (c)   Buttocks; and
         (d)   Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
      (1)   Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal
intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of
unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual
relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual
relationship, and any of the following sexually-orientated acts or conduct:
anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio,
necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphis, zooerasty;
      (2)   Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation,
arousal or tumescence;
      (3)   Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus
or masturbation;
      (4)   Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks
or female breasts;
      (5)   Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude,
clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, and who are engaged in
activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other
physical restraint of any persons;
      (6)   Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually-oriented
contact with an animal by a human being; or
      (7)   Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal
irrigation.
(Ord. 806, passed 12-5-1994)
§ 123.98 VIOLATION.
   (A)   No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall
knowingly or intentionally engage in or cause to be advertised or allow on
their premises adult uses as defined herein.
   (B)   Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity violating
this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 806, passed 12-5-1994)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 124: LOCAL LODGING TAX
Section
   
124.01   Definitions
   
124.02   Imposition of tax
   
124.03   Administration of tax
   
124.04   Collections
   
124.05   Payments and returns
   
124.06   Exceptions and exemptions
   
124.07   Examination of return; adjustments; notices and demands
   
124.08   Refunds
   
124.09   Failure to file a return
   
124.10   Examination of records
   
124.11   Confidential information
   
124.12   Advertising no tax
   
124.13   Use of proceeds
   
124.14   Violations
   
124.15   Appeals
   
124.16   Contract with state
   
124.17   Administration by state
 
   
124.99   Penalty
§ 124.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words when used in this chapter shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the content clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
   LODGING TAX BOARD. The LODGING TAX BOARD, or the appointed agent of the
Board, shall be the Osakis Economic Development Authority.
   OPERATOR. An OPERATOR who provides lodging to others, or any officer, agent,
directors, shareholders, members of employee of the OPERATOR located within the
city limits.
   OSAKIS TOURISM AND VISITOR’S BUREAU. The OSAKIS TOURISM AND VISITOR’S
BUREAU, or the appointed agent of the Bureau, as the city in an area-wide local
lodging tax, hereinafter referred to as “Bureau.”
(Ord. 517.01, passed 5-4-1992; Am. Ord. 102, passed 7-6-2015; Am. Ord. 134,
passed 3-13-2023)
§ 124.02 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   Persuant to authority granted under M.S. § 469.190 there is hereby imposed a
tax of 3% on the rent charged by an operator for providing lodging to any
person. The tax shall be stated and charged separately, and shall be collected
by the operator from the lodge. The tax collected by the operator shall be a
debt owned by the operator to the city it shall be a lien on the real estate to
which it applies, and shall be extinguished only by payment to the city. In no
case shall the tax imposed by this section upon an operator exceed the amount
of tax the operator is authorized and required by this chapter to collect from
a lodger.
(Ord. 517.01, passed 5-4-1992; Am. Ord. 102, passed 7-6-2015) Penalty, see §
124.99
§ 124.03 ADMINISTRATION OF TAX.
   (A)   Administration. The city shall administer and enforce the assessment
and collection of the tax imposed by this chapter. The city shall cause to be
prepared blank forms for the returns required by this chapter, and shall
distribute the same throughout the city and furnish them on application, but
failure to receive or secure them shall not relieve any person from any
obligation authorized to adopt rules and regulations for the administration,
collection or enforcement of the tax, from time to time and as they may be
amended, which rules or regulations are hereby adopted by reference.
   (B)   Costs of administration. Not more than 5% of the gross proceeds from
the tax may be retained by the city for the purpose of administration
collection and enforcement.
(Ord. 517.01, passed 5-4-1992; Am. Ord. 102, passed 7-6-2015) Penalty, see §
124.99
§ 124.04 COLLECTIONS.
   Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter at the time the
rent is paid. The tax collection shall be deemed to be held in trust by the
operator for the city. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the
rent charged for the lodging, and those persons paying the tax shall receive a
receipt of payment from the operator.
(Ord. 517.01, passed 5-4-1992; Am. Ord. 102, passed 7-6-2015) Penalty, see §
124.99
§ 124.05 PAYMENT AND RETURNS.
   (A)   The tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the operator to the
city monthly, not later than 25 days after the end of the month in which the
taxes were collected, or as otherwise provided by rules or regulations of the
Board. At the time of payment, the operator shall submit a return on forms and
containing information as the city may require.
   (B)   The return shall contain the following minimum information:
      (1)   The total amount of rent collected for lodging during the period
covered by the return;
      (2)   The amount of tax required to be collected and due for the period;
      (3)   The signature of the person filing the return, or that of his or
her agent duly authorized in writing;
      (4)   The period covered by the return;
      (5)   The amount of uncollectable rental charges subject to the lodging
tax;
      (6)   A copy of the Minnesota State sales tax and use tax return
submitted by the operator for the period covered by the return; and
      (7)   Such other information as the city may, from time to time, in its
discretion, require of the operator to verify the lodging tax due.
   (C)   The operator may offset against the tax payable with respect to any
reporting period, the amount of tax imposed by this chapter previously paid as
a result of any transaction, the consideration for which became uncollectable
during that reporting period, but only in proportion to the portion of the
consideration that became uncollectable.
(Ord. 517.01, passed 5-4-1992; Am. Ord. 102, passed 7-6-2015) Penalty, see §
124.99
§ 124.06 EXCEPTIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Exceptions. No tax shall be imposed on rent for lodging paid by an
officer of employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express
provisions of Federal law or international treaty.
   (B)   Exemptions. An exemption shall be granted to any person as to whom or
whose occupancy it is beyond the power of the city to tax. No exemption shall
be granted except upon a claim made therefore at the time the rent is
collected. The claim shall be made, in writing and under penalty of perjury, on
forms provided by the Board. All such claims shall be forwarded to the Board
when the returns and collections are submitted as required by this chapter.
(Ord. 517.01, passed 5-4-1992; Am. Ord. 102, passed 7-6-2015) Penalty, see §
124.99
§ 124.07 EXAMINATION OF RETURN; ADJUSTMENTS; NOTICES AND DEMANDS.
   The city shall provide a monthly aggregate total of the amount of lodging
tax collected to the Board, and shall disburse the net proceeds to the Bureau
monthly. The city shall also provide the Board monthly with a list, stating the
name of any lodging facility operator that has failed to pay its monthly tax
and the amount of tax if known. Upon notice of any violation as outlined in §
124.14, the city shall contact or attempt to contact the lodging facility
operator once, and provide written notice by first class mail, postage prepaid.
If violation has not been paid or otherwise resolved within 30 days of written
notice, the Board shall instruct the city to commence enforcement proceedings.
(Ord. 517.01, passed 5-4-1992; Am. Ord. 102, passed 7-6-2015)
§ 124.08 REFUNDS.
   Any person may apply to the Board for a refund of tax paid for a prescribed
period in excess of the amount legally due for that period, provided that no
application for refund shall be considered unless filed within 1 year after the
tax was paid, or within 1 year from the filing of the return, whichever period
is the longer. The Board shall examine the claim and make and file written
findings thereon, denying or allowing the claim, in whole or in part, and shall
mail a notice thereof by registered mail to the person at the address stated
upon the return. If the claim is allowed in whole or in part, the Board shall
credit the amount of the allowance against any taxes due under this chapter
from the claimant and the balance of the allowance, if any, shall be paid by
the Board to the claimant.
(Ord. 517.01, passed 5-4-1992; Am. Ord. 102, passed 7-6-2015)
§ 124.09 FAILURE TO FILE A RETURN.
   (A)   If any operator required by this chapter to file a return shall fail
to do so within the time prescribed, or shall make, willfully or otherwise, an
incorrect, false or fraudulent return, the operator shall, upon written notice
and demand, immediately file the return or corrected return for the person from
any knowledge and information as the city can obtain, and assess a tax on the
basis thereof, which tax (less any payments theretofore made on account of the
tax for the taxable period covered by the return) shall be immediately paid
upon written notice and demand. Any return or assessment made by the city shall
be prima facie correct and valid, and the person shall have the burden of
establishing its incorrectness or invalidity in any action or proceeding in
respect thereto.
   (B)   If any portion of a tax imposed by this chapter, including penalties
thereon, is not paid within 30 days after it is required to be paid, the Board
shall direct the institution of legal action as may be necessary to recover the
amount due. The city may certify the tax as a lien against the real property on
which the lodging establishment is located. If it retains an attorney in
connection with unpaid taxes, penalties or interest, the Board shall be
entitled to recover from any person obligated hereunder all reasonable attorney
fees and costs expended.
(Ord. 517.01, passed 5-4-1992; Am. Ord. 97, passed 9-2-2014; Am. Ord. 102,
passed 7-6-2015) Penalty, see §
124.99
§ 124.10 EXAMINATION OF RECORDS.
   The Board, the City Clerk, or other designated agents authorized in writing,
may examine the books, papers and records of any operator in order to verify
the accuracy of any return made, or if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
as provided in this chapter. Every operator is directed and required to give to
the Board, or to its duly authorized agent or employee, the means, facilities
and opportunity for examinations and investigations as are hereby authorized.
(Ord. 517.01, passed 5-4-1992; Am. Ord. 102, passed 7-6-2015) Penalty, see §
124.99
§ 124.11 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   No officer or employee of the city nor the Board shall divulge or
otherwise make known in any manner any particulars disclosed in any return
required by this chapter, or any information concerning the affairs of the
person making the return acquired from the person's records, officers or
employees while performing an examination or audit, except in connection with a
proceeding involving taxes due under this chapter from the person making a
return. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit the Board from
publishing statistics so classified as not to disclose the identity of
particular returns and the contents thereof.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) above, the Board may
enter into an agreement providing for the administration and collection of the
tax imposed by this chapter with the Minnesota Department of Revenue and its
officers and agents.
(Ord. 517.01, passed 5-4-1992; Am. Ord. 102, passed 7-6-2015)
§ 124.12 ADVERTISING NO TAX.
   It shall be unlawful for any operator to advertise, hold out or state to the
public or any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part
thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be
added to the rent or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded,
except that, in computing the tax to be collected, amounts of tax less than 1/
2 of 1 cent may be disregarded, and amounts of tax with 1/2 cent or more may be
considered an additional cent.
(Ord. 517.01, passed 5-4-1992; Am. Ord. 102, passed 7-6-2015) Penalty, see §
124.99
§ 124.13 USE OF PROCEEDS.
   All gross proceeds less administrative costs, and not less than 95% of the
gross proceeds obtained from the collection of tax pursuant to this chapter,
shall be used to fund a Tourism Promotion Bureau for the purpose of marketing
and promoting the area as a tourist center.
(Ord. 517.01, passed 5-4-1992; Am. Ord. 102, passed 7-6-2015)
§ 124.14 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person who shall refuse to make a return required by this chapter, who
shall refuse to pay the tax, who shall refuse to remit the taxes collected or
any penalty or interest imposed by this chapter, who shall refuse to permit the
Board, the city or any duly authorized employee to examine the books, records
and papers under the person's control, who shall willfully make any incomplete,
false or fraudulent return, or who shall attempt to do anything whatsoever to
avoid a full disclosure of the amount of taxes imposed by this chapter, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 517.01, passed 5-4-1992; Am. Ord. 102, passed 7-6-2015) Penalty, see §
124.99
§ 124.15 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any operator aggrieved by any notice, order or determination made by
the Board under this chapter may file a petition for review of the notice,
order or determination, detailing the operator's reasons for contesting the
notice, order or determination. The petition shall contain the name of the
petitioner, the petitioner's address and the location of the lodging subject to
the order, notice or determination.
   (B)   The petition for review shall be filed with the Board within 20 days
after the notice, order or determination for which review is sought has been
mailed or served upon the person requesting review.
   (C)   Upon receipt of the petition, the Board shall set a date for a hearing
and give the petitioner at least 5 days prior written notice of the date, time
and place of the hearing.
   (D)   At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to show
cause why the notice, order or determination should be modified or withdrawn.
The petitioner may be represented by counsel of petitioner's choosing at
petitioner's own expense.
   (E)   The hearing shall be conducted by the Board, provided only that the
person conducting the hearing shall not have participated in the drafting of
the order, notice or determination for which review is sought.
   (F)   The person conducting the hearing shall make written findings of fact
and conclusions based upon the applicable sections of this chapter and the
evidence presented. The person conducting the hearing may affirm, reverse or
modify the initial notice, order or determination.
   (G)   Any decision rendered by the Board pursuant to this division may be
appealed to the city. A petitioner seeking to appeal a decision must file a
written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 10 days after the decision
has been mailed to the petitioner. The matter will thereupon be placed on the
agenda as soon as is practical. The city shall then review the findings of fact
and conclusions to determine whether they were correct. Upon its determination
that findings and conclusions were incorrect, the city may modify, reverse or
affirm the decision of the Board upon the same standards as set forth in
division (F).
(Ord. 517.01, passed 5-4-1992; Am. Ord. 102, passed 7-6-2015)
§ 124.16 CONTRACT WITH STATE.
   The city is authorized to confirm with the Minnesota Commissioner of Revenue
to the end that an agreement between the city and the Commissioner of Revenue
may be entered into for the purpose of providing for the administration and
collection of the tax imposed by this chapter. An agreement shall not become
effective before being presented to the Board for its approval, and when so
approved the tax imposed by this chapter shall be collected and administered
pursuant to the terms of the agreement.
(Ord. 517.01, passed 5-4-1992; Am. Ord. 102, passed 7-6-2015)
§ 124.17 ADMINISTRATION BY STATE.
   Upon agreement entered into with the Commissioner of Revenue for the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, the
Commissioner of Revenue shall be empowered to exercise all of the authority of
the city as contained in this chapter. In order to provide for the
administration and collection of the tax by the Commissioner of Revenue, the
following rules and regulations and statutory provisions are hereby adopted by
reference, and to the extent that the provision of these statutes and
regulations shall prevail; the rules and regulations adopted by the
Commissioner of Revenue under authority of only those provisions of the
foregoing rules, regulations and statutes that are within the authority of the
city to enact into ordinance are adopted by reference by this section.
(Ord. 517.01, passed 5-4-1992; Am. Ord. 102, passed 7-6-2015)
§ 124.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   If any tax imposed by this chapter is not paid within the time herein
specified for the payment, or an extension thereof, there shall be added
thereto a specific penalty equal to 10% of the amount remaining unpaid.
   (B)   In case of any failure to make and file a return within the time
prescribed by this chapter, unless it is shown that the failure is not due to
willful neglect, there shall be added to the tax in lieu of the 10% specific
penalty provided in division (A) above, 10% if the failure is for not more than
30 days, with an additional 5% for each additional 30 days of fraction thereof
during which the failure continues, not exceeding 25% of the aggregate. If the
penalty as computed does not exceed $10, a minimum penalty of $10 shall be
assessed. The amount so added to any tax shall be collected at the same time
and in the same manner and as a part of the tax, unless the tax has been paid
before the discovery of the negligence, in which case the amount so added shall
be collected in the same manner as the tax.
   (C)   If any person willfully fails to file any return or make any payment
required by this chapter, or willfully files a false or fraudulent return or
willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat any tax or payment thereof,
there shall also be imposed as a penalty an amount equal to 50% of any tax
(less any amounts paid on the basis of the false or fraudulent return) found
due for the period to which the return related. The penalty imposed by this
division shall be collected as part of the tax, and shall be in addition to any
other penalties provided by this chapter.
   (D)   All payments received shall be credited first to penalties, next to
interest and then to the tax due.
   (E)   The amount of tax not timely paid, together with any penalty provided
by this section, shall bear interest at the rate of 8% per annum from the time
the tax should have been paid until paid. Any interest and penalty shall be
added to the tax and be collected as part thereof.
(Ord. 517.01, passed 5-4-1992; Am. Ord. 102, passed 7-6-2015)
CHAPTER 125: CANNABIS BUSINESSES
Section
General Provisions
   
125.01   Findings and purpose
   
125.02   Adoption of state law by reference
   
125.03   Authority and jurisdiction
   
125.04   Enforcement
   
125.05   Definitions
Retail Registration
   
125.10   Registration of cannabis retail businesses
   
125.11   Preliminary inspection prior to retail registration
   
125.12   Response to OCM required
   
125.13   Fees
   
125.14   Application
   
125.15   Application approval
   
125.16   Annual compliance checks
   
125.17   Location change
   
125.18   Renewal of registration
   
125.19   Renewal fees
   
125.20   Renewal application
   
125.21   Suspension of registration
   
125.22   Limiting of registrations
   
125.23   Hours of operation
   
125.24   Advertising
   
125.25   Buffer requirements for cannabis businesses
   
125.26   Zoning and land use
Temporary Cannabis Events
   
125.35   License or permit required for temporary cannabis events
   
125.36   Temporary cannabis event fee
   
125.37   Application submittal and review
Use in Public Places
   
125.45   Prohibition of cannabis use in public places
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 125.01 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   The City Council for the City of Osakis makes the following legislative
findings:
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to implement the provisions of M.S. Ch.
342, which authorizes the city to protect the public health, safety, welfare of
the city residents by regulating cannabis businesses within the legal
boundaries of the city.
   (B)   The City Council for the City of Osakis finds and concludes that the
proposed provisions are appropriate and lawful land use regulations for the
City of Osakis, that the proposed amendments will promote the community’s
interest in reasonable stability in zoning for now and in the future, and that
the proposed provisions are in the public interest and for the public good.
(Ord. 142, passed 5-12-2025)
§ 125.02 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.
   Except as further restricted or regulated by this chapter, the provisions of
M.S. Ch. 342, relating to cannabis and hemp regulation and the corresponding
state rules with respect to the same are hereby adopted and made a part of this
chapter as if set out herein in full in accordance with M.S. §§ 342.13 and
342.22, the city may impose further restrictions and regulations within city
limits. Whenever there is an inconsistency between the provisions of M.S. Ch.
342, as amended, and the provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive
provision shall govern, unless preempted by state law.
(Ord. 142, passed 5-12-2025)
§ 125.03 AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION.
   The City Council for the City of Osakis has the authority to adopt this
chapter pursuant to:
   (A)   M.S. § 342.13(c), regarding the authority of a local unit of
government to adopt reasonable restrictions of the time, place, and manner of
the operation of a cannabis business provided that such restrictions do not
prohibit the establishment or operation of cannabis businesses.
   (B)   M.S. § 342.22, regarding the local registration and enforcement
requirements of state-licensed cannabis retail businesses and lower-potency
hemp edible retail businesses.
   (C)   M.S. § 152.0263, Subd. 5, regarding the use of cannabis in public
places.
   (D)   M.S. § 462.357, regarding the authority of a local authority to adopt
zoning ordinances.
   (E)   This chapter shall be applicable to the legal boundaries of City of
Osakis, Minnesota.
(Ord. 142, passed 5-12-2025)
§ 125.04 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Zoning Administrator is responsible for the administration and
enforcement of this chapter. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter or
failure to comply with any of its requirements constitutes a misdemeanor and is
punishable as defined by law. Violations of this chapter can occur regardless
of whether or not a permit is required for a regulated activity listed in this
chapter.
(Ord. 142, passed 5-12-2025)
§ 125.05 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless otherwise noted in this section, words and phrases contained in M.S.
§ 342.01 and the rules promulgated pursuant to any of these acts, shall have
the same meanings in this chapter.
   CANNABIS CULTIVATION. A cannabis business licensed to grow cannabis plants
within the approved amount of space from seed or immature plant to mature
plant, harvest cannabis flower from mature plant, package and label immature
plants and seedlings and cannabis flower for sale to other cannabis businesses,
transport cannabis flower to a cannabis manufacturer located on the same
premises, and perform other actions approved by the OCM.
   CANNABIS RETAIL BUSINESSES. A retail location and the retail location(s) of
mezzo businesses with a retail operations endorsement, microbusinesses with a
retail operations endorsement, medical combination businesses operating a
retail location, excluding lower-potency hemp edible retailers.
   CANNABIS RETAILER. Any person, partnership, firm, corporation, or
association, foreign or domestic, selling cannabis product to a consumer and
not for the purpose of resale in any form.
   DAYCARE. A location licensed with the Minnesota Department of Human Services
to provide the care of a child in a residence outside the child’s own home for
gain or otherwise, on a regular basis, for any part of a 24-hour day.
   LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLE. As defined under M.S. § 342.01, Subd. 50.
   OFFICE OF CANNABIS MANAGEMENT. Minnesota Office of Cannabis Management,
referred to as OCM in this chapter.
   PLACE, OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION. A business, accommodation, refreshment,
entertainment, recreation, or transportation facility of any kind, whether
licensed or not, whose goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages or
accommodations are extended, offered, sold, or otherwise made available to the
public.
   PRELIMINARY LICENSE APPROVAL. OCM pre-approval for a cannabis business
license for applicants who qualify under M.S. § 342.1.7.
   PUBLIC PLACE. A public park or trail, public street or sidewalk; any
enclosed, indoor area used by the general public, including, but not limited
to, restaurants; bars; any other food or liquor establishment; hospitals;
nursing homes; auditoriums; arenas; gyms; meeting rooms; common areas of rental
apartment buildings, and other places of public accommodation.
   RESIDENTIAL TREATMENT FACILITY. As defined under M.S. § 245.462, Subd. 23.
   RETAIL REGISTRATION. An approved registration issued by the City of Osakis
to a state- licensed cannabis retail business.
   SCHOOL. A public school as defined under M.S. § 120A.05 or a nonpublic
school that must meet reporting requirements under M.S. § 120A.24.
   STATE LICENSE. An approved license issued by the State of Minnesota's Office
of Cannabis Management to a cannabis retail business.
(Ord. 142, passed 5-12-2025)
RETAIL REGISTRATION
§ 125.10 REGISTRATION OF CANNABIS RETAIL BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Registration required. No individual or entity may operate a state-
licensed cannabis retail business or lower-potency hemp edible retailer within
the City of Osakis without first registering with the Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   Violation; penalty. Any state-licensed cannabis retail business or
lower-potency hemp edible retailer that sells to a customer or patient within
the city without valid retail registration shall incur a civil penalty of $500
for each violation.
(Ord. 142, passed 5-12-2025)
§ 125.11 PRELIMINARY INSPECTION PRIOR TO RETAIL REGISTRATION.
   Prior to issuance of a cannabis retail business registration to a cannabis
retail business or a lower-potency hemp edible retailer, the city shall conduct
a preliminary inspection to ensure compliance with local ordinances.
(Ord. 142, passed 5-12-2025)
§ 125.12 RESPONSE TO OCM REQUIRED.
   Pursuant to M.S. Ch. 342, within 30 days of receiving a copy of a state
license application from OCM, to the extent the city is able, the city shall
certify on a form provided by OCM whether a proposed cannabis or hemp business
complies with local zoning ordinances and, if applicable, whether the proposed
business complies with the state fire code and building code.
(Ord. 142, passed 5-12-2025)
§ 125.13 FEES.
   (A)   A registration fee, as established in the city’s Fee Schedule, shall
be charged to applicants depending on the type of retail business license
applied for.
   (B)   An initial retail registration fee shall not exceed $500 or half the
amount of an initial state license fee under M.S. § 342.11, whichever is less.
The initial registration fee shall include the initial retail registration fee
and the first annual renewal fee.
   (C)   Any renewal retail registration fee imposed by city shall be charged
at the time of the second renewal and each subsequent renewal thereafter.
   (D)   A renewal retail registration fee shall not exceed $1,000 or half the
amount of a renewal state license fee under M.S. § 342.11, whichever is less.
   (E)   A medical combination business operating an adult-use retail location
may only be charged a single registration fee, not to exceed the lesser of a
single retail registration fee, defined under this section, of the adult-use
retail business.
(Ord. 142, passed 5-12-2025)
§ 125.14 APPLICATION.
   The city shall issue a retail registration to a state-licensed cannabis
retail business or lower-potency hemp edible retailer that adheres to the
requirements of M.S. § 342.22 and this chapter.
   (A)   An applicant for a retail registration shall fill out an application
form, as provided by the city. Said form shall include, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Full name of the property owner and applicant;
      (2)   Address, email address, and telephone number of the applicant;
      (3)   The address and parcel ID for the property which the retail
registration is sought;
      (4)   Certification that the applicant complies with the requirements of
local ordinances established pursuant to M.S. § 342.13.
      (5)   Verification of land use compliance by the Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   The applicant shall include with the form:
      (1)   The application fee as required in §
125.13;
      (2)   A copy of a valid state license or written notice, of OCM license
preapproval;
   (C)   Once an application is considered complete, the Zoning Administrator
shall inform the applicant as such and forward the application to City Council
for approval or denial. If the City Council finds cause to deny the
application, the city shall give notice to the applicant of a hearing before
the City Council before the application for registration is officially denied.
The applicant shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing.
   (D)   The application fee shall be non-refundable once processed.
(Ord. 142, passed 5-12-2025)
§ 125.15 APPLICATION APPROVAL.
   (A)   A state-licensed cannabis retail business or lower-potency hemp edible
retailer registration application shall not be approved or renewed if the
applicant is unable to meet the requirements of this chapter or would exceed
the limit on cannabis retail businesses permitted to operate in the city
pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   No registration shall be granted or renewed for operation on any
premises on which taxes, assessments, utility charges, service charges, or
other financial claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid.
   (C)   A state-licensed cannabis retail business or lower-potency hemp edible
retailer registration application that meets the requirements of this chapter
shall be approved.
(Ord. 142, passed 5-12-2025)
§ 125.16 ANNUAL COMPLIANCE CHECKS.
   (A)   The city shall complete at minimum one compliance check per calendar
year of every cannabis business and lower-potency hemp edible retailer to
assess if the business meets and follows the requirements required under M.S. §
342.22, Subd. 4(b) and M.S. § 342.24.
   (B)   The city shall conduct at minimum, one unannounced age verification
compliance check at least once per calendar year.
   (C)   Age verification compliance checks shall involve persons at least 17
years of age but under the age of 21 who, with the prior written consent of a
parent or guardian if the person is under the age of 18, attempt to purchase
adult-use cannabis flower, adult-use cannabis products, lower-potency hemp
edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products under the direct supervision of a
law enforcement officer or an employee of the local unit of government.
   (D)   Any failures under this section must be reported to the Office of
Cannabis Management.
(Ord. 142, passed 5-12-2025)
§ 125.17 LOCATION CHANGE.
   A state-licensed cannabis retail business or lower-potency hemp edible
retailer shall be required to submit a new application for registration under §
125.14 if it seeks to move to a new location still within the legal boundaries
of the City of Osakis.
(Ord. 142, passed 5-12-2025)
§ 125.18 RENEWAL OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   The City of Osakis shall renew an annual registration of a state-
licensed cannabis retail business or lower-potency hemp edible retailer at the
same time OCM renews the cannabis retail business’ license.
   (B)   A state-licensed cannabis retail business or lower-potency hemp edible
retailer shall apply to renew registration on a form established by the City of
Osakis.
   (C)   A cannabis retail registration issued under this chapter shall not be
transferred.
(Ord. 142, passed 5-12-2025)
§ 125.19 RENEWAL FEES.
   The City of Osakis may charge a renewal fee for the registration starting at
the second renewal, as established in the city’s Fee Schedule.
(Ord. 142, passed 5-12-2025)
§ 125.20 RENEWAL APPLICATION.
   The application for renewal of a retail registration shall include, but is
not limited to:
   (A)   Items required under §
125.14 of this chapter.
   (B)   Other items required by the city and Zoning Administrator to ascertain
the registration is in compliance with the City Code.
(Ord. 142, passed 5-12-2025)
§ 125.21 SUSPENSION OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   When suspension is warranted. The city may suspend the registration of
a cannabis retail business or lower-potency hemp edible retailer if it violates
this chapter or poses an immediate threat to the health or safety of the
public. The city shall immediately notify the cannabis retail business or
lower-potency hemp edible retailer in writing the grounds for the suspension.
   (B)   Notice of hearing. Prior to imposing a fine or suspending any retail
registration under divisions (A) or (H) of this section, the city shall provide
the registered business with written notice of the alleged violations and
inform the registered business of its right to a hearing on the alleged
violation.
   (C)   Hearing. If a registered business accused of violating this chapter or
the governing state law so requests in writing, filed with the City Clerk, a
hearing shall be scheduled, the time and place of which shall be published and
provided by the City Clerk to the accused violator. Hearing requests must be
made within ten business days of the issuance of the notice of violation and
delivered to the City Clerk or other designated city officer. Failure to
properly request a hearing within ten business days of the issuance of the
notice of violation will terminate the person's right to a hearing and
constitute waiver of said right to a hearing. The City Clerk or other
designated city officer will set the time and place for the hearing. Written
notice of the hearing time and place will be mailed or delivered to the accused
violator at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing.
   (D)   Decision. If the City Council determines that a violation of this
chapter did occur, that decision, along with the City Council’s reasons for
finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed under his chapter, shall be
recorded in writing, a copy of which shall be provided to the accused violator
by in person or mail delivery as soon as practicable following the hearing date
or the date of any continuance, recess or postponement thereof. Likewise, if
the City Council finds that no violation occurred or finds grounds for not
imposing any penalty, such findings shall be recorded and a copy provided to
the acquitted accused violator in person or by mail delivery as soon as
practicable.
   (E)   Notification to OCM. The city shall immediately notify the OCM in
writing the grounds for the suspension. OCM will provide the city and cannabis
retail business or lower-potency hemp edible retailer a response to the
complaint within seven calendar days and perform any necessary inspections
within 30 calendar days.
   (F)   Length of suspension. The suspension of a cannabis retail business
registration may be for up to 30 calendar days, unless OCM suspends the license
for a longer period. The business may not make sales during this period to
customers if their registration is suspended.
   (G)   Reinstatement. The city shall reinstate a registration if the city or
OCM determines that the violation(s) have been resolved.
   (H)   Civil penalties. Subject to M.S. § 342.22, Subd. 5(e) the city may
impose a civil penalty, as specified in the city’s fee schedule, for
registration violations, not to exceed $2,000.
(Ord. 142, passed 5-12-2025)
§ 125.22 LIMITING OF REGISTRATIONS.
   (A)   If the Counties of Douglas and Todd have one active cannabis retail
business registration for every 12,500 residents, the City of Osakis shall not
be required to register additional state-licensed cannabis retail businesses.
   (B)   In no event shall the City of Osakis have more than one cannabis
retail business within the City of Osakis boundaries. This limitation shall not
apply to:
      (1)   Medical cannabis combination businesses licensed by the OCM, and
      (2)   Lower-potency hemp edible retailers.
   (C)   Registration will be first come, first served. The city shall only
consider completed applications in compliance with §
125.14.
(Ord. 142, passed 5-12-2025)
§ 125.23 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   Cannabis retail businesses are limited to retail sale of cannabis, cannabis
flower, cannabis products, lower-potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer
products between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday
and 10:00 a.m. until 9:00 p.m. on Sundays.
(Ord. 142, passed 5-12-2025)
§ 125.24 ADVERTISING.
   As allowed under city code for the underlying zoning district and state law.
Sign permits are required for all signs erected.
(Ord. 142, passed 5-12-2025)
§ 125.25 BUFFER REQUIREMENTS FOR CANNABIS BUSINESSES.
   (A)   The city shall prohibit the operation of a cannabis business:
      (1)   Within 1,000 feet of a school;
      (2)   Within 500 feet of a day care;
      (3)   Within 500 feet of a residential treatment facility;
      (4)   Within 500 feet of an attraction within a public park that is
regularly used by minors, including a playground or athletic field; or
      (5)   Within 500 feet of another cannabis retail business.
   (B)   Upon application to the Planning Commission, on a case-by-case basis,
and after a posted public hearing, the Planning Commission may amend the buffer
requirements, by the use of a Conditional Use Permit application. Applicant
must pay all CUP fees in addition to any other applicable fee or registration
fee pursuant to this chapter. The Planning Commission reserves the right to
reject any and all applications or amend or adjust the applications and
parameters.
   (C)   Pursuant to M.S. § 462.367, Subd. 14, nothing in this section shall
prohibit an active cannabis business or a cannabis business seeking
registration from continuing operation at the same site if a school, daycare,
residential treatment facility, or attraction within a public park that is
regularly used by minors moves within the minimum buffer zone.
(Ord. 142, passed 5-12-2025)
§ 125.26 ZONING AND LAND USE.
   (A)   Cannabis cultivation. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for
cultivation are a permitted use in the following zoning districts:
      (1)   C-3 (Highway Commercial)
      (2)   I-1 (General Industrial)
   (B)   Cannabis manufacturer. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for
cannabis manufacturer are a permitted use in the following zoning districts:
      (1)   C-3 (Highway Commercial)
      (2)   I-1 (General Industrial)
   (C)   Hemp manufacturer. Businesses licensed or endorsed for low-potency
hemp edible manufacturers are a permitted use in the following zoning
districts:
      (1)   C-3 (Highway Commercial)
      (2)   I-1 (General Industrial)
   (D)   Cannabis wholesale. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for
wholesale are a permitted use in the following zoning districts:
      (1)   C-3 (Highway Commercial)
      (2)   I-1 (General Industrial)
   (E)   Cannabis retail. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for cannabis
retail are a conditional use in the C-3 (Highway Commercial) district.
   (F)   Lower-potency hemp edible retail. Hemp businesses licensed or endorsed
as lower-potency hemp edible retailers are a permitted use in the following
zoning districts:
      (1)   C-1 (Central Commercial)
      (2)   C-2 (General Commercial)
      (3)   C-3 (Highway Commercial)
   (G)   Cannabis transportation. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for
transportation are a permitted use in the following zoning districts:
      (1)   C-3 (Highway Commercial)
      (2)   I-1 (General Industrial)
   (H)   Cannabis delivery. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for
delivery are a permitted use in the following zoning districts:
      (1)   C-3 (Highway Commercial)
      (2)   I-1 (General Industrial)
   (I)   All other cannabis businesses licensed by the state not listed above.
All other cannabis businesses licensed by the state are a conditional use in
the following Zoning Districts:
      (1)   C-3 (Highway Commercial)
      (2)   I-1 (General Industrial)
(Ord. 142, passed 5-12-2025)
TEMPORARY CANNABIS EVENTS
§ 125.35 LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED FOR TEMPORARY CANNABIS EVENTS.
   A license or permit is required to be issued and approved by city prior to
holding a temporary cannabis event.
(Ord. 142, passed 5-12-2025)
§ 125.36 TEMPORARY CANNABIS EVENT FEE.
   A fee, as established in the city's fee schedule, shall be charged to
applicants for temporary cannabis events.
(Ord. 142, passed 5-12-2025)
§ 125.37 APPLICATION SUBMITTAL AND REVIEW.
   (A)   The City of Osakis shall require an application for temporary cannabis
events.
   (B)   An applicant shall fill out an application form, as provided by the
city. Said form shall include, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Full name of the property owner and applicant;
      (2)   Address, email address, and telephone number of the applicant;
      (3)   Full site plan;
      (4)   A depiction of any premises for which the applicant seeks approval
from the city to designate as an area for on-site consumption of adult-use
cannabis flower, adult-use cannabis products, lower-potency hemp edibles, hemp-
derived consumer products, or any combination thereof. The city reserves the
right to deny any application for on-site consumption at a temporary cannabis
event with or without denial of the application for the temporary cannabis
event in its entirety;
      (5)   Times of operation;
      (6)   Proof of insurance at least equal to City of Osakis tort liability
limits under M.S. § 466.04 and naming the city as additional insured; and
      (7)   Security plan approved by the County Sheriff’s Department or other
qualified law enforcement agency chosen by the city.
   (C)   The applicant shall include with the form:
      (1)   The application fee as required in the city’s fee schedule; and
      (2)   A copy of the OCM cannabis event license application, submitted
pursuant to M.S. § 342.39, Subd. 2 or subsequent state licensing requirements.
   (D)   The application shall be submitted to the City Clerk, or other
designee for review. If the designee determines that a submitted application is
incomplete, they shall return the application to the applicant with the notice
of deficiencies.
   (E)   Once an application is considered complete, the designee shall inform
the applicant as such, process the application fees, and forward the
application to the Osakis City Council that will approve or deny the request
for approval or denial.
   (F)   The fee shall be non-refundable once processed.
   (G)   A request for a temporary cannabis event that meets the requirements
of this section may be approved if the City Council makes the finding that the
event is in the best interest of the citizens of the city, will not create
undue hardships, stress infrastructure, safety, security, environment or
convenience of the citizens.
   (H)   A request for a temporary cannabis event that does not meet the
requirements of this sections shall be denied. The city will notify the
applicant of the standards not met and the basis for denial.
   (I)   All events must meet all other applicable city codes for events and
event approvals.
   (J)   On-site consumption of cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-
potency hemp edibles, hemp- derived consumer products, or any combination of
those items, if approved by the city, must be limited to the designated area
approved by the city and, if located in an outdoor area, must be surrounded by
commercial grade fencing.
   (K)   All uses of city property must be reviewed and approved by the City
Council, the City Council reserves the right to reject any application if the
City Council makes the finding that the request is not in the best interest of
the city, its citizens, creates a hardship, stresses infrastructure, safety,
security, the environment or the convenience of the citizens, and reserves the
right to set a fee for the use of city property commensurate with the costs to
the city of an individual application on a case-by-case basis.
(Ord. 142, passed 5-12-2025)
USE IN PUBLIC PLACES
§ 125.45 PROHIBITION OF CANNABIS USE IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall use cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency hemp
edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products in a public place or a place of
public accommodation as prohibited under §
90.25 of this code.
(Ord. 142, passed 5-12-2025)
Cross-reference:
   Prohibition of cannabis use in public places, see §
90.25
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
Chapter
   
130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
   
131.   CURFEW
   
132.   VAGRANCY
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
   
130.01   Injury to property
   
130.02   Unlawfully entering building
   
130.03   Blasting
   
130.04   Removal of barricades
   
130.05   Withholding possession of public property
   
130.06   Injury to public property
   
130.07   Injury to survey monuments
§ 130.01 INJURY TO PROPERTY.
   No person shall, by any agency or means, willfully trespass upon, tamper
with, remove, displace, injure or damage or destroy any mark, sign, signal or
real or personal property or anything of value whatsoever without the consent
of the owner or person lawfully in control thereof.
(1986 Code, § 802.01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 130.02 UNLAWFULLY ENTERING BUILDING.
   No person shall enter any building without the consent, express or implied,
of the owner or lawful occupant thereof accept when specifically authorized by
law to do so.
(1986 Code, § 802.02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 130.03 BLASTING.
   No person shall cause or do any blasting within the city, except by
permission of the Council and under the direction or supervision of someone
specifically appointed by the Council.
(1986 Code, § 802.03)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 130.04 REMOVAL OF BARRICADES.
   No person shall remove or interfere with any barricade nor walk upon, drive
or ride over or across any street or sidewalk construction which has not been
opened for travel.
(1986 Code, § 802.04)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 130.05 WITHHOLDING POSSESSION OF PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall take possession of any property, real or personal,
belonging to the city, trespass therein, or unlawfully withhold possession
thereof from the city.
   (B)   The unlawful holding of property after demand therefore shall be
deemed a new and separate offense for every day possession is withheld after
the demand.
(1986 Code, § 802.05)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 130.06 INJURY TO PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   No person shall cut, deface, mark or engrave any character, figure, letter
or name upon any building, sign or structure owned, occupied or used by the
city or in any manner deface or injure any tree shrub, plant, vine or public
property in any park or in or around the grounds on which a public building is
situated.
(1986 Code, § 802.06)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 130.07 INJURY TO SURVEY MONUMENTS.
   No person shall willfully or maliciously displace, remove, injure or destroy
any trees, rocks, post markers or other monument which has been erected or
marked for the purpose of designating a point in the boundary of the city, or
for any tract, block or lot of land in the city or any mark or inscription
thereon.
(1986 Code, § 802.07)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 131: CURFEW
Section
   
131.01   Curfew for minors
§ 131.01 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
   (A)   Purpose. The curfew for minors established by this section is
maintained for 4 primary reasons:
      (1)   To protect the public from illegal acts of minors committed during
the curfew hours;
      (2)   To protect minors from improper influences that prevail during the
curfew hours, including involvement with gangs;
      (3)   To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs during the
curfew hours; and
      (4)   To help parents control their minor children.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      EMERGENCY ERRAND. A task that if not completed promptly threatens the
health, safety or comfort of the minor or a member of the minor’s household.
The term shall include, but shall not be limited to, seeking urgent medical
treatment, seeking urgent assistance from law enforcement or fire department
personnel, and seeking shelter from the elements or urgent assistance from a
utility company due to a natural or human-made calamity.
      OFFICIAL CITY TIME. The time of day as determined by reference to the
master clock used by the Police Department.
      PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT OR REFRESHMENT. Those places that
include, but are not limited to, movie theaters, pinball arcades, shopping
malls, nightclubs catering to minors, restaurants and pool halls.
      PRIMARY CARE or PRIMARY CUSTODY. The person who is responsible for
providing food, clothing, shelter and other basic necessities to the minor. The
person providing PRIMARY CARE or CUSTODY to the minor shall not be another
minor.
      SCHOOL ACTIVITY. An event which has been placed on a school calendar by
public or parochial school authorities as a school sanctioned event.
   (C)   Hours.
      (1)   Minors under the age of 16 years. No minor under the age of 16
years shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or
other public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor in or upon places of
amusement, entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any vacant lot, between
the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the following day, official city time.
      (2)   Minors ages 16 years to 18 years. No minor of the ages of 16 or 17
years shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or
other public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor in or upon places of
amusement, entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any vacant lot, between
the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. the following day, official city time.
   (D)   Effect on control by adult responsible for minor. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to give a minor the right to stay out until the
curfew hours designated in this section if otherwise directed by a parent,
guardian or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the
minor; nor shall this section be construed to diminish or impair the control of
the adult person having the primary care or custody of the minor.
   (E)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply in the
following situations:
      (1)   To a minor accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or other
adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor;
      (2)   To a minor who is upon an emergency errand at the direction of his
or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the primary care and
custody of the minor;
      (3)   To a minor who is in any of the places described in this section if
in connection with or as required by an employer engaged in a lawful business,
trade, profession or occupation; or to a minor traveling directly to or from
the location of the business, trade, profession or occupation and the minor’s
residence. Minors who fall within the scope of this exception shall carry
written proof of employment and proof of the hours the employer requires the
minor's presence at work;
      (4)   To a minor who is participating in or traveling directly to or from
an event which has been officially designated as a school activity by public or
parochial school authorities; or who is participating in or traveling directly
to or from an official activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city,
a civic organization, school, religious institution or similar entity that
takes responsibility for the minor and with the permission of the minor's
parent, guardian or other adult person having the primary care and custody of
the minor;
      (5)   To a minor who is passing through the city in the course of
interstate travel during the hours of curfew;
      (6)   To a minor who is attending or traveling directly to or from an
activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech,
freedom of assembly or freedom of religion;
      (7)   To minors on the sidewalk abutting his or her residence or abutting
the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor does not complain to the
city’s designated law enforcement provider about the minor’s presence; or
      (8)   To a minor who is married or has been married, or is otherwise
legally emancipated.
   (F)   Duties of person legally responsible for minor. No parent, guardian or
other adult having the primary care or custody of any minor shall permit any
violation of the requirements of this section by the minor.
   (G)   Duties of other persons. No person operating or in charge of any place
of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment shall permit any minor to enter or
remain in his or her place of business during the hours prohibited by this
section unless the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other
adult person having primary care or custody of the minor, or unless one of the
exceptions to this section applies.
   (H)   Defense. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that
the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the
city’s designated law enforcement provider that a minor was present on the
premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
   (I)   Law enforcement officer. A law enforcement officer must look into
whether a minor has an affirmative defense before making an arrest.
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 132: VAGRANCY
Section
   
132.01   Definitions
   
132.02   Vagrancy prohibited
   
132.03   Defining and prohibiting loitering
§ 132.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The following persons are declared to be vagrants:
   (A)   Every person who lives wholly or in part on the earnings of
prostitution or who in any public place solicits for immoral purposes. A person
who lives with or is habitually in the company of a prostitute and has no
visible means of support shall be deemed to be living on the earnings of
prostitution;
   (B)   A common prostitute who shall be found wandering about the streets, or
loitering in or about any restaurant, lodging house, saloon or place where
intoxicating liquors are sold;
   (C)   Every person who shall be found wandering about the streets and
addressing male persons for the purpose of soliciting the commission of any
lewd, indecent or unlawful act, or for the purpose of enticing any other person
into a house of prostitution, room or other place for any unlawful purpose;
   (D)   A person engaged in practicing or attempting any trick or device to
procure money or other thing of value, if the trick or device is made a public
offense of any law or this state, or any person engaged in soliciting,
procuring or attempting to solicit or procure money or other thing of value by
falsely pretending and representing himself or herself to be blind, deaf, dumb,
without arms or legs, or to be otherwise physically deficient or to be
suffering from any physical defect or infirmity;
   (E)   Any person who shall have no visible means of support, lives idly,
without employment or any settled place of abode, and loiters about the
streets, pool halls, taverns, soft drink parlors or other like places;
   (F)   A person wandering about and lodging in taverns, groceries, sheds,
stable, barn or uninhabited building, or who shall be found trespassing on
private property and who shall not be able to account for his or her presence;
and
   (G)   A person who has not resided within 5 miles of the city for a period
of 6 months prior thereto and has no reasonable means of maintaining or
supporting himself or herself.
(1986 Code, § 804.01)
§ 132.02 VAGRANCY PROHIBITED.
   Vagrancy is hereby prohibited within the city and no person shall be or
become a vagrant or do any act of vagrancy within the city.
(1986 Code, § 804.02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.03 DEFINING AND PROHIBITING LOITERING.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CAUSE. Any behavior, act or course of conduct on the part of any person
which may or is likely to result in a disturbance of the peace, including but
not limited to the following:
         (a)   The making or production of any unnecessary noise by shouting or
by any other means or mechanisms including the blowing of any automobile or
other vehicle horn;
         (b)   Any improper use of flash or spotlights;
         (c)   The drinking or display of any beer or intoxicating liquor or
wine in or about any premises in which drinking or display is prohibited by
law;
         (d)   The defacement or destruction of, or causing otherwise of damage
to any premises or of any property located thereon;
         (e)   The strewing, scattering, littering, throwing, disposal or
deposit of any refuse, garbage or rubbish on or unto any premises except into
receptacles provided for that purpose;
         (f)   The discharge of any fireworks, caps, pistols, firearms or any
other device or mechanism designed to create noise;
         (g)   The use of profane, abusive, indecent or threatening language
towards any person including peace officers;
         (h)   Inciting to or committing assault or battery;
         (i)   Soliciting for any illegal or immoral purposes;
         (j)   Any unexplained lingering in or about premises after closing
hours;
         (k)   Any obstructing of traffic either pedestrian or vehicular except
in cases of emergency;
         (l)   Spitting on a public or private sidewalk;
         (m)   Standing or lingering about the doorway of any building in a
manner so as to obstruct or partially obstruct the free uninterrupted ingress
to or egress from the building or in a manner so as to annoy the owner or
occupant thereof or the owner or occupant of any adjacent premises;
         (n)   Lingering on, near, under or about any public bridge, including
approaches thereto or abutments thereof;
         (o)   Lingering near or about any public building, reservoir, dam or
public works; or
         (p)   Any other behavior which is otherwise forbidden by law.
      LOITERING. The failure or refusal on the part of any person to vacate or
leave any premises after being requested or ordered either orally or in writing
to do so, for cause, by the owner, agent, manager or person in charge thereof,
or by any law enforcement agent or official, and shall also the premises after
having been so requested or ordered to vacate or leave the premises, or the
failure or refusal when requested or ordered as herein provided to stop or
cease the behavior, act or conduct, provided, however, that this definition
shall not include any person on the premises who may be the owner or tenant of
any part thereof, nor shall it include the wife, children, employee or tenant
of the owner or occupier.
      PREMISES. Any land, lot, parcel, sidewalk, boulevard, street, highway,
alley, thoroughfare, park, playground, restaurant, café, church, school, car or
parking lot, drive-in, building used for business, commercial or industrial
purposes, place, washroom or toilet, apartment hallway or other location
whether public or private in the City of Osakis.
   (B)   Loitering prohibited. Loitering in the City of Osakis is prohibited.
   (C)   Violations. Any person violating any provisions of divisions (A) or
(B) above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1986 Code, § 804.03)
Penalty, see § 10.99
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
Chapter
   
150.   BUILDING CODE
   
151.   ANTI-BLIGHT REGULATIONS
   
152.   SUBDIVISIONS
   
153.   ZONING
   
154.   SHORELAND MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING CODE
Section
   
150.01   Code adopted by reference
   
150.02   Application, administration and enforcement
   
150.03   Permits and fees
   
150.04   Building Code optional chapters
   
150.99   Penalty
§ 150.01 CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Minnesota State Building Code, pursuant to M.S. §§ 16B.59 to 16B.75, as
they may be amended from time to time, includes all of the referenced
amendments, rules and regulations and is hereby adopted by reference with the
exception of the optional chapters, unless specifically adopted herein. The
Minnesota State Building Code is hereby incorporated in this chapter as if
fully set out herein.
§ 150.02 APPLICATION, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The application, administration and enforcement of the code shall be
in accordance with Minnesota State Building Code, The code shall be enforced
within the extraterritorial limits permitted by M.S. § 16B.62, Subd. 1, as it
may be amended from time to time, when so established by this chapter.
   (B)   The code enforcement agency of this municipality is called the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (C)   This code shall be enforced by the Minnesota certified Building
Official designated by the city to administer the code (M.S. § 16B.65, Subd. 1,
as it may be amended from time to time).
§ 150.03 PERMITS AND FEES.
   (A)   The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as
authorized in M.S. § 16B.62, Subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by this code in
accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the city. In addition, a surcharge
fee shall be collected on all permits issued for work governed by this code in
accordance with M.S. § 16B.70, as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 150.04 BUILDING CODE OPTIONAL CHAPTERS.
   The Minnesota Building Code , established pursuant to M.S. §§ 16B.59 to
16B.75, as they may be amended from time to time, allows the city to adopt by
reference and enforce certain optional chapter of the most current edition of
the Minnesota State Building Code.
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   A violation of this code is a misdemeanor (M.S. § 16B.69, as it may be
amended from time to time.)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 151: ANTI-BLIGHT REGULATIONS
Section
   
151.01   Purpose
   
151.02   Findings
   
151.03   Definitions
   
151.04   Exceptions
   
151.05   Location of sexually oriented businesses
   
151.06   Sign restrictions for sexually oriented businesses
§ 151.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to control, through zoning regulations,
certain land uses that have a direct and detrimental effect on the character of
the city’s residential and commercial neighborhoods.
   (B)   The City Council specifically recognizes the sanctity and fundamental
nature of free speech and does not intend to regulate or ban speech based on
content.
§ 151.02 FINDINGS.
   The City Council makes the following findings regarding the effect sexually-
oriented businesses have on the character of the city’s neighborhoods. In
making these findings, the City Council accepts the recommendations and
conclusions of the Report of the Attorney General’s Working Group on the
Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses, dated June 6, 1989. This Chapter
151 shall have no force and effect until the City Council accepts these
recommendations by resolution of a majority of its members.
   (A)   Sexually oriented businesses have an impact on the neighborhoods
surrounding them which is distinct from the impact caused by other uses.
   (B)   Residential and commercial neighborhoods located within close
proximity to sexually oriented businesses experience the following negative
impacts:
      (1)   Increased crime rates, particularly in sex-related crimes such as
rapes, prostitution, indecent exposure and other lewd and lascivious behavior;
      (2)   Property values which are either diminished or fail to appreciate
at the rate of other comparable properties not located in proximity to sexually
oriented businesses;
      (3)   Increased transiency and decreased stability of ownership;
      (4)   Deteriorated neighborhood appearance from litter and graffiti;
      (5)   Sex-related harassment of residents and customers by motorists and
pedestrians;
      (6)   A perception that the area is unsafe; and
      (7)   Difficulty in attracting and retaining customers, employees and
desirable tenants.
   (C)   The adverse impacts which sexually oriented businesses have on
surrounding areas diminish as the distance from the sexually oriented business
increases.
   (D)   The adverse impacts of sexually oriented businesses are exacerbated
when the uses are located near each other.
   (E)   The presence of liquor establishments in the immediate vicinity of
sexually oriented businesses also compounds the adverse impacts on the
neighborhood.
   (F)   Sexually oriented businesses can exert a dehumanizing influence on
persons attending places of worship, children attending day care centers or
schools, and people using public parks and libraries.
   (G)   Sexually oriented businesses can significantly contribute to the
deterioration of residential neighborhoods and can impair the character and
quality of the residential housing in the area where they are located, thereby
exacerbating the shortage of affordable and habitable housing for city
residents.
   (H)   (1)   The concentration of sexually oriented businesses in 1 area can
have a substantially detrimental effect on that area and on the overall quality
of urban life.
      (2)   A cycle of decay can result from the influx and concentration of
sexually oriented businesses. The presence of like businesses is perceived by
others as an indication that the area is deteriorating and the result can be
devastating: other businesses move out of the vicinity and residents flee from
the area.
      (3)   The resulting decline in real estate values erodes the city’s tax
base and contributes to overall urban blight.
   (I)   Land-use regulations are appropriate to minimize the detrimental
effects that sexually oriented businesses have on adjacent land uses.
§ 151.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning, except as
provided otherwise in §
151.04 below.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Shall include the following:
      (1)   A business that meets any of the following criteria, measured on a
daily, weekly, monthly or yearly basis;
         (a)   Has more than 25% of its inventory, stock-in-trade or publicly
displayed merchandise in sexually oriented materials;
         (b)   Devotes more than 25% of its floor area (not including
storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements or any portion of the business
not open to the public) to sexually oriented materials; or
         (c)   Derives more than 25% of its gross revenues from sexually
oriented materials.
      (2)   A business that engages for any length of time in a sexually
oriented use as defined in this section, or any other use that has an emphasis
on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED MATERIALS. Visual, printed or aural materials, and other
objects or devices, which:
      (1)   Contain, depict, simulate or describe specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas;
      (2)   Are marketed for use in conjunction with, or are primarily used
only with or during, specified sexual activities; or
      (3)   Are designed for sexual stimulation.
   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED USE. Includes any of the following activities and
businesses, even if the activity exists for only a short-time:
      ADULT BODY PAINTING STUDIO. An establishment or business that provides
the service of applying paint, ink or other substance, whether transparent or
non-transparent, to the body of a patron when the person is nude.
      ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment or business used for the barter,
rental, or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides,
records, audiotape, videotape, movies or motion picture film if it meets the
criteria established in the definition of sexually oriented business, as
defined in this section.
      ADULT CABARET. A business or establishment that provides dancing or other
live entertainment distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on:
         (a)   The depiction of nudity, specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas; or
         (b)   The presentation, display or depiction of matter that seeks to
evoke, arouse or excite sexual or erotic feelings or desire.
      ADULT COMPANIONSHIP ESTABLISHMENT. A business or establishment that
provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or
discussion distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
      ADULT CONVERSATION/RAP PARLOR. A business or establishment that provides
the services of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      ADULT HEALTH/SPORT CLUB. A health/sport club that is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
      ADULT HOTEL OR MOTEL. A hotel or motel that presents material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A business or establishment with a
capacity of less than 50 persons that as a prevailing practice presents on-
premises viewing of movies, motion pictures, or other material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
      ADULT MODELING STUDIO. A business or establishment that provides live
models who, with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual
gratification, engage in specified sexual activities or display specified
anatomical areas while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn,
sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted.
      ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted
or invited where coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled or operated still or motion picture machines,
projectors or other image-producing devices are used to show images to 5 or
fewer persons per machine at any 1 time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A motion picture theater with a capacity of
50 or more persons that as a prevailing practice presents material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons.
      ADULT NOVELTY BUSINESS. An establishment or business that has a variety
of items for sale if it meets the criteria established in the definition of
sexually oriented business, as defined in this section.
      ADULT SAUNA. A sauna that excludes minors by reason of age, and that
provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of bathing,
relaxation or reducing, if the service provided by the sauna is distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
      ADULT STEAM ROOM/BATHHOUSE FACILITY. A building or portion of a building
used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of
pleasure, bathing, relaxation or reducing, if the building or portion of a
building restricts minors by reason of age and if the service provided by the
steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      MASSAGE PARLOR/HEALTH CLUB. A massage parlor or health club that provides
massage services distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Shall include the following:
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
area, buttock, anus or female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola; and
      (2)   Human male genitals in a state of sexual arousal, whether or not
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Shall include the following:
      (1)   Actual or simulated: sexual intercourse; oral copulation; anal
intercourse; oral-anal copulation; bestiality; direct physical stimulation of
unclothed genitals; flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual
relationship; the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual
relationship; anilingus; coprophagy; coprophilia; cunnilingus; fellatio;
necrophilia; pedophilia; piquerism or zooerastia;
      (2)   Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation,
arousal or tumescence;
      (3)   Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus
or masturbation;
      (4)   Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic regions,
buttocks or female breasts;
      (5)   Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, who
are clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes and engaged in the
flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other physical restraint of any
person;
      (6)   Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually oriented
contact with an animal by a human being; or
      (7)   Human excretion, urination, menstruation or vaginal or anal
irrigation.
§ 151.04 EXCEPTIONS.
   This section does not regulate the following:
   (A)   Any material with significant literary content or social commentary;
   (B)   A business where sexually oriented materials are sold, bartered,
distributed, leased, furnished or otherwise provided for off-site use or
entertainment, if:
      (1)   The sexually oriented material on each item is blocked from view by
an opaque cover as required under M.S. § 617.293, as it may be amended from
time to time; and
      (2)   Each item is in an area accessible only by an employee of the
business.
   (C)   Any person or organization exempted under M.S. § 617.295, as it may be
amended from time to time;
   (D)   Any activity regulated under M.S. § 617.251, as it may be amended from
time to time;
   (E)   Displaying works of art showing specified anatomical areas, so long as
no sexually oriented materials are for sale and the business does not have a
liquor license; and
   (F)   Movies rated G, PG, PG-13, NC-17 or R.
§ 151.05 LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   (A)   A sexually-oriented business may locate only in the C-2 and I zones.
   (B)   No person may operate a sexually oriented business on property, any
part of which is within the area circumscribed by a circle that has a radius of
250 feet from any of the uses listed below. Distances must be measured by
following a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects,
between the closest points on the boundary lines of the property parcels where
the 2 uses are located. This distance requirement applies to the following
uses:
      (1)   Property used or zoned for residential uses;
      (2)   A day care facility, school, library, park, playground, state or
federal wildlife area or preserve, religious institution or other public
recreational facility;
      (3)   Premises licensed under city code
Chapter 118; and
      (4)   Another sexually-oriented business.
Cross-reference:
   Sexually Oriented Businesses,
Ch. 123
§ 151.06 SIGN RESTRICTIONS FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   In order to protect children from exposure to lurid signs and materials, to
avoid the appearance that the windows are boarded up and that the property is
deteriorating, and to preserve the value of property surrounding sexually
oriented businesses, the following sign regulations apply to all sexually
oriented businesses.
   (A)   All signs must be flat wall signs. No signs may be freestanding,
located on the roof or contain any flashing lights, moving elements or
electronically or mechanically changing messages.
   (B)   No merchandise, photos or pictures of the products or entertainment on
the premises may be displayed in or immediately behind window areas or any
other area, if they can be viewed from outside the portion of the building in
which the business is located.
   (C)   Window areas must not be covered or made opaque in any way. No signs
may be placed in a window. A sign no larger than 1 square foot must be placed
on the main entrance door and must state, “Adults Only.” The letters of this
message must be a minimum of 2 inches high. The only other information on this
sign may be the hours of operation.
Cross-reference:
   Sexually Oriented Businesses,
Ch. 123
CHAPTER 152: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
   
152.01   Adoption by reference
§ 152.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   The subdivision regulations of the city are adopted and incorporated as part
of this code of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.
CHAPTER 153: ZONING
Section
   
153.01   Adoption by reference
§ 153.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   The Zoning Code of the city is adopted and incorporated as part of this code
of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.
CHAPTER 154: SHORELAND MANAGEMENT
Section
   
154.01   Adoption by reference
§ 154.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   The Shoreland Management Ordinance of the city is adopted and incorporated
as part of this code of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Table
   
I.   [RESERVED]
   
II.   FRANCHISES
TABLE I: [RESERVED]
TABLE II: FRANCHISES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
-        - -         Grants a franchise to Minnegasco, Inc., for gas
                     (1986 Code, § 1000.01)
                     Grants a franchise to WestMarc Communications of
-        - -         Minnesota, Inc., to meet the cable needs of the community
                     (1986 Code, § 1000.02)
                     Grants a franchise to Northern States Power Company to
-        - -         conduct an electric distribution system
                     (1986 Code, § 1000.03)
                     Grants a franchise to Northern States Power Company to
59       9-6-2005    conduct an electric distribution system for a period of 20
                     years
64       6-5-2006    Extends current franchise of Charter Communications for
                     operation of a cable system on a month-to-month basis
                     Grants a franchise to Tekstar Communications, Inc., d/b/
75       6-2-2008    a Arvig Communication Systems, to meet the cable-related
                     needs of the community for an initial term of 15 years
                     Grants a franchise to Centerpoint Energy Resources Corp.,
76       12-1-2008   d/b/a Centerpoint Energy Minnesota Gas, to construct and
                     operate facilities for the distribution of gas energy for
                     public and private use, for a period of 20 years
                     Grants a non-exclusive franchise to CC VIII Operating,
115      4-3-2018    LLC, locally known as Charter Communications, to
                     construct, operate, and maintain a cable system for an
                     initial term of 10 years
                     Extends current franchise with Northern States Power
144      10-13-2025  Company to conduct an electric distribution system for a
                     period of 20 years
                    
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Minnesota Statutes
References to 1986 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES
M.S. Cite Code Section
M.S. Cite             Code Section
12.25                 35.01;
                      35.04
12.31                 35.06
14.57–14.70         118.35;
                      118.99
16B.59–16B.75       150.01;
                      150.04
16B.62, Subd. 1       150.02;
                      150.03
16B.65, Subd. 1       150.02
16B.69                150.99
16B.70                150.03
18.022                94.03
18.46, Subd. 13       94.05
84.81 et seq.         73.07
84.81–84.90         95.08
84.81–84.929        73.11
84.91                 73.03
85.40–85.45         95.08
88.16–88.22         90.70;
                      98.45
120A.05               125.05
120A.24               125.05
145A.03               120.01
152.02                95.03
152.02, Schedules I–100.01
152.0263, Subd. 5     125.03
157.16                118.03
157.16, Subd. 3       118.03
168B                  Ch. 75, Sch. I
168B.01 et seq.       91.01
168B.01               71.04
168B.011              91.01
168B.01–168B.13     71.04
169                   95.08;
                      95.09
169.01                70.01
169.045               73.12
169.522               73.12
169A                  73.11
169A.20               73.03
245.462, Subd. 23     125.05
326.40                50.06
329                   113.03
                      118.01;
                      118.02;
                      118.20;
340A                  118.22;
                      118.35;
                      118.55;
                      118.99;
                      122.07
340A.101              118.03
340A.404, Subd. 1(4)  118.55
340A.404, Subd. 5     118.55
330A.408, Subd. 5     118.22
340A.409              118.24;
                      118.54
340A.413              118.20;
                      118.55
340A. 413, Subd. 3    118.20
340A.414              118.34
340A.504              118.32
340A.509              118.02
                      125.01;
342                   125.02;
                      125.12
342.01                90.25,
                      125.05
342.01, Subd. 50      125.05
342.1.7               125.05
342.11                125.13
342.13                125.02;
                      125.14
342.13(c)             125.03
                      125.02;
342.22                125.03;
                      125.14
342.22, Subd. 4(b)    125.16
342.22, Subd. 5(e)    125.21
342.24                125.16
342.39, Subd. 2       125.37
                      111.01;
349                   11.02;
                      111.15
349.11–349.21       111.99
349.11–349.23       111.06;
                      111.07
349.12                111.04
349.12, Subd. 25      111.13
349.16                111.13
349.166               111.09
349.213               111.02
398                   95.01
398.31–398.36       95.02
                      10.98;
429                   92.47,
                      94.07
429.02                92.42
429.021, Subd. 1      92.41
429.061               90.24
                      10.98;
                      90.01;
429.101               90.02;
                      90.24; 90.43;
                      92.29;
                      94.07
444.075               54.01
462.354, Subd. 1      34.01
462.357               125.03
462.357, Subd. 3      34.05
462.367, Subd. 14     125.25
                      90.01;
463.15–463.26       92.20;
                      92.23
463.17                90.23
466                   92.03
466.04                125.37
469.190               124.02
471.6985              118.53
514.67                90.01
606.01                10.98
609.01                71.04
609.2246, Subd. 2     120.01
609.72                122.11
609.72, Subd. 1       95.05
609.75–609.763      111.06;
                      111.99
609.415               10.98
617.251               151.04
617.293               151.04
617.295               151.04
626.862               10.20
                      
 
REFERENCES TO 1986 CODE
1986 Code 2007 Code
1986 Code 2007 Code
201.01    30.01
201.02    30.02
201.03    30.03
201.04    30.04
201.05    30.05
201.06    30.06
201.07    30.07
201.08    30.08
201.09    30.09
201.10    30.10
201.11    30.11
201.12    30.12
201.13    30.13
202.01    31.01
202.02    31.02
202.03    31.03
202.04    31.04
202.05    31.05
203.01    32.01
203.02    32.02
203.03    32.03
203.04    32.04
203.05    32.05
203.06    32.06
203.07    32.07
203.08    32.08
203.09    32.09
203.10    32.10
203.11    32.11
203.12    32.12
203.13    32.13
203.14    32.14
203.15    32.15
203.16    32.16
203.17    32.17
204.01    33.01
205.01    34.01
205.02    34.02
205.03    34.03
205.04    34.04
205.05    34.05
205.06    34.06
206.02    36.01
209.01    91.01
209.02    91.02
301.01    92.01
301.02    92.02
301.03    92.03
301.04    92.04
301.05    92.05
301.06    92.06
301.08    92.07
302.01    92.20
302.02    92.21
302.03    90.39
302.04    92.23
302.05    92.24
302.06    92.25
302.07    92.26
302.08    92.27
302.09    92.28
302.10    92.29
303.01    92.40
303.02    92.41
303.03    92.42
303.04    92.43
303.05    92.44
303.06    92.45
303.07    92.46
303.08    92.47
303.09    92.48
303.10    92.49
303.11    92.50
303.12    92.51
303.13    92.52
401.01    50.01
401.02    50.02
401.03    50.03
401.05    50.05
401.06    50.06
402.01    51.01
402.02    51.02
402.03    51.03
403.01    52.01
403.02    52.02
403.03    52.03
403.04    52.04
403.05    52.05
403.06    52.06
403.07    52.07
403.08    52.08
403.09    52.09
403.10    52.10
403.11    52.11
403.12    52.12
404.01    52.25
404.02    52.26
404.03    52.27
404.04    52.28
404.05    52.29
404.06    52.30
404.07    52.31
404.08    52.33
501.01    110.01
501.02    110.02
501.03    110.03
501.04    110.04
501.05    110.05
501.06    110.06
501.07    110.07
502.01    53.01
502.02    53.02
502.03    53.03
502.04    53.04
502.05    53.05
502.06    53.06
502.07    53.07
502.08    53.08
503.02    93.21
503.04    93.23
503.05    93.24
503.06    93.25
503.07    93.26
503.08    93.27
504.01    93.01
504.02    93.02
504.03    93.03
504.04    93.04
504.05    93.05
504.06    93.06
504.07    93.07
504.08    93.08
507.03    111.08
510.01    112.01
510.02    112.02
510.03    112.03
510.04    112.04
512.01    114.01
512.02    114.02
512.03    114.03
512.04    114.04
512.05    114.05
512.06    114.06
512.07    114.07
513.01    115.01
513.04    115.02
513.05    115.03
513.06    115.04
513.07    115.05
514.01    116.01
514.02    116.02
514.03    116.03
514.04    116.04
514.05    116.05
515.01    117.01
515.02    117.02
515.03    117.03
515.04    117.04
515.05    117.05
516.01    92.65
701.01    70.01
701.02    70.02
701.03    70.03
701.04    70.04
701.05    70.05
701.06    70.06
701.07    70.07
701.08    70.08
701.09    70.09
701.10    71.01
701.10(C) Ch. 75, Sch. I
701.12    71.02
701.13    71.03
701.14    70.10
701.15    70.25
701.16    70.26
701.17    70.27
701.18    70.28
701.19    70.29
701.20    70.30
701.21    70.31
701.23    70.32
701.24    70.33
701.25    70.34
701.26    70.35
701.27    70.36
701.28    70.37
701.29    70.38
701.30    70.39
701.31    70.40
701.33    71.04
702.01    72.01
702.02    72.02
702.03    72.03
702.04    Ch.74, Sch. I
802.01    130.01
802.02    130.02
802.03    130.03
802.04    130.04
802.05    130.05
802.06    130.06
802.07    130.07
804.01    132.01
804.02    132.02
804.03    132.03
805.01    94.01
805.02    94.02
805.03    94.03
805.04    94.04
805.05    94.05
805.06    94.06
805.07    94.07
805.08    94.08
805.09    94.09
805.10    94.10
1001.01   TSO II
1001.02   TSO II
1001.03   TSO II
1105.01   36.01
1105.02   36.02
1105.03   36.03
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.     Date Passed Code Section
–          - -         TSO II
                         124.01–
517.01       5-4-1992    124.17;
                         124.99
6            8-3-1992    94.11
518          8-3-1992    53.09
-            7-15-1994   71.03
-            12-5-1994   50.05
                         123.01;
806          12-5-1994   123.02;
                         123.99
12           2-6-1995    34.02
13           4-3-1995    52.32
14           5-1-1995    Ch. 74, Sch. I
-            6-6-1995    70.02
17           9-5-1995    53.03
19           10-2-1995   53.02;
                         53.04
22           10-2-1995   94.25-
                         94.33
24           4-1-1996    50.04
25           4-1-1996    50.06
                         52.02;
27           5-6-1996    52.06-
                         52.08
29           11-4-1996   53.03
30           11-4-1996   93.02
31           3-3-1997    34.03
32           10-6-1997   51.02
34           10-6-1997   37.01-
                         37.11
37           12-1-1997   119.01-
                         119.03
44           7-7-1999    150.01-
                         150.04
45           8-2-1999    34.04,
                         36.01
48           10-1-2001   52.02
49           1-7-2002    34.01
54           12-2-2002   73.01-
                         73.12
57           5-5-2003    54.01-
                         54.13
59           9-6-2005    TSO II
63           2-6-2006    34.02
64           6-5-2006    TSO II
66           8-7-2006    53.02;
                         98.41
68           3-5-2007    53.05
69           4-2-2007    53.05
71           9-4-2007    118.32
72           9-4-2007    118.32
73           9-4-2007    51.03
74           9-4-2007    71.01
1-2008       3-3-2008    118.22
75           6-2-2008    TSO II
76           12-1-2008   TSO II
2009-13      7-6-2009    90.38
2011-21      7-5-2011    52.02
84           8-6-2012    90.39;
                         90.40
85           8-6-2012    90.22
                         73.02;
86           8-6-2012    73.03;
                         73.12
87           8-6-2012    93.22
                         118.20;
88           2-4-2013    118.26;
                         118.30;
                         118.32
89           4-1-2013    76.01
93           11-4-2013   92.21
94           5-5-2014    92.21
95           5-5-2014    118.55
96           9-2-2014    34.02
97           9-2-2014    124.09
98           12-1-2014   92.21
101          6-1-2015    118.32;
                         118.55
                         124.01–
102          7-6-2015    124.17;
                         124.99
105          9-8-2015    90.19
106          9-8-2015    92.65
108          2-1-2016    50.05;
                         53.06
109          6-6-2016    118.31
110          3-7-2016    71.01
111          3-6-2017    118.55
112          8-7-2017    50.05
113          10-2-2017   71.01
115          4-3-2018    TSO II
116          7-2-2018    50.05
119          12-3-2018   30.01
120          12-3-2018   51.02
132          4-11-2022   118.31
134          3-13-2023   124.01
135          7-10-2023   10.98
Res. 2023-19 7-10-2023   Ch. 10, App. I
137          9-11-2023   90.25
138          2-12-2024   39.01,
                         39.02
                         55.01–
140          12-10-2024  55.14,
                         55.99
                         125.01–
                         125.05;
                         125.10–
142          5-12-2025   125.26;
                         125.35–
                         125.37;
                         125.45
143          9-8-2025    92.21
144          10-13-2025  TSO II
                        
 
