PRESTON, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-3 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 314, passed 5-19-2025
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street, Ste. 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 241
CITY OF PRESTON
COUNTY OF FILLMORE
STATE OF MINNESOTA
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF PRESTON, MINNESOTA,
AMENDING, RESTATING, REVISING, UPDATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY DEALING WITH THE SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES, AND PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES.
WHEREAS, Minnesota Statutes Sections 415.02 and 415.021 authorize the city to
cause its ordinances to be codified and printed in a book.
NOW, THEREFORE, the City Council of the City of Preston, Minnesota, ordains:
Section 1.   The general ordinances of the City as amended, restated, revised,
updated, codified and compiled in book form, including penalties for the
violations of various provisions thereof, are hereby adopted and shall
constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Preston." This Code of
Ordinances also adopts by reference certain statutes and administrative rules
of the State of Minnesota as named in the Code of Ordinances.
Section 2.   The Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of
the following titles:
         Title I:      General Provisions
         Title III:   Administration
         Title V:   Public Works
         Title VII:   Traffic Code
         Title IX:   General Regulations
         Title XI:   Business Regulations
         Title XIII:   General Offenses
         Title XV:   Land Usage
         Table of Special Ordinances
Section 3.   All prior ordinances, pertaining to the subjects treated in the
Code of Ordinances, shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance, except as they are included and re-ordained in whole or in
part in the Code of Ordinances; provided, this repeal shall not affect any
offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the
effective date of this ordinance, nor shall this repeal affect the provisions
of ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching
territory, establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain
persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or
borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal
property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public
use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor
shall this repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature
or pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code of
Ordinances. All fees established in prior ordinances codified in this Code
shall remain in effect unless amended in this code or until an ordinance
adopting a fee schedule is adopted or amended.
Section 4.   This ordinance adopting the Code of Ordinances shall be a
sufficient publication of any ordinance included in it and not previously
published in the City's official newspaper. The Clerk of the City shall cause a
substantial quantity of the Code of Ordinances to be printed for general
distribution to the public at actual cost and shall furnish a copy of the Code
of Ordinances to the County Law Library or its designated depository. The
official copy of this Code of Ordinances shall be marked and kept in the office
of the City Clerk.
Section 5.   The Code of Ordinances is declared to be prima facie evidence of
the law of the City and shall be received in evidence as provided by Minnesota
Statutes by the Courts of the State of Minnesota.
Section 6.   This ordinance adopting the Code of Ordinances, and the Code of
Ordinances itself, shall take effect upon publication of this ordinance in the
City's official newspaper.
PASSED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PRESTON, MINNESOTA THIS 7th DAY OF
OCTOBER, 2002.
APPROVED:
Clarence M. Quanrud /s/
MAYOR
ATTEST:
Fred Nagle /s/
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter
   
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Rules of interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Official time
   
10.11   Reasonable time
   
10.12   Ordinances repealed
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
   
10.18   Copies of code
   
10.19   Adoption of statutes and rules by reference
 
   
10.98   General penalty for infractions
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city, as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“city code,” for which designation “code of ordinances,” “codified ordinances”
or “code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter, and section headings do not
constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to the
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “Traffic Code.” Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as
“§ 10.01.” Headings and captions used in this code other than the title,
chapter, and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall
not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of
state law.
   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances
of this city shall be by the following rules, unless that construction is
plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of
the same ordinance:
      (1)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” whenever the context requires.
      (2)   Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions or ordinance
requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as
the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the
act by an authorized agent or deputy.
      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
      (4)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CITY. The area within the corporate boundaries of the City of Preston as
presently established or as amended by ordinance, annexation or other legal
actions at a future time. The term CITY when used in this code may also be used
to refer to the City Council and its authorized representatives.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This city code as modified by
amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections.
      COUNTY. Fillmore County.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED. All terms shall mean a pledge
taken by the person and administered by an individual authorized by state law.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT.  An officer,
office, employee, commission, or department of this city unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Minnesota.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have subchapters.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.10 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city
business.
§ 10.11 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
§ 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this
indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.17 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties
incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The
liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties, or
forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted.
In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway right-of-
ways, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance,
establishment or vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate
officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been
enacted.
§ 10.18 COPIES OF CODE.
   The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer for public inspection. The Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer shall provide a copy for sale for a reasonable charge.
§ 10.19 ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES BY REFERENCE.
   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this Minnesota
Basic Code, all future amendments to any state or federal rules and statutes
adopted by reference in this Code or referenced in this Code are hereby adopted
by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this
Code was adopted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the Code to the
contrary.
§ 10.98 GENERAL PENALTY FOR INFRACTIONS.
   (A)   For infractions of ordinances referenced to this penalty the person(s)
involved will be notified in writing by certified mail from the City
Administrator or by hand delivered letter, generally by law enforcement, to
cease and desist from the activity causing the infraction.
   (B)   The order will contain a minimum of 15 days for the person(s) to
repair or remove any physical accouterments of the infraction(s). Longer
periods may be awarded by the City Administrator or the City Council if more
costly and complex removal is necessary. Immediate action may be required by
the city for remediation if a violation(s) constitute a threat to health and
safety such as but not limited to some of those items found in Chapter 92.
   (C)   None of this section negates the ability of the city to recover costs
for enforcement or repair of any damages to city property.
   (D)   Failure to comply or repeated infractions of the same nature by the
same individual(s) may result in consideration of changing the penalty to §
10.99. This determination may be made by the City Administrator in consultation
with the City Attorney and Mayor or by the City Council.
(Ord. 266, passed 3-7-2011)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for
any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota Statutes
specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90 days
or a fine of not more than $700, or both.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $200.
   (C)   In either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs
of prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
   (D)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
   
30.   CITY GOVERNMENT
   
31.   MUNICIPAL OFFICES AND DEPARTMENTS
   
32.   BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
   
33.   FINANCE
   
34.   CITY POLICY
   
35.   TAXATION
CHAPTER 30: CITY GOVERNMENT
Section
   
30.01   City Council meetings
   
30.02   Presiding officer
   
30.03   Minutes
   
30.04   Order of business
   
30.05   Voting
   
30.06   Ordinance, resolutions, motions, petitions and communications
   
30.07   Suspension or amendment of rules
   
30.08   Compensation of officers and employees
   
30.09   Quorum for conducting business
   
30.10   Fees and charges
   
30.11   Mayor and City Council; salaries
   
30.12   City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer; Zoning Administrator
   
30.13   Workers’ compensation for elected officials
   
30.14   Special election to fill vacancy on City Council
§ 30.01 CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held
at least once each month, at a date, time and place as established by the City
Council. Any regular meeting falling upon a holiday shall be held on the next
following business day at the same time and place. All meetings, including
special and adjourned meetings, shall be held in the city hall unless the City
Council decides otherwise at a prior meeting, or meeting in the city hall is
impossible.
   (B)   Special meetings. The Mayor or any two members of the City Council may
call a special meeting of the City Council upon at least 24 hours written
notice to each member of the City Council. This notice shall be delivered
personally to each member or shall be left at the member’s usual place of
residence with some responsible person. Pursuant to M.S. § 471.705, as it may
be amended from time to time, written notice of any special meeting shall be
posted giving the date, time, place and purpose of the meeting at least three
days before the meeting. Written notice shall be mailed at least three days
before the meeting to anyone who has filed a written request for notice of
special meetings. In calculating the three days, if the last day falls on a
Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the next regular business day shall be
counted as the third day.
   (C)   Emergency meetings. Notice of emergency meetings shall be given as
required by M.S. § 471.705, Subdivision 1c(c), as it may be amended from time
to time. An emergency meeting is a meeting defined by M.S. § 471.705,
Subdivision 1c(c), as it may be amended from time to time.
   (D)   Initial meeting. At the first regular City Council meeting in January
of each year, the City Council shall:
      (1)   Designate the depositories of city funds;
      (2)   Designate the official newspaper;
      (3)   Choose one of the Council Members as Acting Mayor, who shall
perform the duties of the Mayor during the disability or absence of the Mayor
from the city or, in case of a vacancy in the office of Mayor, until a
successor has been appointed and qualifies;
      (4)   Appoint officers and employees and members of departments, boards,
commissions and committees as may be necessary;
      (5)   Establish and appoint Council Members to those City Council
committees as are deemed appropriate for the efficient and orderly management
of the city.
   (E)   Public meetings. All City Council meetings, including special,
emergency and adjourned meetings and meetings of City Council committees, shall
be conducted in accordance with the Minnesota Open Meeting Law, M.S. § 471.705,
as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 30.02 PRESIDING OFFICER.
   (A)   Who presides. The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the City
Council. In the absence of the Mayor, the Acting Mayor shall preside. In the
absence of both, the City Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer shall call the meeting
to order and shall preside until the Council Members present at the meeting
choose one of their number to act temporarily as presiding officer.
   (B)   Procedure. The presiding officer shall preserve order, enforce any
rules of procedure adopted by the City Council, and determine without debate,
subject to the final decision of the City Council on appeal, all questions of
procedure and order.
   (C)   Appeal procedure. Any member may appeal to the City Council a ruling
of the presiding officer. If the appeal is seconded, the member may speak once
solely on the question involved and the presiding officer may explain the
ruling, but no other Council Member shall participate in the discussion. The
appeal shall be sustained if it is approved by a majority of the members
present, including the presiding officer.
§ 30.03 MINUTES.
   (A)   Generally. Minutes of each City Council meeting shall be kept by the
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer or, in the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer’s absence, by the Deputy
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer. In the absence of both, the presiding
officer shall appoint a secretary pro tem. Ordinances, resolutions and claims
need not be recorded in full in the minutes if they appear in other permanent
records of the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer and can be accurately
identified from the description given in the minutes.
   (B)   Approval. The minutes of each meeting shall be reduced to typewritten
form, shall be signed by the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, and copies
thereof shall be delivered to each Council Member as soon as practicable after
the meeting. At the next regular City Council meeting following the delivery,
approval of the minutes shall be considered by the City Council. The minutes
need not be read aloud, but the presiding officer shall call for any additions
or corrections. If there is no objection to a proposed addition or correction,
it may be made without a vote of the City Council. If there is an objection,
the City Council shall vote upon the addition or correction. If there are no
additions or corrections, the minutes shall stand approved.
§ 30.04 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   Order established. Each meeting of the City Council shall convene at
the time and place appointed therefor. City Council business shall be conducted
in the following order unless varied by the presiding officer:
      (1)   Call to order.
      (2)   Roll call.
      (3)   Approval of minutes.
      (4)   Consent agenda.
      (5)   Public hearings.
      (6)   Petitions, requests, and communications.
      (7)   Ordinances and resolutions.
      (8)   Reports of officers, boards, and committees.
      (9)   Unfinished business.
      (10)   New business.
      (11)   Miscellaneous.
      (12)   Adjournment.
   (B)   Petitions and agenda. Petitions and other papers addressed to the City
Council shall be read by the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer upon
presentation of the same to the City Council. All persons desiring to present
new business before the City Council shall inform the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer thereof at least 72 hours before new business is to be heard. The
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer may prepare an agenda of the new business
for submission to the City Council on or before the time of the next regular
meeting.
§ 30.05 VOTING.
   The votes of the Council Members on any question may be taken in any manner
which signifies the intention of the individual members, and the votes of the
Council Members on any action taken shall be recorded in the minutes. The vote
of each Council Member shall be recorded on each appropriation of money, except
for payments of judgments, claims and amounts fixed by statute. If any Council
Member is present but does not vote, the minutes, as to his or her name, shall
be marked “Present-Not Voting.”
§ 30.06 ORDINANCE, RESOLUTIONS, MOTIONS, PETITIONS AND COMMUNICATIONS.
   (A)   Signing and publication proof. Every ordinance and resolution passed
by the City Council shall be signed by the Mayor, attested by the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, and filed by the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer in the ordinance or resolution book. Proof of publication of every
ordinance shall be attached and filed with the ordinance.
   (B)   Repeals and amendments. Every ordinance or resolution repealing a
previous ordinance or resolution or a section or subdivision thereof shall give
the number, if any, and the title of the ordinance or code number of the
ordinance or resolution to be repealed in whole or in part. Each ordinance or
resolution amending an existing ordinance or resolution or part thereof shall
set forth in full each amended section or subdivision as it will read with the
amendment.
§ 30.07 SUSPENSION OR AMENDMENT OF RULES.
   These rules may be suspended only by a two-thirds vote of the members
present and voting.
§ 30.08 COMPENSATION OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   Officers and employees of the city shall be compensated at a rate as
established from time to time by City Council.
§ 30.09 QUORUM FOR CONDUCTING BUSINESS.
   (A)   A quorum shall consist of a majority of the entire City Council,
including the Mayor. A quorum shall be necessary to transact the business of
the City Council.
   (B)   If no quorum is present, the City Council shall not thereby stand
adjourned, but the members present shall adjourn or recess the City Council by
a majority vote.
§ 30.10 FEES AND CHARGES.
   The City Council may enact an ordinance establishing those fees and charges
that are authorized by this code. Until that ordinance becomes effective, all
fees and charges established by ordinance or resolution prior to the adoption
of this code shall remain in effect. All fees and charges established by the
ordinance establishing fees and charges may be amended from time to time by
amendment of that ordinance.
§ 30.11 MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL; SALARIES.
   The compensation of the Mayor and the compensation of each Council Member
shall be established from time to time by City Council ordinance pursuant to
M.S. § 415.11, as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 30.12 CITY ADMINISTRATOR/CLERK-TREASURER; ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   There is hereby established the position of City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer. The offices of City Clerk and City Treasurer are hereby combined
pursuant to M.S. § 412.591, Subdivision 2, as it may be amended from time to
time. The City Administrator is hereby appointed to be the Clerk-Treasurer for
the city and shall exercise all of the duties and responsibilities of a city
clerk and a city treasurer as specified in M.S. Chapter 412 as it may be
amended from time to time and elsewhere in the laws of the State of Minnesota
and this code. The City Administrator shall also be the Zoning Administrator
for the city and shall execute all of the duties and responsibilities given
this position by state law and this code.
§ 30.13 WORKERS’ COMPENSATION FOR ELECTED OFFICIALS.
   Pursuant to M.S. § 176.011, Subdivision 9, clause 5, as it may be amended
from time to time, the elected officials of the city and those municipal
officers of the city appointed for a regular term of office, shall be and
hereby are included in and under the coverage of the Minnesota Workers’
Compensation Act.
(Ord. 191, passed 2-13-1989)
§ 30.14 SPECIAL ELECTION TO FILL VACANCY ON CITY COUNCIL.
   (A)   In the event of a vacancy on the City Council occasioned by the death
of a council member or some other circumstance, and the vacancy occurs on or
after the first day to file affidavits of candidacy for the next regular city
election or when less than two years remain in the unexpired term, the City
Council, or the Mayor in the event of a tie vote, shall first appoint a person
to fill the vacancy who shall then serve until the qualification of a
successor, all pursuant to M.S. § 412.02, subd. 2a. At any time after the
qualification of the appointed person, the City Council may, but need not, call
a special election to fill the vacancy and the appointed person shall serve
until a successor is duly elected and qualified.
   (B)   The election officials for a special election shall be the same as for
the most recent municipal general election unless changed according to law.
Otherwise, special elections shall be conducted and the returns made in the
manner provided for the municipal general election as provided in M.S. §§
205.10, 205.13, 205.16, 205.17, and 205.175, as from time to time amended.
These cited statutes are hereby adopted and incorporated herein and made a part
of this section by reference as completely as if set out in full herein.
   (C)   No special election shall be authorized under this section in the
event that the vacancy occurred at a time when less than six months remained in
the unexpired term.
(Ord. 242, passed 10-6-2003)
CHAPTER 31: MUNICIPAL OFFICES AND DEPARTMENTS
Section
Volunteer Fire Department
   
31.01   Volunteer Fire Department continued; appointment of officers
   
31.02   Duties of Chief
   
31.03   Duties of Fire Marshal
   
31.04   Records
   
31.05   Practice drills
   
31.06   Assistant Chief
   
31.07   Firefighters
   
31.08   Loss of membership
   
31.09   Compensation
   
31.10   Interference with Volunteer Fire Department
   
31.11   Bylaws
VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 31.01 VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT CONTINUED; APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS.
   (A)   There is continued in this city a Volunteer Fire Department, which
department shall have the following officers: a Chief, and Assistant Chief, and
a Fire Marshal.
   (B)   The Chief of the Volunteer Fire Department shall be appointed by the
Fire Department. The Chief of the Volunteer Fire Department shall appoint each
year an Assistant Chief, subject to confirmation by the City Council. The Chief
of the Volunteer Fire Department and the Assistant Chief each shall hold office
for one year and until the successor has been duly appointed or qualified.
These officers may be removed by the City Council for cause and after a public
hearing. If one of the officers duly appointed shall resign his or her office,
be removed from office by the Fire Department, or is deceased during his or her
term of office, the successor shall be duly appointed by the Fire Department as
soon as is practical and no later than two weeks from the time the position
becomes open. The officer so appointed is so appointed for the period of the
unexpired term of the vacated office.
   (C)   Firefighters and probationary firefighters shall be appointed by the
Fire Department. Firefighters shall continue as members of the Volunteer Fire
Department during good behavior until retirement or voted off by the
Department.
§ 31.02 DUTIES OF CHIEF.
   The Chief shall have control of all fire fighting apparatus and shall be
responsible for its care and condition. The Chief shall make a report annually
to the City Council at its meeting in September as to the condition of the
equipment and needs of the Volunteer Fire Department. The Chief may submit
additional reports and recommendations at any meeting of the City Council, and
he or she shall report each suspension by him or her of a member of the
Volunteer Fire Department at the first meeting of the City Council following
the suspension. The Chief shall be responsible for the proper training and
discipline of the members of the Volunteer Fire Department, and may suspend any
member for refusal or neglect to obey orders.
§ 31.03 DUTIES OF FIRE MARSHAL.
   The office of Fire Marshal shall be held by the Chief or Assistant Chief, if
the City Council approves. The Fire Marshal shall be charged with the
enforcement of all city ordinances and laws of the state for fire prevention
including, if authorized by the City Council, the Uniform Fire Code, Minnesota
Rules Chapter 7510, as it may be amended from time to time. The Fire Marshal
shall have full authority to inspect all premises and to cause the removal or
abatement of all fire hazards.
§ 31.04 RECORDS.
   The Chief shall keep in convenient form a record of all fires. The record
shall include the time of the alarm, location of fire, cause of fire, if known,
type of building, name of owner or tenant, purpose for which occupied, value of
building and contents, members of the Volunteer Fire Department responding to
the alarm and other information as he or she may deem advisable or as may be
required from time to time by the City Council or state law or regulation.
§ 31.05 PRACTICE DRILLS.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief, when the weather permits, to hold
practice drills for the Volunteer Fire Department and to give the firefighters
instruction in approved methods of fire fighting and fire prevention.
§ 31.06 ASSISTANT CHIEF.
   In the absence or disability of the Chief of the Volunteer Fire Department,
the Assistant Chief shall perform all functions and exercise all of the
authority of the Chief.
§ 31.07 FIREFIGHTERS.
   Firefighters shall not be less than 18 years of age and able bodied. They
shall become members of the Volunteer Fire Department only after a 12-month
probationary period. The Fire Department may require that each candidate,
before he or she may become a probationary firefighter, must possess certain
minimum height, weight, education, mental and physical health requirements, and
any other qualifications which may be specified by the City Council.
§ 31.08 LOSS OF MEMBERSHIP.
   Firefighters shall forfeit membership in the Volunteer Fire Department for
unreasonable inattention to duties or lack of attendance at meetings or calls
or disobedience of orders or other due cause, and any firefighter may be
suspended by the Fire Department pending hearing upon his or her removal.
Firefighters absent from three consecutive drills or calls, unless excused by
the Fire Department, shall forfeit membership in the Volunteer Fire Department.
§ 31.09 COMPENSATION.
   The members and officers of the Volunteer Fire Department shall receive
compensation as provided by the City Council.
§ 31.10 INTERFERENCE WITH VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to give or make, or cause to be given or
made, an alarm of fire without probable cause, or to neglect or refuse to obey
any reasonable order of the Chief or other firefighter at a fire, or to
interfere with the Volunteer Fire Department in the discharge of its duties.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 31.11 BYLAWS.
   The Volunteer Fire Department may adopt bylaws for its government, which
bylaws shall be effective upon approval by the City Council.
CHAPTER 32: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section
Economic Development Authority
   
32.01   Establishment; membership
   
32.02   Purpose
   
32.03   Meetings
   
32.04   Expenses
Public Utilities Commission
   
32.15   Establishment and composition
   
32.16   Jurisdiction
   
32.17   Powers
Park Board
   
32.30   Establishment of the Preston Park Board
   
32.31   Organization
   
32.32   Duties
Tree Board
   
32.45   Establishment and composition
   
32.46   Powers and duties
   
32.47   City Forester
Library Board
   
32.60   Establishment and purpose of the Library Board
   
32.61   Composition
   
32.62   Organization
   
32.63   Powers and duties of Board
   
32.64   Library funds
Tourism Board
   
32.75   Establishment of the Preston Tourism Board
   
32.76   Organization
   
32.77   Duties
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
§ 32.01 ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   Establishment. A City Economic Development Authority is established,
which shall be known as the Preston Economic Development Authority.
   (B)   Composition. The Authority shall consist of seven members of the
resident population of the city, or a representative of a business located
within city boundaries, all of whom shall be appointed by the City Council, and
two of whom shall be members of the City Council and appointed annually.
Majority shall be of the resident population. Terms shall be for one, two,
three, four and five years respectively and two members are six-year terms.
Thereafter all commissioners shall be appointed for six-year terms. The
original and successive appointees shall hold their offices until their
successors are appointed and qualified. Vacancies during the term shall be
filled by the City Council for the unexpired portion of that term. The City
Council will determine the amount of compensation for all members in attendance
at meetings.
   (C)   Officers. The Authority shall elect from among its own appointed
members a Chairperson who shall serve a term of one year. The Authority may
create and fill such other offices as it may determine.
   (D)   By-laws. The Authority shall at all times have the power to make,
establish and formulate by-laws and amendments thereto for the efficient
conduct of its business as authorized by this subchapter.
(Ord. 180, passed 2-9-1987; Am. Ord. 233, passed 2-7-2000; Am. Ord. 305, passed
5-19-2025)
§ 32.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Authority is to promote, develop and foster economic
development and economic activity within the city; to apply for and receive
grants, loans, contributions, or other funds to be used for the promotion and
generation of economic activity and development.
(Ord. 180, passed 2-9-1987; Am. Ord. 305, passed 5-19-2025)
§ 32.03 MEETINGS.
   The Economic Development Authority shall hold at least one regular meeting
in every two-month period. It shall keep a record of its resolutions,
transactions and findings, and this record shall be a public record. As soon as
practicable following the end of the fiscal year, the Authority shall submit to
the City Council a report of its work and activities during the preceding year.
(Ord. 180, passed 2-9-1987; Am. Ord. 305, passed 5-19-2025)
§ 32.04 EXPENSES.
   The City Council may appropriate such funds to defray the expenses of the
Authority in such amounts as the Council, in its discretion, may determine. The
expenditures of the Authority shall be within the amounts appropriated for that
purpose by the City Council.
(Ord. 180, passed 2-9-1987; Am. Ord. 305, passed 5-19-2025)
PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
§ 32.15 ESTABLISHMENT AND COMPOSITION.
   (A)   The Preston Public Utilities Commission now in existence shall
hereafter operate as a Public Utilities Commission under M.S. §§ 412.321 to
412.391, as from time to time amended.
   (B)   The Commission shall consist of three members appointed by the Mayor
with the approval of the City Council. No more than one member may be chosen
from the Council membership. Each member shall serve for a term of three years
and until a successor is appointed and qualified except that of the members
initially appointed in any city, one shall serve for a term of one year, one
for a term of two years, and one for a term of three years. Members must be of
the resident population of the city. A vacancy shall be filled by the Council
for the unexpired term.
(Ord. 127, passed 9-5-1968; Am. Ord. 306, passed 5-19-2025)
§ 32.16 JURISDICTION.
   The following public utilities shall be within the jurisdiction of the
Commission.
   (A)   The city water system, including all facilities and appurtenances for
the distribution and consumption of water.
   (B)   The light and power system, including all facilities and appurtenances
for the distribution and consumption of light and power, and also any electric
signal systems and street lighting systems.
   (C)   Gas distribution system, if any.
   (D)   Under and pursuant to the authority stated in M.S. § 412.351, as it
may be amended from time to time, jurisdiction over the sewage treatment system
of the city, including but not limited to the sewage disposal plant and sewage
collection system within the city, shall be transferred from the city to the
Public Utilities Commission.
(Ord. 127, passed 9-5-1968; Am. Ord. 228, passed 11-18-1996; Am. Ord. 306,
passed 5-19-2025)
§ 32.17 POWERS.
   (A)   The Commission shall have all of the powers enumerated and described
for public utilities commissions in M.S. Chapter 412, as it may be amended from
time to time, and shall have all the necessary and incidental powers to
properly operate and maintain all of the systems under its jurisdiction.
   (B)   The city shall continue to own and operate the city’s municipal
utilities unless and until, two-thirds of voters voting in a general or special
election approve an ordinance or resolution passed by the City Council,
concurred in by the Public Utilities Commission if the utility is under the
jurisdiction of such a commission, to lease or sell the utility or discontinue
its operation, wholly or in part, as provided by M.S. § 412.321, Subdivision 4,
as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 127, passed 9-5-1968; Am. Ord. 306, passed 5-19-2025)
PARK BOARD
§ 32.30 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRESTON PARK BOARD.
   (A)   That pursuant to M.S. § 412.501, as it may be amended from time to
time, there is hereby established a Park Board for the city.
   (B)   The Preston Park Board shall consist of five members from the resident
population of the city to be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the
City Council. The appointees shall be appointed to serve staggered terms of
three years, except as noted below, commencing on the first day of January in
the year of appointment. Upon expiration of a term, the appointee shall
continue until reappointed or a successor is appointed. Absences from any three
meetings in a year, unless excused in advance by the Chair, constitutes a
vacancy. In the event of any vacancy, the Mayor, with the approval of the City
Council, shall appoint a person to complete the unexpired term.
   (C)   One member may be a Council Member or the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer, to be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council.
This member shall serve for a one- year term, to expire on December 31 of each
year.
   (D)   Other persons may serve in an ex officio capacity as the City Council
may, in its discretion, deem appropriate.
   (E)   Each of the five regular Park Board Members shall have equal voting
privileges. Any member may be removed for cause by majority vote of the City
Council upon written charge and after a public hearing.
(Ord. 236, passed 1-16-2001)
§ 32.31 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   At the first regular meeting in January, the Park Board shall elect a
Chairperson, and a Vice- Chairperson from among its own members each for a term
of one year. The Board may create and fill such other officers as it may
determine appropriate.
   (B)   The Park Board shall hold at least one meeting each month at the time
and place as they may fix by resolution. Special meetings may be called at any
time by the Chairperson, or in the case of the Chairperson’s absence, by the
Vice-Chairperson.
   (C)   Written minutes of meetings shall be kept and filed with the City
Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer prior to the new regularly scheduled City
Council meeting, but shall be subject to the approval at the next Park Board
Commission meeting.
   (D)   Expenditures by the Park Board may be made accordingly but must make
quarterly reports available to the City Council and file an annual statement of
receipts and disbursements with the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer.
(Ord. 236, passed 1-16-2001; Am. Ord. 307, passed 5-19-2025)
§ 32.32 DUTIES.
   The Park Board shall maintain, beautify, and care for park property, and
perform all other acts necessary to carry out its statutory powers according to
M.S. § 412.521, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 236, passed 1-16-2001)
TREE BOARD
§ 32.45 ESTABLISHMENT AND COMPOSITION.
   (A)   A Tree Board is hereby established which shall be composed of three
members, from the resident population of the city, to be appointed by the Mayor
with the approval of the City Council. Members shall be appointed annually.
   (B)   One member may be a Council Member, to be appointed by the Mayor with
the approval of the City Council.
   (C)   The Council may, in lieu of appointing a separate Tree Board, assign
its duties to the Public Utility Commission.
   (D)   The City Forester shall serve as administrative staff to the Board.
(Ord. 308, passed 5-19-2025)
§ 32.46 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Board shall study, investigate, counsel, develop and administer a
written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal
or disposition of trees and shrubs, in parks, along streets and in other public
areas. The plans shall be presented to the Council, and following the review
and approval by the Council shall constitute the official tree plan for the
city. The Board, when requested by the Council, shall consider, investigate,
make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter or question coming
within the scope of its work.
   (B)   The Board shall have the following specific powers and duties:
      (1)   Determine and establish rules and regulations for the conduct of
the Board as the members deem advisable. Provided, however, that the rules and
regulations shall not be in conflict with this subchapter or other city code
provisions, state or federal law;
      (2)   Recommend the adoption of rules, regulations and city code
provisions which it shall from time to time deem in the public interest, as
most likely to enhance and beautify the urban forest, and for the purposes of
carrying out this subchapter;
      (3)   Recommend the broad matters of policy regarding the planting,
maintenance and removal of trees and other vegetation on city property;
      (4)   Recommend policies for the review and approval of projects on
private property where open space and/or landscaping is required as a condition
for the development, and recommend policies for the enforcement of approved
plans;
      (5)   Assist the City Forester in encouraging landscaping installation
and maintenance on private property by providing information on the value of
landscaping and on the proper planting and care of trees and other vegetation;
      (6)   Assist the City Forester in promoting appreciation of trees and the
urban forest through an annual Arbor Day observance and other activities;
      (7)   Review those portions of the city budget allocated for the planting
and care of trees and other vegetation, and advise the Council on the
appropriateness of the funding levels; and
      (8)   In all instances, serve as an advocate of the city’s urban forest.
(Ord. 308, passed 5-19-2025)
§ 32.47 CITY FORESTER.
   (A)   Establishment. The position of City Forester is hereby established.
The Council may, in its sole discretion, assign the duties of City Forester as
deemed appropriate.
   (B)   Duties. The City Forester may recommend, and the Board may adopt,
additional regulations to be known as the urban forestry standards and
specifications proper and necessary to effectuate the urban forest management
plan within the city providing reasonable guidance for planting and maintaining
public trees. These rules and regulations may not be in conflict with any other
law or city code provision.
(Ord. 308, passed 5-19-2025)
LIBRARY BOARD
§ 32.60 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE OF THE LIBRARY BOARD.
   If, at the time this subchapter is adopted, the city has a Library Board,
the Library Board for the city is hereby continued. If the city did not have a
Library Board at the time of the adoption of this subchapter, the City Council
may at any time determine to establish a Library Board by appointing members to
the Library Board as provided in §
32.61 of this code. The Library Board shall be the library agency authorized by
M.S. § 134.09, as it may be amended from time to time. The purpose of this
subchapter is to define the composition, organization, powers, funding, and
protocol of the Public Library Board for the City of Preston, Minnesota.
(Ord. 309, passed 5-19-2025)
§ 32.61 COMPOSITION.
   (A)   Number of members. The Library Board shall consist of seven members,
all having full voting privileges. The members shall be amongst the resident
population of the city; if the city library is a member of a regional public
library system, as defined in M.S. § 134.001, as it may be amended from time to
time, the Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, may appoint to the City
Library Board, residents of the county, provided that the county is
participating in the regional public library system and that the majority of
the members of the City Library Board are residents of the city.
   (B)   Term(s) of office. Of the seven members, one may be a Council Member,
to be appointed by the Mayor with approval of the City Council. Of the
remaining members, members shall be appointed or reappointed to the Library
Board and shall serve for a term of three years. The appointments shall be made
before the first meeting of the Library Board after the end of the fiscal year.
A Library Board member shall not be eligible to serve more than three
consecutive three-year terms. Members shall serve until a successor is
appointed and qualifies. The Mayor, with consent of the City Council, may
remove any member for misconduct or neglect.
(Ord. 309, passed 5-19-2025)
§ 32.62 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   The Library Board shall choose one of its members as Chairperson and
one member as Secretary, and from time to time it may appoint such other
officers as is it deems necessary.
   (B)   Regular meetings of the Public Library Board shall be held monthly
unless otherwise determined by the majority of the Board Members.
   (C)   The Library Board shall adopt bylaws and regulations for the
government of the library and for the conduct of its business as may be deemed
expedient and conformable to law.
   (D)   The Library Board shall have exclusive control of the expenditure of
all money collected for and placed to the credit of the Library Fund; interest
earned on all money collected or placed to the credit of the fund, of the
construction of library buildings, and of the grounds, rooms and buildings
provided for library purposes.
   (E)   Library Board Members shall receive no compensation for their services
but may be reimbursed for actual and necessary travel expenses incurred in the
discharge of Library Board duties and activities.
(Ord. 309, passed 5-19-2025)
§ 32.63 POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD.
   (A)   Generally. In order to carry out the general powers granted in
accordance with Minnesota State Statute and this subchapter, the Library Board
shall have the powers granted in this section.
   (B)   Employment.  The library staff are appointed by the City Council upon
the recommendation of the Library Board. Library staff shall be considered a
city employee(s) and will be paid and given benefits accordingly.
   (C)   Construction.  With approval of the City Council, the Library Board
may purchase grounds and erect a library building thereon. The Library Board
may, with the consent of the City Council, make contracts and leases for the
construction and operation of these facilities for terms not exceeding ten
years. The Library Board may lease rooms for library use. Every such contract
and lease shall provide that the structure shall be operated for the public use
and convenience, and that the charges shall be reasonable, and it shall reserve
to the Library Board the power to prescribe reasonable rules and regulations
from time to time for the conduct of the privilege.
   (D)   Purchase of supplies, equipment, and services. The Library Board may
purchase all necessary materials, supplies, equipment, and services.
   (E)   Maintenance. The Library Board shall maintain, beautify, and care for
all library property.
(Ord. 309, passed 5-19-2025)
§ 32.64 LIBRARY FUNDS.
   (A)   Establishment. For the purpose of carrying out the powers, duties, and
responsibilities of the library, there shall be established a Library Fund. All
money received for the library shall be paid to the city treasury, credited to
the Library Fund, and paid out only upon approval by the Board. The City
Council may transfer to the Library Fund the money it deems necessary for
public library purposes.
   (B)   Budget. No later than August 1 of each year or any other date fixed by
state statute, the Library Board shall present to the City Administrator in the
manner and detail the City Council requires, its estimate of the financial
needs of the Library Board for the ensuing fiscal year.
   (C)   Annual report(s). As soon as practicable following the end of the
fiscal year, the Library Board shall report to the governing body of the city
all amounts received during the preceding year and sources thereof, the amounts
expended and for what purposes, the number of library materials on hand, the
number purchased and loaned, and such other information as it deems advisable.
No later than April 1 of each year the Library Board shall file this
information with the Department of Education on forms supplied by the
Department.
(Ord. 309, passed 5-19-2025)
TOURISM BOARD
§ 32.75 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRESTON TOURISM BOARD.
   (A)   The Preston Tourism Board is hereby established for the purpose of
advising and assisting the City Council on the promotion of the Preston area as
a tourist destination and in the allocation and utilization of the lodging tax
proceeds collected within the city to further that purpose.
   (B)   The Preston Tourism Board shall consist of five members from the
resident population of the city, or a representative of a business located
within city boundaries, all of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of the City Council. The appointees shall be appointed to serve
staggered terms of three years, except as noted below, commencing on the first
day of January in the year of appointment. Upon expiration of a term, the
appointee shall continue until reappointed, or a successor is appointed.
Absences from any three meetings in a year, unless excused in advance by the
Chair, constitutes a vacancy. In the event of any vacancy, the Mayor, with the
approval of the City Council, shall appoint a person to complete the unexpired
term.
   (C)   One member may be a Council Member to be appointed by the Mayor with
the approval of the City Council. This member shall serve for a one-year term,
to expire on December 31 of each year.
   (D)   Other persons may serve in an ex officio capacity as the City Council
may, in its discretion, deem appropriate.
   (E)   Each of the five regular Tourism Board Members shall have equal voting
privileges. Any member may be removed for cause by majority vote of the City
Council upon written charge and after a public hearing.
   (F)   The Council may, in lieu of appointing a separate Tourism Board,
assign the advisory duties to staff with recommendations provided to City
Council.
(Ord. 310, passed 5-19-2025)
Cross-reference:
   Lodging tax provisions, see §
35.01 et seq.
§ 32.76 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   At the first regular meeting in January, the Tourism Board shall elect
a Chairperson, from among its own members each for a term of one year. The
Board may create and fill such other offices as it may determine appropriate.
   (B)   The Board shall hold at least one meeting each quarter at the time and
place as they may fix by resolution. Special meetings may be called at any time
by the Chairperson.
   (C)   Written minutes of meetings shall be kept and filed with the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer prior to the new regularly scheduled City Council
meeting but shall be subject to the approval at the next Tourism Board meeting.
   (D)   Expenditures by the Tourism Board may be made accordingly but must
make quarterly reports available to the City Council and file an annual
statement of receipts and disbursements with the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer.
(Ord. 310, passed 5-19-2025)
§ 32.77 DUTIES.
   The Tourism Board shall make recommendations to the City Council on the
promotion of Preston area as a tourist destination and/or convention site and
for the allocation and utilization of the lodging tax proceeds.
(Ord. 310, passed 5-19-2025)
CHAPTER 33: FINANCE
Section
Special Assessments for Local Developments
   
33.01   Purpose
   
33.02   (Reserved)
   
33.03   (Reserved)
   
33.04   (Reserved)
   
33.05   (Reserved)
   
33.06   (Reserved)
   
33.07   Permanent improvement revolving fund
   
33.08   Improvements where public utilities not available
   
33.09   (Reserved)
   
33.10   Reservation of rights by city
   
33.11   Law governing assessment proceedings; bond requirements
   
33.12   Fees
Public Charitable Trust Fund
   
33.40   Recitals
   
33.41   Establishment
   
33.42   Purpose
   
33.43   Board of Trustees; powers
   
33.44   City as trustee of funds; accounting
   
33.45   Records
   
33.46   Transfers to trust fund
SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS FOR LOCAL DEVELOPMENTS
§ 33.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   A LOCAL IMPROVEMENT PROJECT is a project involving the construction of
one or more of the following types of improvements, on which part or all of the
cost may be assessed to benefitting properties.
      Street pavement
      Sidewalk
      Curb, gutter and driveway
      Service connections
      Sanitary sewer treatment facility
      Water main
      Sanitary sewer
      Storm sewer
      Water storage
   (B)   M.S. Chapter 429 as it may be amended from time to time regulates the
procedure for the construction and financing of local improvement projects when
at least part of the cost is defrayed by special assessments against benefitted
properties.
   (C)   When an improvement is constructed which is of special benefit to
certain areas, the City Council may levy special assessments against the
benefitted properties within that area.
   (D)   The objectives of these special assessment policies are to promote
orderly development; to ensure fair and equitable treatment of benefitting
properties; and to assure that the city’s financial resources are protected.
(Ord. 226, passed 8-19-1996)
§ 33.02 (RESERVED)
§ 33.03 (RESERVED)
§ 33.04 (RESERVED)
§ 33.05 (RESERVED)
§ 33.06 (RESERVED)
§ 33.07 PERMANENT IMPROVEMENT REVOLVING FUND.
   M.S. Chapter 429.091 Subdivision 7a, as it may be amended from time to time,
regulates the establishment and use of revolving fund bonds. No revolving fund
bond shall be established or used unless it complies with this chapter.
   (A)   Establishment. There is established a permanent improvement revolving
fund of the city to be held and administered by the Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer, separate and apart from all other funds of the city, for the purpose
of financing local improvements.
   (B)   Source of funds. The fund shall be a permanent fund of the city and
the moneys necessary for its maintenance shall be provided by taxation, by the
appropriation of available moneys from other funds of the city, and/or by the
issuance and sale of permanent improvement revolving fund bonds of the city as
deemed necessary from time to time by the Council.
   (C)   Disposition of funds. Moneys in the fund shall be used only as
directed by resolution of the Council for the purpose of advancing to local
improvement funds the cost of improvements for which assessments are to be
levied. All moneys so advanced to an improvement fund shall be restored as soon
as sufficient moneys are received in the improvement fund, together with
interest at a rate fixed by the Council during the time for which the moneys
have been so furnished.
   (D)   Investment. Whenever there are moneys in the fund not immediately
needed for local improvements, those moneys shall be invested by the
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer under the direction of the Council in any
securities authorized by law for investment of municipal sinking funds.
   (E)   Transfer of surplus. When the fund accumulates encumbered moneys in
excess of any amounts reasonably anticipated to be needed for local improvement
fund advances, the Council may, by resolution adopted by a four-fifths vote,
declare any part of the excess to be surplus and transfer it to the general
fund.
(Ord. 226, passed 8-19-1996)
§ 33.08 IMPROVEMENTS WHERE PUBLIC UTILITIES NOT AVAILABLE.
   In lands where city sewer and water is deemed by the Council to be not
available for economic or other reasons, development may take place if the
following requirements are met.
   (A)   All lots must have the capabilities of being served by city sewer and
water in the future, when and if service shall become economically feasible.
Economic feasibility shall be exclusively determined by the City Council.
   (B)   To meet the requirements for a zoning permit, each home site shall
meet all requirements of the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance, and shall be
capable of supporting an on-site sewage system as specified by the Department
of Health and as required by city ordinances.
   (C)   An individual well may serve up to four homes.
   (D)   Each home must have an individual disposal system meeting the
requirements of city ordinances.
   (E)   All wells must be built to all recommended state standards.
(Ord. 226, passed 8-19-1996)
§ 33.09 (RESERVED)
§ 33.10 RESERVATION OF RIGHTS BY CITY.
   The city reserves the right to do the following.
   (A)   Reject all or any part of a proposed development based on the
determination that city facilities, sewer treatment, water pumping, storage and
distribution and other city services, including the Fire Department, would not
be adequate without major expansion, and funding is not available at the time
of the presentation of the development, or for other reasons determined by the
Council. In any event, the city shall not be obligated to the developer or any
other person or entity to assist or provide any assistance, financial or
otherwise, with respect to any proposed improvement, unless the city and
developer shall have entered into a written agreement setting forth the
respective obligations of the parties.
(Ord. 226, passed 8-19-1996; Am. Ord. 257, passed 9-10-2007)
§ 33.11 LAW GOVERNING ASSESSMENT PROCEEDINGS; BOND REQUIREMENT.
   All special assessment proceedings shall be in accordance with M.S. Chapter
429, as it may be amended from time to time. Provided nevertheless, that the
city may, but need not, require the developer to post a bond in a penal sum
determined by the City Council for the purpose of guaranteeing payment of
special assessments on the lots and parcels of land included in the project
that have not been sold by the developer to consumers. The amount of the bond
and the required duration thereof shall be determined by the City Council after
consideration of all facts and circumstances.
(Ord. 226, passed 8-19-1996)
§ 33.12 FEES.
   (A)   A filing fee payable to the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall
accompany the application for final review by the Council of each subdivision.
   (B)   The filing fees shall be as set forth and changed from time to time by
action of the Council.
(Ord. 226, passed 8-19-1996)
PUBLIC CHARITABLE TRUST FUND
§ 33.40 RECITALS.
   The City Council, in full recognition of the needs of the citizens of the
city for recreational, health and athletic facilities for use by the public,
determines that the establishment of a Public Charitable Trust Fund for the
purpose of receiving and administering funds for recreational, health and
athletic purposes may provide substantial benefits to the citizens of the city,
and substantially improve the quality of life for the residents of the city in
general; and that accordingly, the establishment of the City Recreation Health
and Athletic Public Charitable Trust Fund is in the public interest.
(Ord. 162, passed 12-5-1977)
§ 33.41 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is established a perpetual and permanent public charitable trust fund
for the city for recreational, health and athletic purposes, to be officially
called and known as “The City of Preston Recreation, Health and Athletic Public
Charitable Trust Fund,” hereinafter referred to as the Trust Fund.
(Ord. 162, passed 12-5-1977)
§ 33.42 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Trust Fund is exclusively to receive and to administer
funds for recreational, health and athletic purposes for the benefit of the
residents of the city, and to that end to take and hold by bequest, device,
gift, grant, purchase, lease or otherwise any property, real, personal,
tangible, or any undivided interest therein, without limitation as to amount or
value; to sell, convey or otherwise dispose of any property and to invest,
reinvest, or deal with the principal or the income thereof in such manner as,
in the judgement of the Board of Trustees of the Fund, will best promote the
purposes of the Trust Fund.
(Ord. 162, passed 12-5-1977)
§ 33.43 BOARD OF TRUSTEES; POWERS.
   (A)   Establishment of Board of Trustees. There is established a Board of
Trustees for the purpose of administering the funds of the Trust Fund in
accordance with the purposes herein set forth. The Board of Trustees shall
consist of five persons, who shall be the Mayor (ex-officio), the City Attorney
(ex-officio), and three other members appointed by the City Council, all of
whom shall be residents of the city, and one of whom shall be a member of the
banking profession, one of whom shall be a member of the health or healing arts
profession, and one of whom shall be a current member of the Park Board. The
Mayor and City Attorney shall serve on the Board of Trustees so long as they
hold public office, respectively, and the three remaining members of the Board
of Trustees shall each serve on the Board for terms of one, two and three
years, respectively, and thereafter each member and his or her successor in
office shall serve for three-year terms. No member shall serve on the Board for
more than nine consecutive years. The City Council resolution, require that the
members be bonded in an amount determined by the Council in its discretion, at
the sole expense of the city.
   (B)   Powers of Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees shall have the
power and authority to do any act or thing incidental to or connected with the
foregoing purposes or in advancement thereof.
   (C)   Limitations on power of Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees shall
not engage in any activities, acts or actions which would make any investments
of the funds of the Trust Fund in any manner subject to tax under Section 49.44
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 or any like or corresponding provisions of
any subsequent federal tax laws; and shall not engage in any activities, acts
or actions which might destroy the tax deductibility of gifts, bequests or
devises be donors to the Trust Fund, it being the intent of the City Council
that all such bequests, devices and gifts made and transferred to the Trust
Fund by any donor, shall be deductible for income tax and death tax purposes.
   (D)   Board of Trustees may formulate by-laws for the conduct of its
business. The Board of Trustees shall at all times have the power to make,
establish and formulate by-laws and amendments thereto, for the efficient
conduct of its business as authorized by this subchapter.
(Ord. 162, passed 12-5-1977)
§ 33.44 CITY AS TRUSTEE OF FUNDS; ACCOUNTING.
   The city, a municipal corporation, shall be at all times considered the
Trustee of all funds received by the Trust Fund, to be administered by the city
by and through the Board of Trustees, as above established. An annual
accounting of all funds received by the Trust Fund and paid out therefrom, the
income thereon and the expenses relating to the Trust Fund, shall be included
in the annual city audit. The city shall at all times be considered the owner
of all funds received by the Trust Fund, to be held in trust for the uses and
purposes hereinbefore stated and described.
(Ord. 162, passed 12-5-1977)
§ 33.45 RECORDS.
   All books, records, statements of account, and any and all other information
relating to the Trust Fund and administration thereof shall be permanently
located at the office of the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, and shall at
all times be open for inspection by the public.
(Ord. 162, passed 12-5-1977)
§ 33.46 TRANSFERS TO TRUST FUND. 
   Gifts, bequests, devices, or other transfers to the Trust Fund may be
accomplished by making checks, drafts or bequests payable to “City of Preston
Recreation, Health and Athletic Public Charitable Trust Fund.” All such gifts,
bequests, and transfers from any third party or parties shall be acknowledged
by the Board of Trustees by means of a resolution of the Board accepting the
gift or bequests for the purposes hereinbefore set forth.
(Ord. 162, passed 12-5-1977)
CHAPTER 34: CITY POLICY
Section
   
34.01   Election day
   
34.02   Polling place
   
34.03   Official newspaper
   
34.04   Employment background checks
   
34.05   License background checks
§ 34.01 ELECTION DAY.
   The regular city election shall be held annually on the first Tuesday after
the first Monday in November of every year. This section is made and passed
pursuant to authority granted to the City Council in M.S. § 205.07, as it may
be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 129, passed 12-9-1968)
§ 34.02 POLLING PLACE.
The place of holding all city elections is established at the Emergency Service
Building.
(Ord. 36, passed 4-12-1889)
§ 34.03 OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER.
   At the first regular meeting of the City Council in each fiscal year, the
Council shall designate a newspaper printed and published in the city as the
official paper thereof, and all legal notices of the city required to be
published shall be published therein, and the paper so designated shall
continue to be the official paper of the city until another newspaper is
designated as such.
(Ord. 35, passed 4-12-1889)
§ 34.04 EMPLOYMENT BACKGROUND CHECKS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose and intent of this section is to establish
regulations that will allow law enforcement access to Minnesota's Computerized
Criminal History information for specified non-criminal purposes of employment
background checks.
   (B)   Criminal history employment background investigations.
      (1)   The Preston Police Department is hereby authorized, as the
exclusive entity within the city, to do a criminal history background
investigation on applicants for all city employment position unless the city's
hiring authority concludes that a background investigation is not needed.
      (2)   In conducting the criminal history background investigation in
order to screen employment applicants, the Police Department is authorized to
access data maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions
Computerized Criminal History information system in accordance with BCA policy.
Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Police
Department under the care and custody of the chief law enforcement official or
his or her designee. A summary of the results of the Computerized Criminal
History data may be released by the Police Department to the hiring authority,
including the City Council, the City Administrator, or other city staff
involved in the hiring process.
      (3)   Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must
authorize the Police Department by written consent to undertake the
investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of
M.S. Chapter 13 regarding the collection, maintenance and use of the
information. Except for the positions set forth in M.S. § 364.09, the city will
not reject an applicant for employment on the basis of the applicant's prior
conviction unless the crime is directly related to the position of employment
sought and the conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor
with a jail sentence. If the city rejects the applicant's request on this
basis, the city shall notify the applicant in writing of the following:
         (a)   The grounds and reasons for the denial.
         (b)   The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in
M.S. § 364.06.
         (c)   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment.
         (d)   That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered
upon reapplication.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-7-2016)
§ 34.05 LICENSE BACKGROUND CHECKS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose and intent of this section is to establish
regulations that will allow law enforcement access to Minnesota's Computerized
Criminal History information for specified non-criminal purposes of licensing
background checks.
   (B)   Criminal history license background investigations.
      (1)   The Preston Police Department is hereby authorized, as the
exclusive entity within the city, to do a criminal history background
investigation on the applicants for the licenses within the city.
      (2)   In conducting the criminal history background investigation in
order to screen license applicants, the Police Department is authorized to
access data maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions
Computerized Criminal History information system in accordance with BCA policy.
Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Police
Department under the care and custody of the chief law enforcement official or
his or her designee. A summary of the results of the Computerized Criminal
History data may be released by the Police Department to the licensing
authority, including the City Council, the City Administrator or other city
staff involved the license approval process.
      (3)   Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must
authorize the Police Department by written consent to undertake the
investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of
M.S. Chapter 13 regarding the collection, maintenance and use of the
information. Except for the positions set forth in M.S. § 364.09, the city will
not reject an applicant for a license on the basis of the applicant's prior
conviction unless the crime is directly related to the license sought and the
conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail
sentence. If the city rejects the applicant's request on this basis, the city
shall notify the applicant in writing of the following:
         (a)   The grounds and reasons for the denial.
         (b)   The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in
M.S. § 364.06.
         (c)   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for the license.
         (d)   That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered
upon reapplication.
(Ord. 277, passed 11-7-2016)
CHAPTER 35: TAXATION
Section
Local Lodging Tax
   
35.01   Definitions
   
35.02   Imposition of tax
   
35.03   Administration of tax
   
35.04   Collection
   
35.05   Payment and returns
   
35.06   Exceptions and exemptions
   
35.07   Refunds
   
35.08   Failure to file a return
   
35.09   Examination of records
   
35.10   Confidential information
   
35.11   Failure to advertise tax
   
35.12   Use of proceeds
   
35.13   Violations
   
35.14   Appeals
   
35.15   Contract with state
   
35.16   Administration by state
   
35.99   Penalty
LOCAL LODGING TAX
§ 35.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply,
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GENDER. All pronouns and any variation thereof and are deemed to refer to
the feminine, masculine, neuter, singular, or plural as the identity of the
person or persons may require.
   LODGER. A person obtaining lodging from an operator.
   LODGING. The furnishing for consideration of lodging at a hotel, motel,
rooming house, tourist court, or resort or other than the rent or leasing
thereof for a continuous period of 30 days or more. LODGING shall not include
the renting or leasing of campgrounds, camper or motor home sites, except in
the case of municipally-owned campgrounds which are eligible for taxation.
   OPERATOR. An operator who provides lodging to others or any officer, agent,
directors, shareholders, members or employees of the operator.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, estate,
receiver, trustee, executor, administrator, assignee, syndicate, or any other
combination of individuals. Whenever the term PERSON is used in any provision
of this chapter prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to a
corporation, association, or partnership, shall mean the officers, directors,
shareholders, members or partners thereof as the case may be.
   RENT. The total consideration valued in money charged for lodging, whether
paid in money or otherwise.
(Ord. 209, passed 4-6-1993)
§ 35.02 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   There is imposed a tax of 3% on the rent charged by an operator for
providing lodging to any person after 12 midnight, May 1, 1993. The tax shall
be stated and charged separately and shall be collected by the operator of the
lodge. The tax collected by the operator shall be a debt owed by the operator
to the city, and shall be extinguished only by payment to the city. In no case
shall the tax imposed by this section upon an operator exceed the amount of tax
which the operator is authorized and required by this chapter to collect from a
lodger.
(Ord. 209, passed 4-6-1993)
§ 35.03 ADMINISTRATION OF TAX.
   (A)   Administration. The city shall administer and enforce the assessment
and collection of the tax imposed by this chapter. The city shall cause to be
prepared blank forms for the returns required by this chapter, and shall
distribute the same throughout the city and furnish them on application, but
failure to receive or secure them shall not relieve any person from any
obligation, collection or enforcement of the tax.
   (B)   Costs of administration. Not more than 5% of gross proceeds from the
tax may be retained by the city for the purpose of administration, collection
and enforcement.
(Ord. 209, passed 4-6-1993)
§ 35.04 COLLECTION.
   Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter at the time the
rent is paid. The tax collection shall be deemed to be held in trust by the
operator for the city. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the
rent charged for the lodging, and those persons paying the tax shall receive a
receipt of payment from the operator.
(Ord. 209, passed 4-6-1993)
Penalty, see § 35.99
§ 35.05 PAYMENT AND RETURNS.
   (A)   The tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the operator to the
city monthly, not later than 25 days after the end of the month in which the
taxes were collected, or as otherwise provided by Rules and Regulations of the
City Council. At the time of payment, the operator shall submit a return on
forms and containing information as the city may require. The return shall
contain the following minimum information.
      (1)   The total amount of rent collected for lodging during the period
covered by the return.
      (2)   The amount of tax required to be collected and due for the period.
      (3)   The signature of the person filing the return or that of his or her
agent duly authorized in writing.
      (4)   The period covered by the return.
   (B)   The operator may offset against the tax payable with respect to any
reporting period, the amount of tax imposed by this chapter previously paid as
a result of any transaction the consideration for which became uncollectable
during the reporting period, but only in proportion to the portion of the
consideration which became uncollectable.
(Ord. 209, passed 4-6-1993)
§ 35.06 EXCEPTIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Exceptions. No tax shall be imposed on rent for lodging paid by an
officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express
provisions of federal law or international treaty.
   (B)   Exemptions. An exemption shall be granted to any person as to whom or
whose occupancy it is beyond the power of the city to tax. No exemption shall
be granted, except upon a claim therefor made at the time the rent is
collected, and the claim shall be made in writing and under penalty of perjury.
All claims shall be forwarded to the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer when
the returns and collections are submitted as required by this chapter.
(Ord. 209, passed 4-6-1993)
§ 35.07 REFUNDS.
   Any person may apply to the City Council for a refund of tax paid for a
prescribed period in excess of the amount legally due for that period, provided
that no application for refund shall be considered unless filed within one year
after the tax was paid, or within one year from the filing of the return, which
ever period is the longer. The City Council shall examine the claim, and shall
make and file written findings thereon, denying or allowing the claim in whole
or in part, and shall mail a notice thereof by registered mail to the person at
the address stated upon the return. If the claim is allowed in whole or in
part, the city shall credit the amount of the allowance against any taxes due
under this chapter from the claimant, and the balance of the allowance, if any,
shall be paid by the city to the claimant.
(Ord. 209, passed 4-6-1993)
§ 35.08 FAILURE TO FILE A RETURN.
   (A)   If any operator required by this chapter to file a return shall fail
to do so within the time prescribed, or shall make, willfully or otherwise, an
incorrect, false, or fraudulent return, the operator shall, upon written notice
and demand, immediately file the return or corrected return. The city shall
assess a tax on the basis thereof, which tax (less any payments previously made
on account of the tax for the taxable period covered by return) shall be
immediately paid upon written notice and demand.
   (B)   If any portion of a tax imposed by this chapter, including penalties
thereon, is not paid within 30 days after it is required to be paid, the city
shall direct the institution of legal action as may be necessary to recover the
amount due.
(Ord. 209, passed 4-6-1993)
§ 35.09 EXAMINATION OF RECORDS.
   The city or its designated agents authorized in writing may examine the
books, papers and records of any operator, in order to verify the accuracy of
any return made, or if no return was made, to ascertain the tax as provided in
this chapter. Every operator is directed and required to give to the city, or
to its duly authorized agent or employee, the means, facilities and opportunity
for examinations/ investigations as are hereby authorized.
(Ord. 209, passed 4-6-1993)
Penalty, see § 35.99
§ 35.10 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   No officer or employee of the city shall divulge or otherwise make
known in any manner any particulars disclosed in any return required by this
chapter, or any information concerning the affairs of the person making the
return acquired from the person’s records, officers, or employees while
performing an examination or audit, except in connection with a proceeding
involving taxes due under this chapter from the person making a return. Nothing
herein contained shall be construed to prohibit the city from publishing
statistics so classified as not to disclose the identity of particular returns
and the contents thereof.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the above provisions of this section, the city may
enter into an agreement providing for the administration and collection of the
tax imposed by this chapter with the Minnesota Department of Revenue and its
officers and agents.
(Ord. 209, passed 4-6-1993)
§ 35.11 FAILURE TO ADVERTISE TAX.
   It shall be unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state to
the public or any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part
thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be
added to the rent, or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded,
except that in computing the tax to be collected, amounts of the tax less than
one-half of one cent may be disregarded, and amounts of tax with one-half cent
or more may be considered an additional cent.
(Ord. 209, passed 4-6-1993)
§ 35.12 USE OF PROCEEDS.
   All gross proceeds less administrative costs and not less than 95% of the
gross proceeds obtained from the collection of tax pursuant to this chapter
shall be used in accordance with M.S. § 469.190, as the same may be amended
from time to time, to fund tourism for the purpose of marketing and promoting
the area as a tourist region, and shall have complete and independent control
over the use of the funds.
(Ord. 209, passed 4-6-1993)
§ 35.13 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Any person who shall refuse to make a return required by this chapter,
or who shall refuse to pay the tax, or who shall refuse to remit the taxes
collected or any penalty or interest imposed by this chapter, or who shall
refuse to permit the city or any duly authorized employee to examine the books,
records and papers under the person”s control, or who shall willfully make any
incomplete, false or fraudulent return, or who shall attempt to do anything
whatsoever to avoid a full disclosure of the amount of taxes imposed by this
chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Upon notice of any violation as outlined in division (A) of this
section, the city shall contact the lodging facility operator and provide
written notice by first-class mail, postage prepaid. If the violation
has not been cured within 30 days of the written notice, the city shall
commence enforcement proceedings.
(Ord. 209, passed 4-6-1993)
Penalty, see § 35.99
§ 35.14 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any operator aggrieved by any notice, order or determination made by
the city under this chapter may file a petition for review of the notice, order
or determination, detailing the operator’s reasons for contesting the notice,
order or determination. The petition shall contain the name of the petitioner,
the petitioner’s address, and the location of the lodging subject to the
notice, order or determination.
   (B)   The petition for review shall be filed with the City Administrator/
Clerk-Treasurer within 20 days after the notice, order or determination for
which review is sought has been mailed or served upon the person requesting
review.
   (C)   Upon receipt of the petition, the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer
shall set a date for a hearing and give the petitioner at least five days prior
written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing.
   (D)   At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to show
cause why the notice, order or determination should be modified or withdrawn.
The petitioner may be represented by counsel of the petitioner’s choosing at
the petitioner’s own expense.
   (E)   The hearing shall be conducted by the City Council, provided only that
the person conducting the hearing shall not have participated in the drafting
of the order, notice or determination for which review is sought.
   (F)   The person conducting the hearing shall make written findings of fact
and conclusions based upon the applicable sections of this chapter and the
evidence presented. The person conducting the hearing may affirm, reverse or
modify the initial notice, order or determination.
   (G)   Any decision rendered by the City Council pursuant to this
subparagraph may be appealed to the District Court in accordance with the
Minnesota Administrative Procedural Act.
(Ord. 209, passed 4-6-1993)
§ 35.15 CONTRACT WITH STATE.
   The city is authorized to confirm with the Minnesota Commissioner of Revenue
to the end that an agreement between the city and the Commissioner of Revenue
may be entered into for the purpose of
providing for the administration and collection of the tax imposed by this
chapter. An agreement shall not become effective before being presented to the
City Council for its approval, and when so approved the tax imposed by this
chapter shall be collected and administered pursuant to the terms of the
agreement.
(Ord. 209, passed 4-6-1993)
§ 35.16 ADMINISTRATION BY STATE.
   Upon agreement entered into with the State Commissioner of Revenue for the
administration and enforcement of the provision of this chapter, the
Commissioner of Revenue shall be empowered to exercise all of the authority of
the city as contained in this chapter. In order to provide for the
administration and collection of the tax by the Commissioner of Revenue, the
following rules and regulations and statutory provisions are adopted by
reference, and to the extent that the provision of the statutes and regulations
shall prevail; the rules and regulations adopted by the Commissioner of Revenue
under authority of M.S. § 297A.29 as it may be amended from time to time which
are in force and effect on the effective date of this chapter, and M.S. §§
297A.03, 297A.04, 297A.06, 297A.08, 297A.26, 297A.27, 297A.30 through 297A.37
and 297A.39 through 297A.43 as they may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 209, passed 4-6-1993)
§ 35.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   If any tax imposed by this chapter is not paid within the time herein
specified for the payment, or an extension thereof, there shall be added
thereto a specific penalty equal to 10% of the amount remaining unpaid.
   (B)   In case of any failure to make and file a return within the time
prescribed by this chapter, unless it is shown that the failure is not due to
willful neglect, there shall be added to the tax, in lieu of the 10% specific
penalty provided in division (A) of this section, 10% if the failure is not for
more than 30 days, with an additional 5% for each additional 30 days or
fraction thereof during which the failure continues, not exceeding 25%
aggregate. If the penalty as computed does not exceed $10, a minimum penalty of
$10 shall be assessed. The amount so added to any tax shall be collected at the
same time and in the same manner as a part of the tax, unless the tax has been
paid before the discovery of the negligence, in which case the amount so added
shall be collected in the same manner as the tax.
   (C)   If any person willfully fails to file any return or make any payment
required by this chapter, or willfully files a false or fraudulent return or
willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat any tax or payment thereof,
there shall also be imposed a penalty an amount equal to 50% of any tax (less
any amounts paid on the basis of the false or fraudulent return) found due for
the period to which the return related. The penalty imposed by this division
shall be collected as part of the tax, and shall be in addition to any other
penalties provided by this chapter.
   (D)   All payment received shall be credited first to penalties, next to
interest and then to the tax due.
   (E)   The amount of tax not timely paid, together with any penalty provided
by this section, shall bear interest at the rate of 8% per annum from the time
the tax should have been paid until the tax is paid. Any interest and penalty
shall be added to the tax and be collected as part thereof.
(Ord. 209, passed 4-6-1993)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter
   
50.   GARBAGE
   
51.   SEWERS
   
52.   STORM WATER DRAINAGE UTILITY
   
APPENDIX: STORM WATER UTILITY PLAT
   
53.   WATER
CHAPTER 50: GARBAGE
Section
Garbage Collection and Disposal
   
50.01   Contract with city required
   
50.02   Application requirements
   
50.03   Use of service required; billing
   
50.04   Garbage containers
   
50.05   Business and commercial uses
   
50.06   Truck requirements
   
50.07   Large items
   
50.08   City dumping grounds
Recycling Regulations
   
50.20   Policy
   
50.21   Purpose
   
50.22   Definitions
   
50.23   Separation requirements
   
50.24   Required containers
   
50.25   Collection and pick-up
   
50.26   Required destination of refuse
   
50.27   Preparation of materials
   
50.28   Violations
   
50.29   License required
   
50.30   Disposal prohibited in certain areas
GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
§ 50.01 CONTRACT WITH CITY REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to collect garbage
or rubbish without first entering into a written contract with the City
Council. No more than one hauler or collector shall be permitted to do business
within the city limits at any one time.
(Ord. 153, passed 9-1-1975)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 50.02 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   Any person, firm, or corporation desiring to collect garbage and rubbish
shall make application for the same to the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer.
   (A)   The application shall set forth the name and address of the applicant
(s).
   (B)   The application shall contain a list of the equipment which the
applicant proposes to use in collection.
   (C)   The application shall then be submitted to the City Council for their
investigation and approval.
   (D)   If the application is approved by the City Council, the applicant
shall deposit with the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer a performance bond in
the penal sum of at lease $10,000, conditioned that he or she will faithfully
and continuously provide the garbage and rubbish collection service specified
in the application.
(Ord. 153, passed 9-1-1975)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 50.03 USE OF SERVICE REQUIRED; BILLING.
   Every householder or occupant of any dwelling house, boarding house,
apartment house, mobile home, or any other place of residence must avail
themselves of the services of the hauler or collector approved by the city.
Each residence within the city limits shall be billed for services once each
month by the city. The charge for services shall be negotiated between the
approved hauler and the City Council, and the amount of the service charge
shall be published at least once, not less than seven days prior to the
effective date of the charge.
(Ord. 153, passed 9-1-1975)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 50.04 GARBAGE CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Every residence must provide standard containers for garbage and
refuse, which shall be either galvanized metal or heavy plastic in
construction, and made specifically for that purpose. Containers must be
watertight. Each container shall have a capacity not to exceed 35 gallons, and
it may not exceed 70 pounds in weight fully loaded. Plastic bags of at least
1.5 millimeters in thickness may also be used, but each bag may not exceed the
capacity or weight limitations described above, and they must be securely tied.
No item shall be picked up that exceeds four feet in length, and no tree or
hedge trimmings shall exceed four feet in length, nor more than 35 pounds in
weight to a bundle, and each bundle must be securely tied. Newspapers and
magazines shall also be bundled and securely tied.
   (B)   Garbage cans shall be kept at or near the back door of the building
using the same, or at the rear of the property if there is an alley, and shall
be accessible to collectors at all reasonable times. On the day of collection,
all garbage containers must be placed at the curb or alley for pickup.
(Ord. 153, passed 9-1-1975)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 50.05 BUSINESS AND COMMERCIAL USES.
   All nonresidential places, such as businesses and commercial places, must
avail themselves of the services of the approved hauler or collector, unless
they are specifically exempted from doing so by the City Council. Each place
must provide itself with a waterproof, fly-proof, and rodent-proof container,
which meets all applicable state requirements, and which is approved by the
City Council. The charge for service shall be determined by the City Council,
and shall be billed once each month.
(Ord. 153, passed 9-1-1975)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 50.06 TRUCK REQUIREMENTS.
   Each approved garbage and rubbish collector shall provide a dump box on his
or her truck, so constructed that the contents will not leak or spill
therefrom. The conveyance used shall be kept clean and as free from offensive
odors as possible, and shall not be allowed to stand in any street, alley, or
public place longer than is reasonable necessary to collect garbage or rubbish.
(Ord. 153, passed 9-1-1975)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 50.07 LARGE ITEMS.
   Discarded stoves, refrigerators, furniture and other like items shall be
collected pursuant to arrangements between each residence and the approved
hauler.
(Ord. 153, passed 9-1-1975)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 50.08 CITY DUMPING GROUNDS.
   No person, firm, or corporation shall unload, dump or deposit upon that
certain parcel of land, commonly known as the city dump grounds, any garbage,
offal, ashes or other substances or materials of any kind, and the city dumping
grounds shall be permanently closed from any dumping on the effective date of
this chapter. The parcel of land known as the city dump grounds is situated in
Fillmore County, and is described as follows.
Commencing at the southeast corner of the southeast quartet of the southeast
quarter, section 1, Township 102 north of range 11 west, running thence west
841.5 feet, thence north 80 degrees 2 minutes east 18.5 feet, thence north 61
degrees 27 minutes east 181 feet, thence north 42 degrees 55 minutes east 846
feet, thence north 20 degrees 55 minutes east 212.5 feet to a point 905 feet
north of the southeast corner of said section 1, thence south to place of
beginning; also the north 2 acres of the northeast quarter of the northeast
quarter, section 12, Township 102 north of range 11 west; also beginning at a
point 33 feet south of the northeast corner of section 12, Township 102 north
of range 11 west, running thence south 502 feet, thence north 68 degrees west
1,338 feet, thence east 1,240 feet to place of beginning,
(Ord. 153, passed 9-1-1975)
Penalty, see § 10.99
RECYCLING REGULATIONS
§ 50.20 POLICY.
   It is the policy of the city to provide the citizens of the city the least
costly and yet the most ecologically sound method of waste disposal possible.
(Ord. 194, passed 11-28-1989)
§ 50.21 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to provide the residents, businesses and
commercial establishments of the city, waste haulers, contractors, and local
government officials with uniform mandatory rules for recycling.
(Ord. 194, passed 11-28-1989)
§ 50.22 DEFINITIONS. 
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply,
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BULKY WASTE. A large appliance, piece of furniture or waste material from a
source other than construction debris or hazardous waste, with a weight or
volume greater than appropriate for waste containers.
   COMPOSTABLE GARBAGE. Compostable materials including books, cardboard,
catalogs, cereal boxes, disposable diapers, food packaging, food scraps,
magazines, paper bags, paper milk containers, pop and beer cartons, scrap
paper, and putrescible animal or vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, serving or consumption of food and including food
containers.
   CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS. Waste building materials resulting from construction,
remodeling, repair or demolition operations.
   CONTRACTOR. The individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation,
or association performing refuse collection and disposal under contract with
the city.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Waste designated as hazardous by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency or appropriate state agency.
   LANDFILL MATERIAL. Refers to and includes air filters, automobile parts,
building materials, carpet and carpet pads, coat hangers, dishes, fiberglass,
furniture, garden-hydraulic hose, glass window, hard plastics, ice cream pails,
paint pails, plumbing fixtures, styrofoam, twine, wire and banding.
   RECYCLABLES. Recyclable materials including aluminum cans, brown paper
sacks, cardboard, clothing, glass bottles, newspapers, plastic bottles, plastic
jugs, scrap aluminum, and tin cans. RECYCLABLES shall also include any other
specifically defined items of property from time to time designated as such by
resolution of the City Council.
   REFUSE. Discarded waste materials in a solid or semi-liquid state, including
but not limited to recyclables, compostable garbage, landfill materials, tires,
rubbish, yard wastes, bulky wastes and construction debris.
   RESIDENCE. Each separate household and/or each unit in an apartment
building.
   RUBBISH. Non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of combustible and non-
combustible materials, including yard and garden wastes.
   YARD WASTE. Organic plant materials collected from yards or gardens,
including leaves, grass clippings, vines and stalks.
(Ord. 194, passed 11-28-1989)
§ 50.23 SEPARATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All persons, corporations, business entities and commercial
establishments within the city limits shall be responsible for the separation
of their refuse into the following categories.
      (1)   Recyclables.
      (2)   Compostable garbage.
      (3)   Landfill materials including bulky wastes, as defined in § 50.22.
      (4)   Construction debris.
      (5)   Yard and garden wastes.
      (6)   Tires.
   (B)   All compostable garbage shall be separated in such a manner as to be
free of all other categories of refuse; all recyclables shall be separated in
such a manner as to be free of any other category of refuse; and all landfill
materials shall be separated in such a manner as to be free of any and all
other categories of refuse. All recyclables shall be covered and protected from
the weather.
(Ord. 194, passed 11-28-1989)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 50.24 REQUIRED CONTAINERS. 
   (A)   Recyclable materials, landfill materials and compostable materials
shall be separated and deposited in separate refuse containers, and shall each
be identified by affixing a colored sticker (to be furnished by the city) to
the appropriate refuse container, as follows.
      (1)   Green: indicates recyclable materials container.
      (2)   Red: indicates landfill materials container.
      (3)   Yellow: indicates compostable materials container.
   (B)   Green recycling bins may also be used for recyclable materials, and
shall be available for purchase from the city at the office of the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer.
(Ord. 194, passed 11-28-1989)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 50.25 COLLECTION AND PICK-UP.
   All compostable, recyclable and landfill materials shall be collected and
picked up by the contractor at the same site. The times of the collection and
pick-up of the categories of refuse shall be included in a written notification
to the residents and commercial establishments of the city, including a
calendar indicating the dates on which various categories of refuse shall be
collected by the contractor.
(Ord. 194, passed 11-28-1989)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 50.26 REQUIRED DESTINATION OF REFUSE.
   All recyclables, compostable garbage and landfill materials collected and
picked up within the city shall be hauled and transported to the Fillmore
County Resource Recovery Center only, regardless of the person, entity or
contractor who collects and hauls these categories of refuse. Yard and garden
waste may be taken and hauled to a specific area as designated from time to
time by the city. Construction debris shall be hauled to either the Fillmore
County Resource Recovery Center or a licensed demolition landfill. Residents
and commercial establishments may contract with a contractor for the collection
and hauling of bulky wastes, as defined in § 50.22; these bulky wastes shall be
hauled exclusively to the Fillmore County Resource Recovery Center if the
wastes are acceptable by the Center.
(Ord. 194, passed 11-28-1989; Am. Ord. 263, passed 12-17-2008)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 50.27 PREPARATION OF MATERIALS. 
   Proper preparation of each recyclable material shall be as follows.
   (A)   Aluminum shall be free of dirt and liquid but need not be crushed.
   (B)   Tin cans shall have the paper labels removed, rinsed, and flattened,
if possible.
   (C)   Glass shall be cleaned of all metal rings and lids. Paper labels need
not be removed and the glass shall not be broken.
   (D)   Newspapers shall be kept dry and put in a bundle.
   (E)   Plastics need only be rinsed and flattened if possible.
(Ord. 194, passed 11-28-1989)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 50.28 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person, firm, corporation, entity, business or commercial establishment
violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and
in addition, the city may terminate collection services for any person
violating the provisions of this chapter. A contractor need not collect and
take into his or her possession any refuse that is not separated in accordance
with the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. 194, passed 11-28-1989)
§ 50.29 LICENSE REQUIRED. 
   No person, corporation or other entity may collect garbage or municipal
solid waste within the city limits without a license from the city. The city
reserves the right to deny a license to any person, corporation or other entity
if, in the opinion and judgment of the City Council, the denial of a license
would be in the best interests of the city, and to issue only one exclusive
license for the collection of municipal solid waste. The license fee shall be
and hereby is fixed at the sum of $10. This section is passed pursuant to the
authority set forth in M.S. § 115A.93, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 204, passed 2-11-1992)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 50.30 DISPOSAL PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS.
   No person, business, corporation or entity shall do the following.
   (A)   Deposit garbage or any kind of refuse in a container or dumpster owned
or leased by any other person without the prior express permission of the other
person.
   (B)   Deposit refuse or garbage in a public receptacle in any park within
the city, except for refuse or garbage normally generated from picnics and
similar social activities carried on in the park.
   (C)   Deposit or dispose of any household or business refuse or garbage on
the public streets, ditches, rivers or waterways anywhere within the city.
(Ord. 204, passed 2-11-1992)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 51: SEWERS
Section
Use of the Public Sewers
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   Sanitary and storm sewers
   
51.03   Discharge prohibitions
   
51.04   Special agreements
   
51.05   Septic and holding tank disposal
   
51.06   Disconnection of groundwater connections
   
51.07   Connections to public sewer
   
51.08   Control of industrial wastes
   
51.09   Right of entry
   
51.10   Financing of sewer extensions
   
51.11   Sewer service charges
   
51.12   Industrial cost recovery charges
   
51.13   Payment of charges
   
51.14   Audit
   
51.15   Violations; accidental discharge
Connection to Water and Sewer Systems
   
51.25   Permit required
   
51.26   Connection-use charges
   
51.27   Conformance with Plumbing Code
   
51.28   Responsibility for costs
   
51.29   Procedures for issuance of permits
Maintenance of Private Water Lines
   
51.40   Maintenance and repair required; notice
   
51.41   Repair by city
Private Sewage Systems
   
51.55   Purpose
   
51.56   Definitions
   
51.57   Standards for health and environmental protection
   
51.58   Construction and operation permits
   
51.59   Notice to Health Department; inspections
   
51.60   Administration and enforcement
   
51.61   Fees
   
51.62   Violations
USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply,
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVING AUTHORITY. The City Council of Preston, Fillmore County,
Minnesota, or its duly authorized committee, agent or representative.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter in five days at 20°C, expressed as
milligrams per liter. Quantitative determination of BOD shall be made in
accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
   BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal beginning outside the inner face of the building wall.
   CHLORINE REQUIREMENTS. The amount of chlorine in milligrams per liter which
must be added to sewage to produce a specified residual chlorine content in
accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS. Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids,
phosphorus, pH, or fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants
identified in the NPDES permit for the publicly- owned treatment works
receiving the pollutants, if the works were designed to treat the additional
pollutants to a substantial degree.
   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. Shall include all costs associated with the repayment
of debts incurred for the construction and/or rehabilitation of the wastewater
collection system and treatment plant. A portion of the debt service may be
budgeted by levying an ad valorem tax in accordance with state statutes.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
   GARBAGE. The residue from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food,
and from the handling, storage, and sale of food products and produce.
   GARBAGE, GROUND. The residue from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing
of food that has been shredded to such degree that all particles will be
carried freely in suspension under the flow conditions normally prevailing in
public sewers with no particle greater than ½-inch in any dimension.
   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS. Wastewater with pollutants that will adversely
affect or disrupt the quality of wastewater treatment if discharged to a
wastewater treatment facility.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. The wastewater from industrial process, trade, or
business, as distinct from sanitary sewage, including cooling water and
discharge from sewage pretreatment facilities.
   MAY is permissible.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM or NPDES. Any permit or
equivalent document or requirements issued by the Environmental Protection
Agency administration, or, where appropriate, by the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency, after enactment of the Federal Water Pollution Control
Amendment of 1972, to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to Section
402 of the Act.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer
overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface
water or groundwaters.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTEWATER. Wastewater with concentrations of BOD5
and suspended solids no greater than 200 and 250 milligrams per liter (mg/l)
respectively.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS. All costs associated with the operation and
maintenance of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities, as well as
the costs associated with periodic equipment replacement necessary for
maintaining capacity and performance of wastewater collection and treatment
facilities.
   PARTS PER MILLION. A weight-to-weight ratio; the parts per million value
multiplied by the factor 8.344 shall be equivalent to pounds per million
gallons of water.
   PERSON. Any and all person, including any individual, firm, company,
municipal or private corporation, association, society, institution,
enterprise, governmental agency, or other entity.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. The
concentration is the weight of hydrogen ion, in grams per liter of solution.
Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7, and a hydrogen ion
concentration of 10 exp(-7).
   PUBLIC SEWER.  Any sewer provided by a subject to the jurisdiction of the
city. It shall also include sewers within or outside the corporate boundaries
that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the city sanitary
sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been constructed with the
city fund.
   REPLACEMENT COSTS. All costs associated with establishing a fund to
accumulate the necessary resources to replace equipment as required to maintain
capacity and performance during the design life of the plant.
   SANITARY SEWAGE. A combination of liquid and water-carried wastes discharged
from toilets and/or sanitary plumbing facilities, together with any ground,
surface, and storm waters as may be present.
   SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together
with minor quantities of ground, storm, and surface waters that are not
admitted intentionally.
   SEWAGE.  The spent water of a community. Spent water shall be referred to as
wastewater.
   SEWER SERVICE CHARGE. A service charge levied on users of the wastewater
collection and treatment facilities for payment of use-related capital
expenses, as well as the operation and maintenance costs, including replacement
of the facilities.
   SHALL is mandatory.
   SHOCK. Any discharge of sewage or industrial wastewater which, in
concentration of any given constituent, or in quantity of flow, exceeds the
following.
      (1)   Four times the allowable average hourly rate, as set forth in the
table below, for a period of 15 minutes during a given sampling day, as
determined by the average concentration measured in consecutive, flow-
proportionally composited grab samples taken at 15-minute intervals over a 15-
minute period; or samples automatically collected in proportion to flow over a
15-minute period.
      (2)   Three times the allowable average hourly rate, as set forth in the
table below, for a period of 30 minutes during a given sampling day, as
determined by the average concentration measured in consecutive, flow-
proportionally composited grab samples over a 30-minute period; or samples
automatically collected in proportion to flow over a 30-minute period.
      (3)   Two times the allowable average daily rate, as set forth in the
table below, for a period of 60 minutes during a given sampling day, as
determined by the average concentration measured in consecutive, flow-
proportionally composited grab samples taken at 15-minute intervals over a 60-
minute period, or samples automatically collected in proportion to flow over a
60-minute period.
      (4)   One and one-half times the allowable average hourly rate, as set
forth in the table below, for a period of two hours during a given sampling
day, as determined by the average concentration measured in consecutive, flow-
proportionally composited grab samples taken at 15-minute intervals over a two-
hour period, or samples automatically collected in proportion to flow over a
two-hour period.
      (5)   One and three-tenths times the allowable average hourly rate, set
forth in the table below, for any period exceeding two hours and less than 24
hours in length, during a given sampling day, as determined by the average
concentration measured in consecutive, flow-proportionally composited grab
samples taken at 15-minute intervals over the defined period, or samples
automatically collected in proportion to flow over the defined period
Allowable Daily Increase in Industrial Wastewater BOD5 Discharges
Previous Sampling Day’sAllowable AverageAllowable Average
Actual Discharge Daily Rate Hourly Rate
BOD5BOD5/DayBOD5/Hour
   0 - 100   200   8.3
   100 - 200   325   13.5
   200 - 300   450   18.7
   300 - 400   575   24.0
   400 - 500   700   29.2
   500 - 600   825   34.4
   600 - 700   950   39.6
   700 - 800   1075   44.8
   800 - 900   1200   50.0
   900 - 1000   1325   55.2
   1000 - 1100   1450   60.4
   1100 - 1200   1575   65.6
   1200 - 1300   1700   70.8
   STANDARD METHODS. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
most recent edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water, Sewage,
and Industrial Wastes published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Federation of Sewage
and Industrial Wastes Associations.
   STORM DRAIN or STORM SEWER. A drain or sewer for conveying water,
groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source.
   STORM WATER RUNOFF. That portion of the rainfall that is drained into the
sewers.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that are removable by
laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for Examination of Water
and Wastewater, and is referred to as nonfilterable residue.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards, and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of the wastewater collection and
treatment facilities as a part of the sewer service charge for payment of
operation and maintenance and replacement costs of the facilities.
   USER CLASSES. The various users of the sewer system shall be divided into
the following classifications.
      (1)   COMMERCIAL USER.  A user whose contributions to the wastewater
treatment works consist only of normal domestic strength waste originating from
an office, store, or other work place constituting a business, institution or
commercial enterprise.
      (2)   INDUSTRIAL USER. A user whose contributions to the wastewater
treatment works result from a manufacturing, processing, or other industrial
operation, as distinct from domestic use, and discharges an equivalent to
25,000 (gpd).
      (3)   RESIDENTIAL USER. A user whose contributions to the wastewater
treatment works consist only of normal domestic strength waste originating from
a dwelling, house, apartment, flat or other living quarters occupied by a
person or persons constituting a distinct household.
   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source,
it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any
groundwater, surface water, and storm water that may be present.
   WASTEWATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment, and processes required to
collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of
the effluent.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used as
synonymous with waste treatment.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water,
either continuously or intermittently.
(Ord. 170, passed 8-10-1981)
§ 51.02 SANITARY AND STORM SEWERS.
   (A)   Sanitary sewers. No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any unpolluted waters such as storm water, groundwater, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, or cooling water to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Storm sewer. Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to
a natural outlet approved by the approving authority and other regulatory
agencies. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process waters may be
discharged, on approval of the approving authority, to a storm sewer or natural
outlet.
(Ord. 170, passed 8-10-1981)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.03 DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS. 
   (A)   Prohibitions. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer.
      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, lubricating oil or other
inflammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas or other substances which, by
themselves or by interaction with other substances, may cause fire or explosion
hazards, or in any other way be injurious to persons, property, or the
operation of the wastewater facilities.
      (2)   Any waters or waste containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids,
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, which will injure or interfere with any waste treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance in the
receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant, or interfere with the
disposal of sludge.
      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0, or having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and personnel of the wastewater treatment works.
      (4)   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.0.
      (5)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable
of causing obstruction of the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to,
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feather, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, and the like,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
      (6)   Any discharge into the sanitary sewerage system that is in
violation of the requirements of the NPDES permit and the modifications
thereof.
   (B)   Limitations as to discharge. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged the following specifically described substances, materials, fluids,
or solids which may harm sanitary sewers, wastewater treatment works and
equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or may otherwise
endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance, without the
specific written permission of the approving authority. Permission is subject
to termination at any time upon written notice. In forming its opinion as to
the acceptability of these wastes, the approving authority will give
consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation
to flows and velocities in the sanitary sewers, materials of construction of
sanitary sewers, nature of the wastewater treatment works, capacity of the
wastewater facilities and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited
are as follows.
      (1)   Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150°F.
      (2)   Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat or
grease.
      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders
may be connected to sanitary to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels,
institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar
places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for
the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers.
      (4)   Any waters or waste containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc,
mercury, and similar objectionable or toxic substances, to such degree that any
such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment
works exceeds the limits established by the approving authority for such
materials, or toxic pollutants in amounts exceeding the standards promulgated
by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to Section 307(a) of the
Clean Water Act.
      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances exceeding
limits which may be established by the approving authority.
      (6)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the approving authority in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
      (7)   Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a
shock as defined is § 51.01.
      (8)   Incompatible pollutants containing substances which are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
      (9)   Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or
wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases from suspended
solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition
deleterious to structures and treatment processes.
      (10)   Materials which exert or cause the following.
         (a)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorination requirements
in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the wastewater
treatment plant.
         (b)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
shocks as defined in § 51.01.
         (c)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as, but
no limited to, fuller’s earth, lime slurries, and lime residues, or of
dissolved solids, such as but not limited to sodium sulfate.
         (d)   Excessive discoloration, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions.
   (C)   Groundwater.
      (1)   The City Council finds that the discharge of water from roof,
surface, groundwater sump pump, footing tile or swimming pool or other natural
precipitation into the city sewerage system will, and has on numerous occasions
in the past, flooded and overloaded the sewerage system to such an extent as to
cause significant and grave damage to the waste treatment plant. This damage is
caused by the backup of sewage into the plant. The City Council, therefore,
finds it essential to the minimization of damage to property and to meet
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency and Preston Public Utilities Commission
regulations, that the provisions of this division be strictly enforced to avoid
emergencies in the future.
      (2)   No water from any roof, surface, groundwater, sump pump, footing
tile, outdoor swimming pool or other natural precipitation shall be discharged
into the sanitary sewer system. Dwellings and other buildings and structures
which require a sump pump discharge system because of infiltration of water
into basements, crawl spaces and the like, shall have a permanently installed
discharge line, which shall not at any time discharge water into the sanitary
sewer system, except as provided herein. A permanent installation shall be one
which provides for year-round discharge capability to either the outside of the
dwelling, building or structure, or is connected to the city storm sewer or
discharges through the curb and gutter to the street. It shall consist of a
rigid discharge line, without valving or quick connections for altering the
path of discharge.
(Ord. 170, passed 8-10-1981) (Ord. 232, passed 11-15-1999)
Penalty, see § 10.99 
§ 51.04 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.
   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed as prohibiting
any special agreement between the approving authority and any person, whereby
an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be admitted to the
wastewater treatment works, either before or after pretreatment,
provided that there is no impairment of the functioning of the wastewater
treatment works by reason of the admission of the wastes, and no extra costs
are incurred by the city without recompense by the person, provided that all
rates and provisions set forth herein.
(Ord. 170, passed 8-10-1981)
§ 51.05 SEPTIC AND HOLDING TANK DISPOSAL.
   No person in the business of gathering and disposing of septic tank sludge
or holding tank sewage shall transfer the material into any disposal area or
sewer manhole located within the city.
(Ord. 170, passed 8-10-1981)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.06 DISCONNECTION OF GROUNDWATER CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Disconnection. Before March 1, 2000, any person, firm or corporation
having a roof surface, groundwater sump pump, footing tile or outdoor swimming
pool now connected and/or discharging into the sanitary sewer system, shall
disconnect and/or remove same. Any disconnections or openings in the sanitary
sewer shall be closed or repaired in an effective, workmanlike manner, as
approved by the Public Works Director or his or her designated agent.
   (B)   Inspection. Every person owning improved real estate that discharges
into the city’s sanitary sewer system shall allow an employee of the city or
their designated representative to inspect the buildings to confirm that there
is no sump pump or other prohibited discharge into the sanitary sewer system.
In lieu of having the city inspect their property, any person may furnish a
certificate from a licensed plumber, certifying that their property is in
compliance with this section. Any person refusing to allow their property to be
inspected or refusing to furnish a plumber’s certificate within 14 days of the
date city employees or their designated representatives are denied admittance
to the property shall immediately become subject to the surcharge hereinafter
provided for. Any property found to violate this section shall make the
necessary changes to comply with this section and furnish proof of the changes
to the city by March 1, 2000.
   (C)   Future inspections. Each sump pump connection identified may be
reinspected on a yearly basis in conjunction with yearly water meter
inspections.
   (D)   New home inspections. All new homes will be required to have their
sump pump system inspected within 30 days of occupancy and certificate of
compliance completed.
   (E)   Waivers.
      (1)   The Utility Commission shall have the power and duty of hearing and
deciding requests for waivers from the applicability of the provisions of this
section where strict enforcement would cause
undue hardship because of circumstances unique to the individual property under
consideration, or would cause a safety problem. This would also include cases
that would not be practical or feasible to correct the clear water discharge
problem.
      (2)   Application for waivers pursuant to this division shall be
addressed in writing to the City Administrator. The applications shall, at a
minimum, identify the property for which the waiver is being applied, the name
of the property owner/applicant, and describe in detail what characteristics of
the subject property create an undue hardship. Within a reasonable time the
Utility Commission shall make its order deciding on the matter and serve a copy
of the order upon the applicant by mail. Upon approval of an application for a
waiver, a property owner shall be allowed to temporarily discharge directly
into the sanitary sewer system. The applicant will be asked to agree to pay an
additional fee for the additional sewer service, along with the regular monthly
charge. Fees for this service will be based on estimated yearly average amounts
discharged to the sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 232, passed 11-15-1999)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.07 CONNECTIONS TO PUBLIC SEWER.
   (A)   Required connections. 
      (1)   The owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city
and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way, in which there is now
located or may in the future be located a sanitary sewer, shall be required, at
the owner’s expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to
connect the facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with
the provisions of this subchapter.
      (2)   No building sewer shall be connected to the public sewer without a
permit issued by the city. All applications for connection permits shall be
make to the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer and shall be accompanied by
plans and drawings showing the proposed work. Before a permit is given, the
city may inspect the premises and the proposed installation to verify that the
installation is proper and in compliance with local and state laws, ordinances,
and regulations. All plumbing installations shall comply with the State
Plumbing Code. Issuance of permit shall be contingent on the capacity of
downstream facilities to handle the increased flows.
   (B)   Connection-use charges; expenses. Connections to the public sewer
system, connection-use fees therefor, standards for connection to the system,
and the payment of expenses for the connection shall be governed by the
provisions of §§ 51.25 through 51.29.
   (C)   Extensions to sanitary sewer system. No extensions or connections to
the city sanitary sewer system shall be permitted without compliance with the
provision of Preston City Ordinance No. 217, and in no event shall any
extension of the system be permitted unless sufficient capacity exists
downstream to handle the increased flows from the extension.
   (D)   Additional authority. The Council may at any time establish specific
connection and lateral charges for any main not covered by any other provisions
in this subchapter, or when the city has made an extension and the Council has
failed to provide lateral or connection charges. It is further provided that
the Council may amend or alter any connection or lateral charge after its
establishment under the terms of this subchapter or previous ordinance or
resolutions.
(Ord. 170, passed 8-10-1981)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.08 CONTROL OF INDUSTRIAL WASTES.
   (A)   Industrial discharges. If any waters or wastes are discharged, or
proposed to be discharged, to the public sewers, which waters or wastes contain
substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in §§ 51.02 through 51.05
and which, in the judgment of the approving authority, may have deleterious
effects upon the wastewater treatment works, processes, equipment, or receiving
waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life, health, or constitute a
public nuisance, the approving authority may do as follows.
      (1)   Reject the wastes.
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewer consistent with 40 CFR 403.
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
      (4)   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions
of § 51.04.
   (B)   Control manholes.
      (1)   Each person discharging industrial wastes into a public sewer shall
construct and maintain one or more control manholes or access points to
facilitate observation, measurement, and sampling of his or her wastes,
including domestic sewage.
      (2)   Control manholes or access facilities shall be located and built in
a manner acceptable to the approving authority. If measuring devices are to be
permanently installed, they shall be of a type acceptable to the approving
authority.
      (3)   Control manholes, access facilities, and related equipment shall be
installed by the person discharging the waste, at his or her expense, and shall
be maintained by him or her so as to be in safe condition, accessible, and in
proper operating condition at all times. Plans for installation of the control
manholes or access facilities and related equipment shall be approved by the
approving authority prior to the beginning of construction.
   (C)   Measurement of flow. The volume of flow used for computing the sewer
service and cost recovery charges shall be based upon the water consumption of
the person as shown in the records of meter readings maintained by the Public
Utilities Commission, or as determined by other methods revealing accurate
water consumption of the person involved.
   (D)   Provision for deductions. In the event that a person discharging
industrial waste into the public sewers produces evidence satisfactory to the
approving authority that more than 10% of the total annual volume of water used
for all purposes does not reach the public sewer, then the determination of the
water consumption to be used in computing the waste volume discharged into the
public sewer may be made a matter of agreement between the approving authority
and the person.
   (E)   Metering of waste. Devices for measuring the volume of waste
discharged may be required by the approving authority if this volume cannot
otherwise be determined from the metered water consumption records. Metering
devices for determining the volume of waste shall be installed, owned, and
maintained by the person. Following approval and installation, meters may not
be removed without the consent of the approving authority.
   (F)   Waste sampling.  
      (1)   Industrial wastes discharged into the public sewers shall be
subject to periodic inspection and a determination of character and
concentration of the wastes. The determinations shall be made by the industry
as often as may be deemed necessary by the approving authority.
      (2)   Samples shall be collected in such a manner as to be representative
of the composition of the wastes. The sampling may be accomplished either
manually or by the use of mechanical equipment acceptable to the approving
authority.
      (3)   Testing facilities shall be the responsibility of the person
discharging the waste and shall be subject to the approval of the approving
authority. Access to sampling locations shall be granted to the approving
authority or its duly authorized representatives at all times. Every care shall
be exercised in the collection of samples to insure their preservation in a
state comparable to that at the time the sample was taken.
   (G)   Pretreatment. Where required, in the opinion of the approving
authority, to modify or eliminate wastes that are harmful to the structures,
processes, or operation of the wastewater treatment works, the person shall
provide, at his or her expense, such preliminary treatment or processing
facilities as may be required to render his or her wastes acceptable for
admission to the public sewers.
   (H)   Grease and/or sand interceptors. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors
shall be provided when, in the opinion of the approving authority, they are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes, containing floatable grease
in excessive amounts, as specified in § 51.03(B), or any flammable wastes, sand
or other harmful ingredients. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the approving authority, and shall be located so as to be readily
and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these
interceptors, the owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper removal and
disposal by appropriate means of the captured material, and shall maintain
records of the dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by the
approving authority. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not
performed by the owner’s personnel must be performed by currently licensed
waste disposal firms.
   (I)   Analysis.
      (1)   All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of
waters and waste to which reference is made in this subchapter shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association and Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of
Pollutants (1978, 40 CFR 136). Sampling methods, locations, times, durations,
and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval
by the approving authority.
      (2)   Determination of the character and concentration of the industrial
wastes shall be made by the person discharging them, or his or her agent, as
designated and required by the approving authority. The approving authority may
also make its own analysis of the wastes, and these determinations shall be
used as a basis for charges. If the person discharging the waste contests the
determination, the approving authority may elect to have an independent
laboratory determine the character and concentration of the waste. The
independent laboratory, in making determination, shall be assumed by the
discharger.
   (J)   Submission of information. Plans, specifications, and other pertinent
information relating to proposed flow equalization, pretreatment, or processing
facilities shall be submitted for review by the approving authority prior to
the start of their construction if the effluent from the facilities is to be
discharged into the public sewers.
   (K)   Submission of basic data. Within three months after passage of this
subchapter, each person who discharges industrial wastes to a public sewer
shall prepare and file with the approving authority a report that shall include
pertinent data relating to the quantity and characteristics of the waste
discharged to the wastewater works. Similarly, each person desiring to make a
new connection to a public sewer for the purpose of discharging wastes shall
prepare and file with the approving authority a report that shall include
actual or predicted data relating to the quantity and characteristics of the
waste to be discharged.
   (L)   Extension of time. When it can be demonstrated that circumstances
exist which would create an unreasonable burden on the person to comply with
the time schedule imposed herein, a request for extension of time may be
presented for consideration by the approving authority.
(Ord. 170, passed 8-10-1981)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.09 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Director of Public Works, Superintendent of the wastewater treatment
plant, or other duly authorized employee of the approving authority bearing
proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purpose of inspection, observation and testing, all in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 170, passed 8-10-1981)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.10 FINANCING OF SEWER EXTENSIONS.
   The cost of installation of extensions to sanitary sewer mains of the city
shall be paid from the general fund of the city, or, at the discretion of the
City Council, some portion or all of the cost of any extensions may be assessed
to the parcel or parcels specially benefitted by the installation of the
extensions, all in accordance with the terms and provisions of M.S. Chapter
429, as it may be amended from time to time, and amendments thereto. However,
no extensions shall be permitted unless sufficient capacity exists downstream
to handle the expected increased flows from any extensions.
(Ord. 170, passed 8-10-1981)
§ 51.11 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES. 
   (A)   Sewer service and user charges are imposed upon each lot, parcel of
land, building, or premises served by the public sewer and wastewater
facilities, or otherwise discharging sewage, including industrial wastes, into
the public sewer and wastewater facilities. The user charge shall be included
in the sewer service charge, and be payable as hereinafter provided. The
methodology of determining the user charge rates is given in the user charge
system. The rate schedule will be reviewed annually and adjusted as necessary
to maintain a proportional distribution of costs among the users.
   (B)   The sewer service charge for any lot, parcel of land, building, or
premises within the corporate limits, and for any lot, parcel of land,
building, or premises outside the corporate limits which is connected to the
public sewer system, shall be based upon the quantity of wastewater generated
as measured by the water meter or sewage meter in use as follows.
      (1)   CATEGORY A is defined as normal or domestic strength wastewater
having organic concentrations of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) no greater
than 200 milligrams per liter (mg/l) and suspended solids no greater than 250
milligrams per liter (mg/l). The sewer service charge for Category A wastewater
is as follows.
Minimum Sewer Service Charge Per Billing Period With One Customer on Each Meter
Meter Size Debt Portion
   5/8 inch   $3.15 per month
   1-inch   $7.90 per month
   1¼-inch   $12.60 per month
   1½-inch   $18.90 per month
   2-inch   $31.50 per month
   3-inch   $50.40 per month
   5-inch   $201.60 per month
   Volumetric user charge   $1.15 per 1000 gallons
      (2)   CATEGORY B is defined as wastewater having organic concentrations
of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) greater than 200 milligrams per liter (mg/l)
and/or suspended solids greater than 250 milligrams per liter (mg/l). The
minimum Category B charge for BOD and suspended solids will be based on a
concentration of 200 mg/l for BOD and 250 mg/l for suspended solids. The sewer
charge for Category B wastewater is as follows.
   SSC = Category A charge (service charge + volumetric charge)
      +   (BOD - 200) x V x .00834 x CB
      +   (SS - 250) x V x .00834 x CS
in which: SSC = Total Sewer Service Charge per quarter
         BOD = Biochemical Oxygen Demand expressed as mg/1
         SS = Suspended solids expressed as mg/1
         CB = BOD unit price $.18/1000 pounds
         CS = SS unit price $.35/1000 pounds
         V = Total volume of water used, thousand gallons
      (3)   When the user places wastewater in a holding tank so that the flow
is distributed over a 20 to 24-hour period, no further adjustment in the user
charge shall be made. When no holding tank is provided and used by the user,
the sewer service charge aforesaid will be further adjusted by the hours of
operation per day divided by hours discharged, to be averaged over the entire
quarter (such as a user with an average operation of 12 hours per day would
have the sewer service charge increased by 24/12 to arrive at the final user
charge).
   (C)   Reassignment of sewer users. The approving authority will reassign
users into appropriate sewer service charge categories if wastewater sampling
programs and other related information indicate a change of categories is
necessary.
   (D)   Additional charges. Additional charges shall be imposed upon each lot,
parcel of land, building or premises served by public sewer and wastewater
facilities located outside the boundaries of the approving authority, to
equalize local capital costs. The additional charge shall result in a minimum
charge equal to the debt charge for each user, according to the schedule for
debt repayment from utility revenues. Additional charges shall be added to the
sewer bill for each billing period.
(Ord. 170, passed 8-10-1981; Am. Ord. 172, passed 11-27-1984)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.12 INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY CHARGES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   COST OF RECOVERY CHARGE. A charge collected from users discharging
industrial wastes for the recovery of the Federal EPA grant amount allocable to
the treatment of wastes, and is proportionate to the volume and pollutional
characteristics at design capacity of Federal EPA-funded wastewater collection
and treatment facilities.
      (2)   INDUSTRIAL USER. Any non-governmental, nonresidential user of a
publicly-owned treatment works which discharges more than the equivalent of
25,000 gallons per day (gpd) of sanitary wastes and which is identified in the
Standard Industrial supplement under one of the following divisions.
         Division A--Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing.
         Division B--Mining.
         Division D--Manufacturing.
         Division E--Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas,   and
Sanitary Services.
         (a)   In determining the amount of a user’s discharge for purposes of
industrial cost recovery, the grantee may exclude domestic wastes or discharges
from sanitary conveniences.
         (b)   After applying the sanitary waste exclusion in division (A)(2)
(a) of this section (if the grantee chooses to do so), dischargers in the above
divisions that have a volume exceeding 25,000 gpd, or the weight of biochemical
oxygen demand (BOD) or suspended solids (SS) equivalent to that weight found in
25,000 gpd of sanitary waste, are considered industrial users. Sanitary wastes,
for purposes of this calculation of equivalency, are the wastes discharges from
residential users having a strength of 200 mg/l BOD and 250 mg/l SS. Any non-
governmental user of a publicly-owned treatment works discharging wastewater to
the treatment works which contains toxic pollutants or poisonous solids,
liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, to contaminate the sludge of any municipal systems, or to injure
or to interfere with any sewage treatment process, or which constitutes a
hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance, or creates any hazard
in or has an adverse effect on the waters receiving any discharge from the
treatment works, shall be in violation of this ordinance.
   (B)   Cost recovery charge. In addition to the sewer service charge imposed
on each user herein, cost recovery charge shall be imposed upon each industrial
user. The charge shall be payable on the quarterly basis, and shall be the
greater of the actual usage of projected reserve capacity of the industrial
user. For purposes of cost recovery charge, the approving authority may exclude
domestic waste in determining the amount of usage. The cost recovery charge
shall be payable as hereinafter provided, and in an amount determinable as
follows. The cost recovery charge of any industrial user shall be based upon
the quantity of water used and quality of wastewater generated as measured by
the water meter or sewage meter in use as follows.
      Volume Charge (RV) - $1.55 per 1,000 gallons per day per year
      BOD Charge (RB) - $.20 per pounds BOD per day per year
      Suspended Solids Charge (RS)    $.20 per pounds SS per day per year
      R = (V x RV) + (V x RB x B x .00834) + (V x RS x S x .00834)
in which:      R = cost recovery charge
         V = wastewater volume in 1000 gallons of flow
         B = concentration of BOD in milligrams per liter (mg/l) in wastewater
         S = concentration of suspended solids in milligrams per liter (mg/l)
in wastewater
   (C)   Recovery and disbursement of revenues. The recovery and the
disbursement of revenues collected by the city through the cost recovery charge
shall conform to the 40 CFR 35.928-1 and 35.928-2, promulgated by the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act Amendment of 1972.
(Ord. 170, passed 8-10-1981)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.13 PAYMENT OF CHARGES.
   (A)   Payment and penalty. The sewer service charge shall be for the
corresponding period of the water bills, and shall be payable to the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer and Utility Secretary Cashier not later than two
months after the end of each period. A penalty of 5% shall be added to all
bills not paid by the date fixed for final payment.
   (B)   Lien. All sewage charges shall be a lien upon the property served
pursuant to the applicable Minnesota Statutes, and shall be collected in the
manner therein provided.
   (C)   Disposition of revenue. The amounts received from the collection of
charges authorized by this chapter shall be credited to a sanitary sewerage
account, which shall show all receipts and expenditures of the sewerage system.
When appropriated by the Council, the credits to the account shall be available
for the payment of the requirements for operation, maintenance, repairs, and
depreciation of the
sewerage system consistent with 40 CFR 35.929. Any surplus in the account shall
be available for the payment of principal and interest of bonds issued and
outstanding, or which may be issued, to provide funds for the sewerage system,
or part thereof, and all or a part of the expenses for additions and
improvements and other necessary disbursements or indebtedness, and the Council
may, by resolution, pledge the surplus or any part thereof for any purpose. All
present outstanding sewer system general obligation bonds, including the
refunding bonds, shall be paid from this fund, both principal and interest.
(Ord. 170, passed 8-10-1981)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.14 AUDIT.
   The city shall conduct an annual audit, fulfilling the requirements of 40
CFR 35.929(b), the purpose of which shall be to maintain the proportionality
between users and user classes of the user charge system, and to ensure the
adequate revenues are available relative to increasing operation, maintenance,
and replacement costs.
(Ord. 170, passed 8-10-1981)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.15 VIOLATIONS; ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE. 
   (A)   Written notice of violation. Any person found to be violating any
provisions of this subchapter shall be served by the approving authority with a
written notice stating the nature of the violation, and providing a reasonable
time for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the
period of time in the notice, permanently cease all violations.
   (B)   Accidental discharge. Any person found to be responsible for
accidentally allowing a deleterious discharge into the sewer system which
causes damage to the treatment facility and/or receiving body of water, shall,
in addition to a fine, pay the amount to cover damages, both values to be
established by the approving authority.
   (C)   Continued violations. Any person, partnership, or corporation, or any
officer, agent, or employee thereof, who shall continue any violation beyond
the aforesaid notice time limit provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to the terms of § 10.99. Each day in which any violation is continued
beyond the aforesaid notice time limit shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (D)   Liability to city for losses. Any person violating any provisions of
this ordinance shall be come liable to the city for any expense, loss, or
damage occasioned by reason of the violation which the city may suffer as a
result thereof.
(Ord. 170, passed 8-10-1981)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CONNECTION TO WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM
§ 51.25 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall hereafter make or
cause to be made any new or additional connections, either directly or
indirectly, with any water main or sanitary sewer within the city without first
obtaining a written permit therefor, in accordance with the provisions of §
93.01 of this code.
   (B)   No person, corporation, firm or other entity shall hereafter make or
cause to be made any new or additional connection to any other water or sewer
pipes, lines, appurtenances, or mains owned or controlled by that person,
corporation, firm or entity, or owned or controlled by any third party or
parties, without first obtaining from the city a written permit therefor; and
no person, corporation, firm or other entity shall allow, suffer or permit any
other person, corporation, firm or entity to connect that person or
corporation, without first obtaining from the city a written permit therefor.
(Ord. 163, passed 9-11-1978)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.26 CONNECTION-USE CHARGES.
   A connection-use charge in the amount of $300 for connection to the city
sanitary sewer system, and the sum of $120 for connection to the city water
system are established for the connection to and operation, maintenance,
depreciation, and necessary replacements of the sanitary sewer and water
systems, and for necessary improvements, and enlargements and extensions of the
systems. The charges shall be paid in advance to the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer prior to the issuance by the city of a permit for connection to the
sanitary sewer and water systems of the city. The charges shall be paid once
for each and every connection from each and every lot and from each and every
house, dwelling, residence, apartment, commercial building, or other structure,
whether made directly or indirectly. The charges are established and imposed
pursuant to M.S. § 444.075, as it may be amended from time to time, and are in
addition to, and not in lieu of, monthly sewer rental charges heretofore
imposed and established by the city.
(Ord. 163, passed 9-11-1978)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.27 CONFORMANCE WITH PLUMBING CODE.
   No person, firm, corporation or entity shall make or cause to be made any
connection, or subsequent repairs or maintenance, directly or indirectly, with
or to the city water or sanitary sewer systems unless the connection, repairs
or maintenance are made strictly in accordance with and in conformity of the
Minnesota State Plumbing Code; and all connections, repairs or maintenance
shall be made only under the supervision of the City Superintendent, and all
connections, repairs or maintenance shall be approved by him or her after the
same have been completed.
(Ord. 163, passed 9-11-1978; Am. Ord. 199, passed 5-8-1990)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.28 RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS.
   All connections, whether direct or indirect, to the city sanitary sewer and
water systems, shall be made at the sole expense of the owner of the parcel
served by the connection. The costs of the connection shall be paid by the
owner or other person requesting the same, shall include all lateral pipes,
lines, and other appurtenances necessary to make the connection with the city
sanitary sewer main or water main, all excavation expenses and expenses for
restoration of the street or road to its original condition. The city shall not
be responsible for any costs or expenses of any kind or nature in any manner
relating to connections to the city water and sanitary sewer systems.
(Ord. 163, passed 9-11-1978)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.29 PROCEDURES FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   The City Council shall from time to time, by resolution, establish
procedures for the issuance of the permits required by the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 163, passed 9-11-1978)
Penalty, see § 10.99
MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE WATER LINES
§ 51.40 MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR REQUIRED; NOTICE.
   (A)   Every land owner and every person, firm or corporation in possession
of real property in the city shall be required to properly maintain and keep in
good repair all water lines or pipes running from the curb stop in the city
street or easement to the water meter located in or on such real property.
   (B)   Whenever the Superintendent of Public Utilities shall determine that a
water line from curb stop to meter is defective, or requires repairs, he or she
shall notify the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, who shall thereupon give
written notice to the landowner or person in possession of the real property
wherein the line or pipe is located, notifying that person or persons of the
defective line or pipe, and requiring them to repair the same within five days
from and after receipt of the written notice. Service of the notice shall be
made on the owner or person in possession of the parcel of real estate or his
or her authorized agent personally or by mail sent to his or her last known
address. If the owner cannot be reached by mail so addressed, service upon the
occupant of the premises involved shall be deemed to be valid notice to the
owner.
(Ord. 138, passed 6-7-1971)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.41 REPAIR BY CITY.
   Whenever the notice provided for in § 51.40(B) is not complied with, the
Council shall be authorized and empowered to apply to the local District Court
for a mandatory injunction or other appropriate court order requiring the
delinquent person, firm or corporation to comply with the provisions of this
subchapter, under supervision and direction of the City Council. The cost of
repair of the water lines of pipes shall be paid initially from the general
fund, and then assessed by the Council against the property involved. If the
assessment is not paid to the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer within 30 days
after the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer has served written notice in the same
manner as provided for the notice referred to in § 51.40(A), the Administrator/
Clerk-Treasurer shall certify the amount of the assessment to the County
Auditor for collection in the same manner as other special assessments. The
Council, by resolution, may provide for payment of the assessment in two annual
installments bearing interest at 7% per annum from the expiration of the 30-day
period.
(Ord. 138, passed 6-7-1971)
PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEMS
§ 51.55 PURPOSE.
   The City Council accepts the premise that, in order to protect the public’s
health, eliminate or prevent the development of public nuisance, and protect
the city’s groundwater and streams from contamination by human sewage and
waterborne household and commercial wastes, minimum standards be adopted for
the disposal of sewage and wastewater.
(Ord. 207, passed 6-23-1992)
§ 51.56 DEFINITIONS.
   When used in this regulation, the following terms and the terms included as
part of Minnesota Rules Part 7080, except where amended below, have the
meanings given to them.
   GROUNDWATER. The water contained below the surface of the earth in a
saturated zone, including, without limitation, all waters, whether under
confined, unconfined, or perched conditions, in near surface unconsolidated
sediment or regolith, or in rock formations, deeper underground.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The City Health Officer as appointed by the City Council.
   INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM. Any individual sewage treatment system,
as defined in Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080.
   MINNESOTA RULES. The Minnesota Individual Sewage Treatment Systems Standards
codified in Minnesota Rules Chapter 7080 and appendices thereto.
   NONCOMPLYING SYSTEM. Any individual sewage treatment system which does not
comply with this regulation.
   NON-WATER-CARRIED SEWAGE SYSTEM. A device for the disposal of human excreta
in a structure designed to treat sewage, utilizing methods that significantly
reduce or eliminate the addition of water to the sewage. (Examples include
privies, chemical toilets, recirculating toilets, combustion toilets,
composting toilets, oil flush toilets, and portable toilets.)
   OWNER OF LAND or LAND OWNER. Any person who holds a freehold interest,
either individually or as a joint tenant or tenant in common, to any land lying
within the county. Where the term OWNER OF LAND or LAND OWNER is used, it
includes each and all of the joint tenants and tenants in common with respect
to the land.
   PERMITTEE. Any person who obtains a permit from the city pursuant to this
subchapter. A person is a permittee only for the term of the permit.
   PERSON. Any natural person, any state, municipality or other governmental or
other political subdivision or other public agency or instrumentality, any
public or private corporation, any partnership, firm, association, or other
organization, any receiver, trustee, assignee, agent or other legal
representative of any of the foregoing, and any other entity.
   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. An area containing a concentration of buildings
used as the residence or sleeping place for ten or more persons, but not
including tents, trailers, or similar portable housing.
   SAND. A soil texture composed of at least 25% very coarse, coarse, and
medium sand, varying in size from 2.0 to 0.25 mm, less than 50% of fine or very
fine ranging in size between 0.25 and 0.05 mm, and no more than 10% of
particles smaller than 0.05 mm.
   SOIL CONSERVATION SERVICE. The United States Department of Agriculture Soil
Conservation Service.
   SUBSURFACE WATER. Any water below the surface of the ground, included but
not limited to water in the saturated and unsaturated zones.
   SUPPORT AREA. That area or portion of a property or land parcel that is
designated to be protected for the use of present or future soil treatment
areas meeting all setback requirements for individual sewage treatment units.
(Ord. 207, passed 6-23-1992)
§ 51.57 STANDARDS FOR HEALTH AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION.
   (A)   Minnesota Rules. Those standards provided in Minnesota Rules, Chapter
7080, except with amendments authorized by this subchapter, shall be the basis
for permit applications and issuance of permits, the conduct of inspections of
work in progress, the issuance of notices of violation and notices of
revocation of permits, except as otherwise provided herein.
      (1)   There shall be a four-foot thickness of soil separating the bottom
of a sewage treatment system from limiting factors such as bedrock or water
table. The soil shall have percolation rates ranging between 0.1 and 60 minutes
per inch unless an alternative system is installed.
      (2)   Twelve inches of soil fill material with appropriate percolation
rates shall be placed between the filter material and the original soil in the
excavation when soil conditions have very fast or very slow percolation rates.
      (3)   Where Minnesota Rules allow sewage mound systems to be located on
slopes, the mound shall be designed and constructed with sufficient base area
to prevent seepage out of the mound. The base area shall be designed according
to a calculated absorption rate of 0.24 gallons per day per square foot of base
area.
   (B)   Support areas. Sewage treatment systems shall be placed in a
designated support area. The least dimension of the support area running with
the contour lines shall be a minimum of 50 feet. Support areas shall be located
and sized according to the daily sewage flow and the slope as follows.
      (1)   For every proposed dwelling there shall be identified and preserved
at least 5,000 square feet of support area for the soil treatment system if
slopes do not exceed 6%. Where slopes exceed 6%, the support area size shall be
determined by multiplying the percent slope times 1,000 square feet.
      (2)   For installations other than single-family dwellings, the
appropriate size of support area shall be determined by multiplying the square
feet of the soil treatment area times three and adding 10% for every percent
slope that is more than 6%.
   (C)   Soils evaluations and construction designs. Soils evaluations and/or
construction designs must be prepared by a Minnesota Licensed Professional
Engineer, Hydrologist, Geologist, or Soils Scientist/Classifier, that is
trained and experienced in soils evaluation and sewage treatment design and
appropriately certified (or provisionally certified) by the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency for individual sewage treatment systems site evaluation and/or
design when the following apply.
      (1)   The Soil Survey of Fillmore County published by the Soil
Conservation Service, indicates that soils have severe restrictive features or
when slopes exceed 20%.
      (2)   The sewage system proposed is designed for sewage flows that are
apt to exceed 5,000 gallons in any 24-hour period.
   (D)   Multi-family residential, commercial, or industrial development.
Proposed multi-family residential, commercial, or industrial developments that
generate sewage wastes shall connect to a public sewage collection system
properly operated in accordance with MPCA permits, unless otherwise authorized
by the State Board of Health. All other residences and commercial
establishments within the city that abut upon easements or streets where city
sanitary sewer lines are situated shall likewise connect to the public sewage
collection system.
   (E)   Non-water-carried sewage treatment/disposal methods.
      (1)   Homes or other establishments requiring sewage treatment facilities
may utilize non-water- carried sewage treatment facilities. However, an
adequate support area shall be located for future construction of a sewage
drain field.
      (2)   The city shall have the right to review all proposed construction
and issue permits for all non-water-carried sewage disposal and/or treatment
methods. The wastes from these systems shall be treated and disposed of to
protect the quality of surface or groundwaters and not become offensive, odor-
producing, or serve as a source or attraction for flies, vermin, or rodents.
Unsanitary conditions or nuisances caused by these devices must be corrected.
   (F)   Use and maintenance of sewage systems. No person shall use, operate,
or maintain a noncomplying sewage treatment system. No person shall permit
sewage effluent to spill upon or pool on the surface of the ground, or to enter
a well, sink hole, fissured rock formation, or stream or river.
(Ord. 207, passed 6-23-1992)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.58 CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATION PERMITS.
   (A)   Approval of application for construction permit. If, after considering
the application for permit and accompanying information, the city is satisfied
that the proposal complies with the provisions of this subchapter, the city
shall issue a written permit. One copy of the approved application accompanying
information and permit number shall be kept by the permittee at the work site
during its progress. The other copy shall remain with the city.
   (B)   Rejection of application. If after considering the construction permit
application and accompanying plat or scale drawing, the city determines that
the work will not comply with the provisions of this subchapter, the city shall
not issue a permit until suitable revisions and corrections are proposed.
   (C)   Alteration of plans. The construction or operation authorized under
the construction permit shall not be altered or modified in any of the
essential details without the written consent of the city.
   (D)   Construction or operation violations. A sewage treatment system which
is constructed or operated in violation of the provisions of this subchapter
shall be prima facie evidence of a common
nuisance without other proof thereof than the proof of its unlawful
construction or operation. The city may abate and remove it as authorized by
this subchapter or other applicable regulations or statutes.
   (E)   Expiration of permit. Operation permits for use of the sewage system
shall terminate if at any time in the future the sewage system should fail,
becomes a nuisance, if a public sewer becomes accessible to serve the building,
or if the city should require operation permits to be renewed periodically.
(Ord. 207, passed 6-23-1992)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.59 NOTICE TO HEALTH DEPARTMENT; INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Inspection. It shall be the duty of the permittee to notify the city
when construction of the individual sewage treatment system will start and when
it is completed before any of the system is covered. The installation and
construction of the system shall be in accordance with the permit limitations
and application design. Proposals to alter the permitted construction shall be
reviewed and the proposed change accepted by the city prior to construction.
   (B)   Notifications.
      (1)   City to be notified. It shall be the duty of the permittee to
notify the city in person, by telephone, or in writing between the hours of 8
a.m. and 4 p.m. on the workday preceding the day inspection is desired. If
adjustments of the specific inspection time are necessary, the final notice
shall be given not less than four hours in advance of the time the permittee
desires inspection.
      (2)   Standards and limitations. It shall be the duty of the permittee to
make sure that the work meets the prescribed standards and limitations before
giving the above notification.
      (3)   Equipment and labor. The equipment and supporting labor necessary
for the inspection and tests shall be furnished by the permittee.
      (4)   Covering of work. If any building drain, plumbing, or septic system
component is covered before being inspected and approved, it shall be uncovered
upon the direction of the city.
      (5)   Method of testing. The drainage system shall be checked for
materials and slopes in its entirety or in sections. Construction or components
of a sewage system that are defective or in an unsanitary condition shall be
repaired, replaced, or removed upon notice, and the permittee shall renotify as
above, unless the city issues an operational authorization permit subject to
the correction of work being completed according to the standards.
      (6)   Operational authorization permit. Upon the satisfactory completion
and final inspection of the sewer system, an operational authorization permit
may be issued by the city and left at the site or mailed to the property owner.
(Ord. 207, passed 6-23-1992)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.60 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The city shall have the right to review the design and inspect the
construction, installation, and operation of individual sewage treatment
systems.
   (B)   The city, by or through its own personnel, or by contract with the
county or other entity, shall be responsible for the administration and
enforcement of this subchapter, shall issue all licenses and permits, notices
of violation, and notices of revocation of licenses or permits; shall examine
the work in progress as required by this subchapter and determine compliance
with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 207, passed 6-23-1992)
§ 51.61 FEES.
   (A)   The appropriate fee shall accompany permit applications for individual
sewage treatment system construction or repairs of a sewage treatment system.
Fees for licenses and permits shall be set from time to time by resolution of
the City Council.
   (B)   The fee for other services performed by personnel of the city, such as
soil investigations or processing of loan applications, will be as set by
resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 207, passed 6-23-1992)
§ 51.62 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this regulation shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided by
law. A separate offense shall be deemed to be committed each day that a
violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   All premises affected by this subchapter shall be subject to
inspection by the city, its personnel, health officer or other authorized
agent. The city may collect samples for laboratory examination as deemed
necessary for enforcement of this subchapter. No person shall refuse to permit
the city to inspect any premises. No person shall molest or resist city
personnel, Health Officer or other agents in the discharge of their duty in the
protection of the public health.
   (C)   The existence of violations to this regulation are a threat and
nuisance to the public, the groundwater and rivers or streams. Therefore, the
city will notify the owner of the land where the violation exists that the
violation must be corrected in accordance with this subchapter. The owner will
be given 30 days to comply. In cases of imminent hazard, the compliance time
may be shortened accordingly. If the owner does not comply within the
compliance time limit, the city may cause the violation to be corrected. Any
expenses incurred therefor shall be the responsibility of the owner, and if
subsequently unpaid, shall be assessed against the property as provided by law.
(Ord. 207, passed 6-23-1992)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 52: STORM WATER DRAINAGE UTILITY
Section
   
52.01   Storm water drainage utility
   
52.02   Purpose of funds derived and allocation of revenue
   
52.03   Storm sewer utility fee
   
52.04   Exemptions
   
52.05   Area to be included within storm water drainage district
   
52.06   Utility charges may be imposed when land is developed
   
52.07   Reduction or elimination of utility fees that are found to be unfair or
inequitable
   
Appendix: Storm Water Utility Plat
§ 52.01 STORM WATER DRAINAGE UTILITY.
   A storm water drainage utility for the city shall be and hereby is
established. The municipal storm sewer system shall be operated as a public
utility pursuant to M.S. § 444.075, as it may be amended from time to time,
from which revenue will be derived pursuant to applicable Minnesota statutes.
(Ord. 238, passed 7-16-2001)
§ 52.02 PURPOSE OF FUNDS DERIVED AND ALLOCATION OF REVENUE.
   The purpose of all funds derived is to pay for all or part of the
construction, reconstruction, repair, enlargement, improvement or other
obtainment and the maintenance, operation and use of the storm sewer utility as
established by the city.
(Ord. 238, passed 7-16-2001)
§ 52.03 STORM SEWER UTILITY FEE.
   A storm sewer utility fee for the connection and availability of the storm
sewer facilities shall be determined by resolution of the City Council and
shall be just, and equitable, and non-discriminating. A charge for the
availability of the storm sewer service may be imposed for all premises within
the storm water drainage district not otherwise exempt under § 52.04 of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 238, passed 7-16-2001)
§ 52.04 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Public rights-of-way are exempt from the fees established in § 52.03.
   (B)   State of Minnesota and City of Preston owned land are exempt from the
fees established in § 52.03.
   (C)   Areas outside the storm water utility boundary are exempt from the
fees established in § 52.03.
   (D)   Undeveloped agricultural land (row crop or pasture).
   (E)   Undeveloped wood lands.
   (F)   Parcels not directly accessible from a county or city street or that
do not contribute water to any storm water or drainage pipe facility.
   (G)   All cemeteries are exempt from the fees established in § 52.03.
(Ord. 238, passed 7-16-2001; Am. Ord. 239, passed 10-1-2001)
§ 52.05 AREA TO BE INCLUDED WITHIN STORM WATER DRAINAGE DISTRICT.
   The area to be included within the storm water drainage district is as shown
on the plat annexed hereto as Chapter 52 Appendix: Storm water utility plat.
(Ord. 238, passed 7-16-2001)
§ 52.06 UTILITY CHARGES MAY BE IMPOSED WHEN LAND IS DEVELOPED.
   At such time as undeveloped land referred to in § 52.04(D) and (E) above is
developed, the city may impose equitable utility fees upon such land not
otherwise exempt under the terms of this subchapter.
(Ord. 238, passed 7-16-2001)
§ 52.07 REDUCTION OR ELIMINATION OF UTILITY FEES THAT ARE FOUND TO BE UNFAIR OR
INEQUITABLE.
   The city shall have the right and authority to adjust or eliminate drainage
utility fees that the City Council finds to be unfair, inequitable or
discriminatory. In the event a utility fee is adjusted or eliminated pursuant
to this section, the City Council shall prepare and record in its minutes
specific findings of fact supporting such adjustment or elimination.
(Ord. 238, passed 7-16-2001)
APPENDIX: STORM WATER UTILITY PLAT
[Click_here_to_view_plat.]
(Ord. 238, passed 7-16-2001)
CHAPTER 53: WATER
Section
Water Conservation Restrictions
   
53.01   Purpose
   
53.02   Definitions
   
53.03   Application
   
53.04   Declaration of critical water deficiency
   
53.05   Mandatory emergency water conservation measures
   
53.06   Variances
   
53.07   Violation
   
53.08   Enforcement
WATER CONSERVATION RESTRICTIONS
§ 53.01 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter establishes water conservation restrictions; and the plan
will be in effect at any time the governor declares by executive order a
critical water deficiency, pursuant to M.S. § 103G.291.
(Ord. 290, passed 9-9-2020)
§ 53.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply,
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CLERK IN STATUTORY CITIES. The person assigned duties pursuant to M.S. §
412.151; or the city manager pursuant to M.S. §§ 412.601 - 412.751 or in
charter cities as determined by city charter.
   DEPARTMENT. The city Water Department.
   EMERGENCY. The declaration of a critical water deficiency by the governor.
   IRRIGATION. The watering of shrubs, trees, sod, seeded areas, gardens,
lawns, or any other outdoor vegetation, except outdoor vegetation utilized for
agricultural purposes.
   NOTIFICATION TO PUBLIC. Notification through local media, including
interviews and issuance of news releases.
   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIER. The city or other entity that owns, manages, or
operates a public water supply, as defined in M.S. § 144.382, subdivision 4.
   RECLAIMED WATER. Water collected from rooftops, paved surfaces, or other
collection devices and all water utilized more than once before re-entering the
natural water cycle.
   WATER RECIRCULATION SYSTEM. Any system which enables a user to reuse water
at least once prior to returning the water to the natural water cycle.
(Ord. 290, passed 9-9-2020)
§ 53.03 APPLICATION.
   (A)   This subchapter applies to all customers of public water suppliers who
own or control water use on any premises.
   (B)   No person shall make, cause, use, or permit the use of water received
from a public water supply for residential, commercial, industrial,
governmental, or any other purpose in any manner contrary to any provision in
this subchapter.
   (C)   Mandatory emergency conservation measures shall be implemented based
upon the declaration of a critical water emergency by the governor.
(Ord. 290, passed 9-9-2020)
§ 53.04 DECLARATION OF CRITICAL WATER DEFICIENCY.
   Upon the declaration of a critical water deficiency by the governor, the
public water supplier shall immediately post notice of the emergency
declaration at the usual meeting place of the City Council, or the official
city bulletin board. The city shall provide notification to the public as
quickly as possible or through established water supply plans emergency
response plans or procedures.
(Ord. 290, passed 9-9-2020)
§ 53.05 MANDATORY EMERGENCY WATER CONSERVATION MEASURES.
   Upon declaration of a water emergency and notification to the public, the
following mandatory restrictions upon nonessential water use shall be enforced:
   (A)   Outdoor irrigation of yards, gardens, golf courses, parklands, and
other non-agricultural land, except for those areas irrigated with reclaimed
water, is prohibited.
   (B)   Washing or spraying of sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis
courts, patios, or other paved areas with water from any pressurized source,
including garden hoses, except to alleviate immediate health or safety hazards,
is prohibited.
   (C)   The outdoor use of any water-based play apparatus connected to a
pressurized source is prohibited.
   (D)   Restaurants and other food service establishments are prohibited from
serving water to their customers, unless water is specifically requested by the
customer.
   (E)   Operation of outdoor misting systems used to cool public areas is
prohibited.
   (F)   The filling of swimming pools, fountains, spas, or other exterior
water features is prohibited.
   (G)   The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, and other types of
mobile equipment is prohibited, except at facilities equipped with wash water
recirculation systems, and for vehicles requiring frequent washing to protect
public health, safety, and welfare.
(Ord. 290, passed 9-9-2020)
§ 53.06 VARIANCES.
   The City Clerk or their designee, is authorized to grant variances to this
subchapter where strict application of its provisions would result in serious
hardship to a customer. A variance may be granted only for reasons involving
health or safety. An applicant may appeal the denial of a variance within five
days of the decision by submitting a written appeal to the City Clerk. The City
Council shall hear the appeal at the next City Council meeting. The decision of
the City Council is final.
(Ord. 290, passed 9-9-2020)
§ 53.07 VIOLATION.
   (A)   Violations shall be determined and cited by the City Clerk or their
designee. A violator may appeal the citation within five days of its issuance
by submitting a written appeal to the city. The City Council shall hear the
appeal at the next City Council meeting. The decision of the City Council is
final. Violators may be granted an administrative waiver if evidence is
provided that equipment failure was the cause of the violation. A letter from a
qualified vendor or equipment invoice will be required to show proof of
equipment failure.
   (B)   Upon discovery of a first violation, the violator shall be issued,
either personally or by mail, a warning letter that sets forth the violation
and which shall describe the remedy and fines for future violations.
   (C)   Upon subsequent violations at the same location, the violator shall be
issued, either personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the violation
and shall describe the remedy. Fines shall be added to the monthly water bill
of the owner or current occupant of the premises where the violation occurred.
The imposition of the fine shall in no way limit the right of the city to
pursue other legal remedies.
(Ord. 290, passed 9-9-2020)
§ 53.08 ENFORCEMENT.
   The City Clerk or their designee is authorized to designate city employees
or law enforcement personnel to enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 290, passed 9-9-2020)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter
   
70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
   
71.   PARKING REGULATIONS
   
72.   SNOWMOBILE REGULATIONS
   
73.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
70.01   Adoption of Minnesota Highway Traffic Regulation Act
   
70.02   Exhibition driving prohibited
   
70.03   Valid driver’s license required
   
70.04   Motor vehicles on recreational trails prohibited
   
70.05   Skateboards and scooters prohibited in Courthouse Square Area and
Trailhead Area
   
70.06   Special vehicles operating on city streets
§ 70.01 ADOPTION OF MINNESOTA HIGHWAY TRAFFIC REGULATION ACT.
   Traffic regulations, M.S. Chapter 169, as last amended or as amended from
time to time subsequent to the date hereof, known as the Minnesota Highway
Traffic Regulation Act, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, is adopted as the traffic regulation code
of the city, for the purpose of regulating all motor vehicles and traffic
within the city. Every provision contained in the Minnesota Highway Traffic
Regulation Act is hereby adopted and made a part of this section as if fully
set forth herein. Any violation of the statutes adopted by reference in this
section is a violation of this code, and a violator guilty of the offense shall
be punished by the penalty as is prescribed by the statutes.
(Ord. 120, passed 3-1-1965)
§ 70.02 EXHIBITION DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Any person or individual driving and/or operating a motor vehicle or
other vehicle within the limits of the city in such a manner as to create or
cause unnecessary engine noise or tire squeal; skid or slide upon acceleration
or stopping; or that simulates a temporary race; or that causes the vehicle to
unnecessarily turn abruptly, shall be guilty of exhibition driving.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of division (A) of this section as
above stated shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction for a
violation hereof shall be subject to the terms of § 10.99.
(Ord. 158, passed 7-7-1975)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.03 VALID DRIVER’S LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No persons except those expressly excepted by the provisions of M.S.
Chapter 171 as from time to time amended, shall operate or drive any motor
vehicle upon any street or highway in the city without a valid license as a
driver under the provisions of M.S. Chapter 171, as from time to time amended.
   (B)   M.S. Chapter 171, as from time to time amended, shall be made a part
of this section and incorporated herein by reference, except for the provisions
of § 171.02.
(Ord. 128, passed 10-3-1968)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.04 MOTOR VEHICLES ON RECREATIONAL TRAILS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definition.  RECREATIONAL TRAIL. A pathway within the city limits
designated by the City Council as a recreational trail as shown by records and
documents on file in the Office of the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer.
   (B)   Motorized conveyances prohibited. No person shall operate, locate or
park any type or motorized conveyance, including but not limited to motor
vehicles, snowmobiles, motor bikes and motor scooters, in or upon any
recreational trail within the city, except for maintenance vehicles for the
purpose of maintenance of the trail and surrounding grounds, and except for
emergency vehicles.
   (C)   Violations. A violation of the provisions of this section shall be a
misdemeanor and shall be punished according to the terms of §
10.99.
(Ord. 211, passed 7-13-1993)
§ 70.05 SKATEBOARDS AND SCOOTERS PROHIBITED IN COURTHOUSE SQUARE AREA AND
TRAILHEAD AREA.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms
shall have the meanings described herein:
      COURTHOUSE SQUARE AREA. The indicated blocks of the following streets:
Fillmore Street from Houston Street east to Pleasant Street; Main Street from
St. Paul Street east to St. Anthony Street; St. Paul Street from Main Street
north to Fillmore Street; St. Anthony Street from Main Street north to Fillmore
Street.
      SCOOTER. Any motorized of non-motorized device designed to propel a
standing operator.
      SKATEBOARD. A wheeled self-propelled device designed to transport a
rider, which device is not otherwise secured to a rider's feet or shoes.
      TRAILHEAD AREA. The city-owned land that is immediately adjacent to the
Trailhead bathrooms and historic elevator. This area includes the sidewalks and
ramps that service the Trailhead bathrooms and historic elevator.
   (B)   Skateboard and scooter riding prohibited. No person shall ride a
skateboard or scooter on any public sidewalk or street, on any public parking
lot, or in any public or private parking structure, situated in the Courthouse
Square Area or Trailhead Area unless a permit has been obtained from the City
Council.
   (C)   Permit. A person desiring to conduct an exhibition involving the use
of skateboards or scooters in the Courthouse Square Area or Trailhead Area
shall file an application with the City Administrator or designated
representative at least three weeks prior to the date of the proposed
exhibition. The application shall be in writing addressed to the City Council
and shall contain the following information and such other information as the
City Administrator or designated representative may request: the name of the
person conducting the exhibition, the date(s) and approximate duration of the
exhibition and the location of the exhibition.
   (D)   Exceptions. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to
prohibit the use by a disabled person of a wheelchair or other wheeled device
designed to assist the ambulatory disabled on the sidewalks or streets, public
parking lots, or public or private parking structures, in the Courthouse Square
Area or Trailhead Area.
   (E)   Enforcement. Any person committing a first offense violation of the
provisions of this section shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor punishable by
a $25 fine. Any person committing a second offense violation of the provisions
of this section shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor punishable by a $50
fine. Any person committing a third or subsequent offense violation of the
provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction for a violation hereof shall be subject to the terms of §
10.99.
(Ord. 256, passed 8-6-2007)
§ 70.06 SPECIAL VEHICLES OPERATING ON CITY STREETS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE or ATV. As defined by M.S. § 84.92, Subdivision 8, as
it may be amended from time to time, a motorized vehicle with (1) not less than
three, but not more than six low- pressure or nonpneumatic tires; (2) a total
dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less; and (3) a total width from outside of tire
rim to outside of tire rim that is 65 inches or less. ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE
includes a class 1 all-terrain vehicle and class 2 all-terrain vehicle. It does
not include an electric-assisted bicycle, golf car, mini-truck, dune buggy, or
go-cart or a vehicle designed and used specifically for lawn maintenance, snow
removal, agriculture, logging, or mining purposes.
      CLASS 1 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE. As defined by M.S. § 84.92, Subdivision 9,
as it may be amended from time to time, an all-terrain vehicle that has a total
width from outside of tire rim to outside of tire trim that is 50 inches or
less.
      CLASS 2 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE. As defined by M.S. § 84.92, Subdivision 10,
as it may be amended from time to time, an all-terrain vehicle that has a total
width from outside of tire rim to outside of tire trim that is greater than 50
inches but not more than 65 inches.
      DRIVER or OPERATOR. The person driving and having physical control over
the motorized golf cart, utility task vehicle, all-terrain vehicle, or mini-
truck.
      MINI-TRUCK. As defined in M.S. § 169.011, Subdivision 40(a), as it may be
amended from time to time, a motor vehicle that has four wheels; is propelled
by an electric motor with a rated power of 7,500 watts or less or an internal
combustion engine with a piston displacement capacity of 660 cubic centimeters
or less; has a total dry weight of 900 to 2,200 pounds; contains an enclosed
cabin and a seat for the vehicle operator; commonly resembles a pickup truck or
van, including a cargo area or bed located at the rear of the vehicle; and was
not originally manufactured to meet federal motor vehicle safety standards
required of motor vehicles in the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 49,
Sections 571.101 to 571.404, and successor requirements. A MINI-TRUCK does not
include: a neighborhood electric vehicle or a medium-speed electric vehicle; or
a motor vehicle that meets or exceeds the regulations in the Code of Federal
Regulations, Title 49, Section 571.500, as it may be amended from time to time.
      MOTORIZED GOLF CART. Any passenger conveyance being driven with four
wheels with four low-pressure tires that is limited in engine displacement of
less than 800 cubic centimeters and total dry weight less than 800 pounds.
      UTILITY TASK VEHICLE or UTV. As defined by M.S. § 169.045, Subdivision 1
(3), as it may be amended from time to time, a side-by-side, four-wheel-drive,
off-road vehicle that has four wheels, is propelled by an internal combustion
engine with a piston displacement capacity of 1,200 cubic centimeters or less,
and has a total dry weight of 1,800 but less than 2,600 pounds.
   (B)   Permit required. No person shall operate a motorized golf cart,
utility task vehicle, all-terrain vehicle, or mini-truck on streets, alleys,
sidewalks or other public property that has not been issued a permit from the
city as provided herein.
   (C)   Exception to permit requirement. Authorized city staff and volunteers
may operate city- owned motorized golf carts and mini-trucks without obtaining
a permit within the city on city streets, sidewalks, trails, rights-of-way, and
public property when conducting city business.
   (D)   Application. Every application for a permit shall be made on a form
supplied by the city and shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Application date;
      (2)   Applicant’s name, date of birth, and address;
      (3)   Type of special vehicle to be permitted;
      (4)   Model name, make, and year and number of the motorized golf cart,
utility task vehicle, all-terrain vehicle, or mini-truck to be permitted;
      (5)   Copy of applicant’s current driver’s license or reason for not
having a current license;
      (6)   Proof of insurance in compliance with the provisions of M.S. §
65B.48, Subdivision 5, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (7)   Proof that ATVs and UTVs are registered with the Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources;
      (8)   If applicant is applying for a permit for an ATV and is born after
July 1, 1987, proof that applicant has received a safety certificate from the
State of Minnesota;
      (9)   Confirmation of equipment required as set forth in division (J)
below; and
      (10)   Other information as the city may require.
   (E)   Permit fee. The permit fee shall be as set forth in the ordinance
establishing fees and charges adopted pursuant to § 30.10 of this code, as that
section may be amended from time to time.
   (F)   Term of permit. Permits shall be granted for a period of three
calendar years including the calendar year in which the permit is issued,
except that applicants may renew a permit prior to December 31 in the year a
permit is expiring for the next three calendar years.
   (G)   Conditions for granting permit. No permit shall be granted or renewed
unless the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The applicant submits a completed application and complies with all
requirements of this section.
      (2)   The applicant who is applying for a permit for an ATV and who was
born after July 1, 1987, presents a safety certificate issued by the State of
Minnesota.
      (3)   The applicant who is obtaining a permit for a mini-truck
demonstrates that they currently hold a valid Minnesota driver’s license.
      (4)   The applicant may be required to submit a certificate signed by a
physician that the applicant is able to safely operate a motorized golf cart,
utility task vehicle or all-terrain vehicle on the designated roadways.
   (H)   Rules of operation.
      (1)   Use only on city streets. Motorized golf carts, utility task
vehicles, all-terrain vehicles, and mini-trucks are permitted to operate on
city streets only, not state or federal highways, except to cross at designated
intersections.
      (2)   Time of operation. Motorized golf carts, utility task vehicles and
all-terrain vehicles may only be operated from sunrise to sunset, unless
equipped with original equipment headlights, taillights, and rear-facing brake
lights.
      (3)   Conditions prohibiting operation. Motorized golf carts, utility
task vehicles and all-terrain vehicles shall not be operated in inclement
weather conditions, except during emergency conditions, or when visibility is
impaired by weather, smoke, fog, or other conditions, or at any time when there
is insufficient visibility to clearly see persons and vehicles on the roadway
at a distance of 500 feet.
      (4)   Operation on recreational trails. Operation of motorized golf
carts, utility task vehicles and all-terrain vehicles on city recreational
trails, bicycle paths, bicycle lanes, bicycle trails, or bikeways is prohibited
unless the City Council, by resolution, designates specific bicycle paths,
bicycle lanes, bicycle trails, or bikeways as available for use by such
vehicles. The City Council, by resolution, may set additional conditions on the
use of any designated trails.
      (5)   Location of permit. The permit shall be affixed to the uppermost
portion on the rear of the driver’s side of the vehicle.
      (6)   Number of occupants. The number of occupants on the golf cart,
utility task vehicle, all-terrain vehicle, or mini-truck may not exceed the
design occupant load.
      (7)   Applicability of M.S. Chapter 169. Every person operating a
motorized golf cart, a utility task vehicle, an all-terrain vehicle, or a mini-
truck under permit on designated roadways has all the rights and duties
applicable to the driver of any other vehicle under the provisions of M.S.
Chapter 169, as amended, except when those provisions cannot reasonably be
applied and except as otherwise specifically provided in M.S. § 169.045,
Subdivision 7, as amended.
      (8)   Driver’s license required. Every person operating a permitted mini-
truck on designated roadways shall have a valid driver’s license and is subject
to the provisions of M.S. Chapter 171, as amended.
      (9)   Safety certificate required. Any person operating a permitted ATV
on designated roadways who was born after July 1, 1987, shall be in possession
of a safety certificate from the State of Minnesota and shall present their
safety certificate to law enforcement upon request.
   (I)   Suspension or revocation of permit. The Chief of Police may suspend or
revoke a permit granted hereunder upon a finding that the holder thereof has
violated any of the provisions of this section or M.S. Chapter 169, as amended,
or if there is evidence that the permit holder cannot safely operate the
motorized golf cart, utility task vehicle, all-terrain vehicle, or mini-truck
on the designated roadways. The Chief of Police shall mail written notice to
the address on the application or any updated address provided to the city.
Within 30 days of the date of the written notice to suspend or revoke, a person
whose permit is suspended or revoked may appeal the decision to the City
Council for review.
   (J)   Required equipment.
      (1)   Motorized golf carts may be operated under permit on designated
roadways if it is equipped with all of the following:
         (a)   A slow-moving vehicle emblem as set forth in M.S. §§ 169.045 and
169.522, as amended;
         (b)   A rear-view mirror to provide the driver with adequate vision
from behind as required by M.S. § 169.70, as it may be amended from time to
time; and
         (c)   A parking brake.
      (2)   All-terrain vehicles may be operated under permit on designated
roadways if it is equipped with all of the following:
         (a)   A rear-view mirror to provide the driver with adequate vision
from behind as required by M.S. § 169.70, as it may be amended from time to
time;
         (b)   At least one headlamp; and
         (c)   At least one tail lamp.
      (3)   Utility task vehicles and mini-trucks may be operated under permit
on designated roadways if it is equipped with all of the following:
         (a)   At least two headlamps;
         (b)   At least two tail lamps;
         (c)   Front and rear turn-signal lamps;
         (d)   An exterior mirror mounted on the driver’s side of the vehicle
and either (1) an exterior mirror mounted on the passenger’s side of the
vehicle or (2) a rear-view mirror to provide the driver with adequate vision
from behind as required by M.S. § 169.70, as it may be amended from time to
time;
         (e)   A windshield;
         (f)   A seat belt for the driver and front passenger; and
         (g)   A parking brake.
   (K)   Penalty. A violation of the provisions of this section shall be a
petty misdemeanor and shall be punished according to the terms of §
10.99(B).
(Ord. 300, passed - -)
CHAPTER 71: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Definitions
   
71.02   General parking regulations
   
71.03   Parking prohibitions
   
71.04   Order to proceed
   
71.05   Exceptions
   
71.06   Angle parking
   
71.07   Truck parking
   
71.08   Parking rules in city parking lots
   
71.09   Impounding and removing vehicles
§ 71.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply,
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   RECREATION CAMPING VEHICLE. Applies to the following:
      (1)   CAMPING TRAILER. A folding structure, mounted on wheels and
designed for travel, recreation and vacation uses.
      (2)   MOTOR HOME. A portable, temporary building to be used for travel,
recreation and vacation, constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled
vehicle.
      (3)   PICK-UP COACH. A structure designed to be mounted on a truck
chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation.
      (4)   TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis,
designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and
vacation uses, permanently identified "Travel Trailer" by the manufacturer of
the trailer.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between property lines of every way or
place of whatever nature, when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public, as a matter of right, for the purpose of vehicular traffic.
   UTILITY TRAILER. Any vehicle or structure so designed for transportation
and/or storage of goods, materials, livestock, equipment, boats, snowmobiles,
and the like and so designed that it is or may be mounted on wheels and used as
a conveyance on highways or streets, propelled or drawn by other motive power.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported upon any highway or street, excepting devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Ord. 108, passed 9-2-1958; Am. Ord. 264, passed 4-19-2010)
§ 71.02 GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS.
   Every vehicle parked upon any street with a curb within the city shall be
parked parallel thereto and with the right hand wheel of the vehicle within 12
inches of the curb. On all streets, a vehicle shall be parked to the right of
the main traveled portion thereof and parallel thereto, and in such a manner
that it shall not interfere with the free flow of traffic. This shall not apply
however, to any vehicle disabled upon any street, but every police officer of
the city is authorized to require the person in charge thereof to move any
disabled vehicle to a place of safety, and upon neglect or failure to do so, or
in the case of any motor vehicle being left alone or abandoned in any such
position, a police officer is authorized to provide for the removal of the
vehicle to the nearest convenient garage or other place of safe keeping.
(Ord. 264, passed 4-19-2010)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.03 PARKING PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, whether attended or
unattended, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device,
in any of the following places.
      (1)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping, including
those signs which prohibit parking or stopping during certain periods of time,
as stated thereon.
      (2)   On a sidewalk.
      (3)   In front of a public or private driveway.
      (4)   Within an intersection.
      (5)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant.
      (6)   On a crosswalk.
      (7)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign,
or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.
      (8)   At any place when stopping, standing, or parking would unreasonably
obstruct the flow of traffic.
      (9)   Within 20 feet of the driveway to the City Fire Station.
      (10)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.
      (11)   Along the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of a street.
      (12)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel.
      (13)   In an alley.
      (14)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or parking.
   (B)   No person shall, for camping purposes, leave or park a house trailer
on any street or the right-of-way thereof.
   (C)   Yellow paint shall indicate no parking zones, and no vehicle shall be
parked thereon.
   (D)   All vehicles shall be parked in designated parking stalls.
   (E)   No person shall park any vehicle including any recreational vehicle,
utility trailer or farm implement upon any street within the corporate limits
of the city and leave it standing for more than 24 consecutive hours.
(Ord. Ord. 108, passed 9-2-1958; Am. Ord. 101, passed 8-7-1951; Am. Ord. 264,
passed 4-19-2010)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.04 ORDER TO PROCEED.
   No person shall stop or park a vehicle on a street or highway when directed
or ordered to proceed by any peace officer invested by law with authority to
direct, control, or regulate traffic.
(Ord. 108, passed 9-2-1958)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.05 EXCEPTIONS.  
   This chapter shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled
while parked or standing in one of the prohibited areas as defined in §
71.03 in such a manner and to such an extent that it is impossible to avoid
stopping and temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in that position. If
possible, the disabled vehicle shall display hazard lights.
(Ord. 108, passed 9-2-1958; Am. Ord. 264, passed 4-19-2010)
§ 71.06 ANGLE PARKING.
   Angle parking is prohibited except in the following areas. Except as herein
stated, all vehicles shall park parallel to the curb.
   (A)   Main Street, southerly side, between St. Anthony Street and Houston
Street.
   (B)   Main Street, northerly side, from St. Paul Street to a point 80 feet
east of St. Anthony Street.
   (C)   Pleasant Street, easterly side, from Fillmore Street to a point 110
feet south.
   (D)   Washington Street, easterly side, from Kansas Street to a point 100
feet north.
   (E)   Houston Street, westerly side, from a point 80 feet north to a point
130 feet north of Hwy 52.
   (F)   Kansas Street, northerly side and southerly side, between Franklin
Street and Washington Street.
   (G)   Fillmore Street, southerly side, between St. Anthony Street and St.
Paul Street.
(Ord. 264, passed 4-19-2010)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.07 TRUCK PARKING. 
   No person shall park a semi tractor, semi tractor-trailer or detached semi-
trailer upon any street, city-owned parking lot, or other public property
except streets or areas as specifically designated by the Council by resolution
and sign-posted.
(Ord. 264, passed 4-19-2010) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.08 PARKING RULES IN CITY PARKING LOTS.
   No person shall park any vehicle in a city parking lot and leave it standing
for more than 72 consecutive hours. Recreation camping vehicles, utility
trailers and vehicles with a gross vehicle weight of more than 15,000 pounds
are not permitted in city parking lots. In city-owned parking lots, the Council
may further limit the sizes and types of motor vehicles to be parked thereon,
hours of parking, and prescribed method of parking, provided that such
limitations and restrictions are marked or sign-posted thereon. It is unlawful
to drive in a direction opposite the flow of traffic marked by "one-way" signs
or arrows, or to park any vehicle in any city-owned parking lot contrary to the
restrictions or limitations marked or sign-posted therein.
(Ord. 264, passed 4-19-2010)
§ 71.09 IMPOUNDING AND REMOVING VEHICLES.
   When any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street or city-owned
parking lot in violation of any parking regulation, such officer is hereby
authorized to require the driver or other person in charge of such vehicle to
remove the same to a position in compliance with this chapter. When any police
officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any street or city-owned parking lot in
violation of any parking regulation, such officer is hereby authorized to
impound such unlawfully parked vehicle and to provide for the removal thereof
and to remove the same to a convenient garage or other facility or place of
safety; provided, that if any charge shall be placed against such vehicle for
cost of removal or storage, or both, by anyone called upon to assist therewith
the same shall be paid prior to removal from such place of storage or
safekeeping.
(Ord. 264, passed 4-19-2010)
CHAPTER 72: SNOWMOBILE REGULATIONS
Section
   
72.01   Definitions
   
72.02   Application of traffic regulations
   
72.03   Reduced speed required
   
72.04   Operation within city limits
   
72.05   Prohibitions
   
72.06   Registration required
§ 72.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply,
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OPERATE. To ride in or on and control the operation of a snowmobile.
   OPERATOR. Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
snowmobile.
   OWNER. A person, other than a lien holder, having the property in or title
to a snowmobile, entitled to the use or possession thereof.
   PERSON. Shall include an individual, partnership, corporation, the state and
its agencies and subdivisions, and any body of persons, whether incorporated or
not.
   SNOWMOBILE. A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice or a
natural terrain, steered by wheels, skis or runners.
(Ord. 142, passed 12-13-1971)
§ 72.02 APPLICATION OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   All of the provisions of Ordinances nos. 131 and 133 relating to the
regulation of the operation and use of motor vehicles within the city, insofar
as they are reasonably applicable to the operation of snowmobiles, shall apply
to the operation and use of snowmobiles within the city; for the purposes
hereof, Ordinance no. 131 and Ordinance no. 133 of the city shall be
incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof.
(Ord. 142, passed 12-13-1971)
§ 72.03 REDUCED SPEED REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate a snowmobile within the city at a speed exceeding 20
miles per hour; and the operator of any snowmobile shall drive at an
appropriate reduced speed under 20 miles per hour when any special hazards
exist with respect to pedestrians, other traffic, or by reason of weather,
highway conditions, or other circumstances.
(Ord. 142, passed 12-13-1971)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.04 OPERATION WITHIN CITY LIMITS.
   No person shall operate a snowmobile on any city street between the hours of
10 p.m. and 6 a.m., except for the purpose of entering or leaving the city by
the shortest practical route; no person shall operate a snowmobile on any city
street at any time except for the purpose of traveling to a predetermined
destination via the shortest practical route.
(Ord. 142, passed 12-13-1971)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.05 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Interference with emergency and maintenance vehicles. No person shall
operate a snowmobile within the city in such a manner as to interfere in any
way with the operation of any emergency or maintenance vehicle.
   (B)   Use of snowmobiles on private property. No person shall operate a
snowmobile over or across any sidewalk or boulevard within the city, or over
and across lawns or other private property, unless with the written consent of
the legal owner of the private property.
   (C)   Towing of certain devices. No person shall operate a snowmobile within
the city while towing or pulling in any manner skis, sleds, or any other device
or vehicle connected to the snowmobile by means of rope or other similar
flexible material; the operation of a snowmobile while towing a sled with a
rigid hitch shall be permitted.
   (D)   Operation of snowmobiles in posted public grounds. No person shall
operate a snowmobile within any park or public grounds within the city which
are posted by authority of the City Council as prohibited to the operation of
snowmobiles.
(Ord. 142, passed 12-13-1971)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.06 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   The owner of every snowmobile who resides within the city shall register his
or her ownership of the snowmobile with the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer,
and shall give the Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer such information as is from time to time required with reference to
the snowmobile owned by him or her. The Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall be
and hereby is authorized and directed to keep and maintain, for public
inspection, a register showing the name and address of each owner of a
snowmobile who resides with the city, and the make, model, year and serial
number of each snowmobile so owned.
(Ord. 142, passed 12-13-1971)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 73: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Parking prohibited
SCHEDULE I. PARKING PROHIBITED. 
      (A)   Parking between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Beginning on
November 15 of each year and extending to March 15 of each following year, no
person shall park a motor vehicle or permit it to stand between the hours of 2:
00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. in the following areas.
 
Street      Location            Times              Ord. No. Date Passed
Fillmore    Between St. Paul    2:00 a.m. – 6:00 264; 269 4-19-2010; 11-7-
            and St. Anthony     a.m.                        2011
Fillmore    Between St. Anthony 2:00 a.m. – 6:00 280      12-18-2017
            and Center Street   a.m.
St. Paul    Between Fillmore    2:00 a.m. – 6:00 264; 269 4-19-2010; 11-7-
            and Mill            a.m.                        2011
St. Anthony Between Fillmore    2:00 a.m. – 6:00 264; 269 4-19-2010; 11-7-
            and Main            a.m.                        2011
Main        Between St. Paul    2:00 a.m. – 6:00 264; 269 4-19-2010; 11-7-
            and St. Anthony     a.m.                        2011
 
   (B)   Physically disabled parking zone. Parking in this zone will be limited
to vehicles bearing a disability plate or certificate.
 
Street         Location                                    Ord. No. Date Passed
               North side of the 200 Block extending from
Main St. SW    a point 50 feet west of the centerline of   278      12-18-2017
               St. Paul Street to a point 75 feet west of
               the centerline of St. Paul Street
               South side from a point 70 feet east of the
Main St.       intersection of Main Street and St. Anthony 260      1-7-2008
               Street, to a point 110 east of said
               intersection
               400 Block, along the south side of Preston
               Street commencing at a point 90 feet west
Preston St. NW of the centerline of Franklin Street and    281      2-4-2019
               ending at a point 150 feet west of the
               centerline of Franklin Street
 
   (C)   Restricted parking.
 
Street  Location                                                                      Times                           Ord. Date
                                                                                                                      No.  Passed
Main    South side of the 100 Block extending from St. Anthony St. to a point of 75   Two hour limit                  275  7-21-
St. SE  feet east of the centerline of St. Anthony St.                                                                     2014
Mart    North side from a point 75 feet east of the intersection of Mart St. and      15 min. limit                   259  11-19-
St.     Houston St., to a point 140 east of said intersection                                                              2007
North   North and south sides from the Pleasant Street intersection to a point 125    Fridays from 8:00 a.m. – 3:00 261  10-20-
St. NE  feet east                                                                     p.m.                                 2008
        100 West Block between St. Anthony St. and St. Paul St.:
River   —   On the south side from the intersection with St. Paul St. to a point 165                                  10-21-
St.     feet east of the intersection with St. Paul St.                               8:00 a.m. – 4:00 p.m.         287  2019
        —   On the north side from a point 65 feet east of the intersection with St.
        Paul St. to a point 200 feet east of the intersection with St. Paul St.
St.     East side of the 100 South Block extending from the north edge of the alley   One hour limit from 11:00 a.m.       9-7-
Anthony to a point 50 feet north.                                                     to 2:00 p.m., M–F             254  2004
St.
Winona  600 Block, between Chatfield Ave. and Kansas St. NE, on the east side from a                                       11-4-
St. NW  point 110 feet south of the intersection with Kansas St. NW to a point 140    15 min. limit                   288  2019
        feet south of the intersection with Kansas St. NW
 
   (D)   Prohibited parking.
 
Street           Location                                  Ord. No. Date Passed
Chatfield St. NW From Hwy 52 to a point 120 feet south of  270      11-7-2011
                 the centerline of Circle Dr.
                 West side from the Hwy 52 intersection to
Washington St.   a point 150 feet north of said            255      7-16-2007
                 intersection
                 East side from Hwy 52 intersection north
Washington St.   to a point 50 feet north of said          255      7-16-2007
                 intersection
 
Penalty, see § 10.99
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
   
90.   ABANDONED PROPERTY
   
91.   ANIMALS
   
92.   HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
   
93.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
   
94.   PARKS AND RECREATION
   
95.   TREES
   
96.   FAIR HOUSING STANDARDS
CHAPTER 90: ABANDONED PROPERTY
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Declaration of nuisance; exceptions
   
90.03   Parking of disabled vehicles on public property prohibited
   
90.04   Removal
   
90.05   Notice to owner
   
90.06   Title vested in city
   
90.07   Sale of unclaimed vehicle; lien for costs
   
90.08   Disposition of funds
   
90.09   Abandoned vehicles on private property
   
90.10   Racing vehicles or antique vehicles
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply,
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle, as defined in this section,
which is left unattended on any public street, alley, public place or parking
lot within the city for a longer period than 72 hours without notifying the
Chief of Police and making arrangements for the parking of the motor vehicle.
   CITY. The City of Preston, Minnesota.
   JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle, as defined in this section, which
does not have lawfully affixed thereto both an unexpired license plate or
plates, or the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled,
inoperative or discarded.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel
along the ground, and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses,
motorbikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf
carts, campers and trailers.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any real property within the city which is privately owned
and which is not public property as defined in this section.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any street, alley or highway which shall include the entire
width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the
purposes of vehicular travel, and also means any other publicly-owned property
or facility.
(Ord. 192, passed 5-8-1989)
§ 90.02 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE; EXCEPTIONS.
   The presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, junked or
partially dismantled motor vehicle or parts thereof on private or public
property is a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. This section shall not apply to any motor
vehicle enclosed within a building on private property, or to any motor vehicle
held in connection with a business enterprise, lawfully licensed by the city
and properly operated in the appropriate business zone, pursuant to the zoning
laws of the city, or to any motor vehicle in operable condition, specifically
adapted or designed for operation on drag strips or raceways, and covered with
an appropriate cover to screen it from view, that remains on private property,
or any motor vehicle retained on private property by the owner for antique
collection purposes and covered with an appropriate cover to screen it from
view, or to any motor vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository
maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city or authorized by the city.
(Ord. 192, passed 5-8-1989)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.03 PARKING OF DISABLED VEHICLES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
   No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving
of any abandoned, dismantled, inoperative, junked or partially dismantled motor
vehicle of any kind, whether attended or not, upon any public property within
the city.
(Ord. 192, passed 5-8-1989)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.04 REMOVAL.
   Whenever any police officer finds an abandoned motor vehicle or an
unattended motor vehicle which is in a wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, junked
or partially dismantled condition on public property within the city, he or she
is authorized to provide for the removal of the motor vehicle to a garage or
place of safety. A motor vehicle which causes an obstruction and hazard to
traffic may be removed at any time under the direction of the Police
Department.
(Ord. 192, passed 5-8-1989)
§ 90.05 NOTICE TO OWNER.
   It shall be the duty of the Police Department to notify, by registered mail,
the registered owner, if known, and if encumbered, the lien holder, of the
removal and storage of any motor vehicle under the provisions of this chapter,
and where the motor vehicle has been stored. If the owner is unknown, a notice
of removal and storage shall be given by one publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in the county.
(Ord. 192, passed 5-8-1989)
§ 90.06 TITLE VESTED IN CITY.
   If, after three months from the date of mailing or publishing the notice of
removal and storage provided for by this chapter, the motor vehicle shall
remain unclaimed, the title to the motor vehicle shall be vested in the city,
and the motor vehicle may be disposed of in any manner as may be provided by
the City Council. The proceeds of any such disposal shall first be applied to
the costs incurred in the enforcement of this subchapter, with the balance to
be deposited to the general fund of the city.
(Ord. 192, passed 5-8-1989)
§ 90.07 SALE OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLE; LIEN FOR COSTS.
   (A)   If, after three months from the date of mailing or publishing the
notice of removal and storage provided for by this chapter, the motor vehicle
shall remain unclaimed, the motor vehicle may be sold by the Police Department
at public auction upon notice to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county, not less than once a week for two consecutive weeks.
   (B)   The notice of sale provided for by this chapter shall contain a
description of the removed and stored motor vehicle, including the year, make,
model, serial number, color, license number, if any; a statement that the motor
vehicle was found abandoned, the date thereof; and the place, date and time at
which the motor vehicle shall be sold, which date shall not be sooner than one
week following the date of the last publication of notice.
   (C)   The Police Department shall have a possessory lien upon any motor
vehicle removed under the provisions of this chapter for the costs in taking
custody of and storing the motor vehicle.
(Ord. 192, passed 5-8-1989)
§ 90.08 DISPOSITION OF FUNDS.
   After the costs of removing, storing, advertising and selling a motor
vehicle pursuant to this chapter are deducted, the balance of the sale price
shall be held for the owner of the motor vehicle for a period
of three months from the date of sale. If the funds are not claimed at the
expiration of that time, the proceeds shall be deposited to the general fund of
the city.
(Ord. 192, passed 5-8-1989)
§ 90.09 ABANDONED VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY. 
   (A)   No person owning, in charge of or in control of any real property
within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall
allow any abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, junked or partially
dismantled motor vehicle of any kind to remain on his or her property longer
than 14 days.
   (B)   Whenever it comes to the attention of the Police Department that any
person has an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, junked or partially
dismantled motor vehicle on his or her property, a notice in writing shall be
served upon the person, requesting the removal of the motor vehicle in the time
specified in this chapter.
   (C)   Upon proper notice, the owner of the abandoned, wrecked or dismantled
motor vehicle, and the owner or occupant of the private property on which the
same is located, either or all of them, shall be responsible for its removal.
   (D)   The Police Department shall give notice of removal to the owner or
occupant of the private property where it is located. It shall constitute
sufficient notice when a copy of same is sent by registered mail to the owner
or occupant of the private property at his or her last known address.
   (E)   The notice shall contain the request for removal within 14 days after
the mailing of the notice, and the notice shall advise that failure to comply
with the notice to remove shall be a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 192, passed 5-8-1989)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.10 RACING VEHICLES OR ANTIQUE VEHICLES.
   No owner or occupant of private property shall have an uncovered motor
vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or designed for operation on
drag strips or raceways, or an uncovered motor vehicle retained on private
property for antique collection purposes, all as defined by § 90.02.
(Ord. 192, passed 5-8-1989)
CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS
Section
   
91.01   Definitions
   
91.02   Dogs and cats
   
91.03   Non-domestic animals
   
91.04   Farm animals
   
91.05   Impounding
   
91.06   Kennels
   
91.07   Nuisances
   
91.08   Seizure of animals
   
91.09   Animals presenting a danger to health and safety of city
   
91.10   Diseased animals
   
91.11   Dangerous animals
   
91.12   Dangerous animal requirements
   
91.13   Basic care
   
91.14   Breeding moratorium
   
91.15   Enforcing officer
   
91.16   Pound
   
91.17   Interference with officers
 
   
91.99    Penalty
§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any mammal, reptile, amphibian, fish, bird (including all fowl and
poultry) or other member commonly accepted as a part of the animal kingdom.
Animals shall be classified as follows:
      (1)   DOMESTIC ANIMALS. Those animals commonly accepted as domesticated
household pets. Unless otherwise defined, domestic animals shall include dogs,
cats, caged birds, gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, domesticated rabbits, fish,
non-poisonous, non-venomous and non-constricting reptiles or amphibians, and
other similar animals.
      (2)    FARM ANIMALS. Those animals commonly associated with a farm or
performing work in an agricultural setting. Unless otherwise defined, farm
animals shall include members of the equestrian family (horses, mules), bovine
family (cows, bulls), sheep, poultry (chickens, turkeys), fowl (ducks, geese),
swine (including Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs), goats, bees, and other animals
associated with a farm, ranch, or stable.
      (3)   NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS. Those animals commonly considered to be
naturally wild and not naturally trained or domesticated, or which are commonly
considered to be inherently dangerous to the health, safety, and welfare of
people. Unless otherwise defined, non-domestic animals shall include:
         (a)   Any member of the large cat family (family felidae) including
lions, tigers, cougars, bobcats, leopards and jaguars, but excluding commonly
accepted domesticated house cats.
         (b)   Any naturally wild member of the canine family (family canidae)
including wolves, foxes, coyotes, dingoes, and jackals, but excluding commonly
accepted domesticated dogs.
         (c)   Any crossbreeds such as the crossbreed between a wolf and a dog,
unless the crossbreed is commonly accepted as a domesticated house pet.
         (d)   Any member or relative of the rodent family including any skunk
(whether or not descented), raccoon, squirrel, or ferret, but excluding those
members otherwise defined or commonly accepted as domesticated pets.
         (e)   Any poisonous, venomous, constricting, or inherently dangerous
member of the reptile or amphibian families including rattlesnakes, boa
constrictors, pit vipers, crocodiles and alligators.
         (f)   Any other animal which is not explicitly listed above but which
can be reasonably defined by the terms of this section, including but not
limited to bears, deer, monkeys and game fish.
   AT LARGE. Off the premises of the owner and not under the custody and
control of the owner or other person, either by leash, cord, chain, or
otherwise restrained or confined.
   CAT. Both the male and female of the felidae species commonly accepted as
domesticated household pets.
   DOG. Both the male and female of the canine species, commonly accepted as
domesticated household pets, and other domesticated animals of a dog kind.
   OWNER. Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning,
keeping, or harboring an animal.
   RELEASE PERMIT. A permit issued by the Animal Control Officer or other
person in charge of the pound for the release of any animal that has been taken
to the pound. A release permit may be obtained upon payment of a fee to the
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer in accordance with the regular license
requirement if the animal is unlicensed, payment of a release fee, and any
maintenance costs incurred in capturing and impounding the animal. The release
fee shall be as established by resolution of the Council, as it may be amended
from time to time.
§ 91.02 DOGS AND CATS.
   (A)   Running at large prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the dog or cat
of any person who owns, harbors, or keeps a dog or cat, to run at large. A
person, who owns, harbors, or keeps a dog or cat which runs at large shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. Dogs or cats on a leash and accompanied by a
responsible person or accompanied by and under the control and direction of a
responsible person, so as to be effectively restrained by command as by leash,
shall be permitted in streets or on public land unless the city has posted an
area with signs reading “Dogs or Cats Prohibited.”
   (B)   License required.
      (1)   All dogs over the age of six months kept, harbored, or maintained
by their owners in the city, shall be licensed and registered with the city.
Dog licenses shall be issued by the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer upon
payment of the license fee as established by resolution of the Council, as may
be amended from time to time. The owner shall state, at the time application is
made for the license and upon forms provided, his or her name and address and
the name, breed, color, and sex of each dog owned or kept by him or her. No
license shall be granted for a dog that has not been vaccinated against
distemper and rabies, as evidenced by a certificate by a veterinarian qualified
to practice in the state in which the dog is vaccinated.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of each owner of a dog subject to this section
to pay to the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer the license fee as established
by resolution of the Council, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (3)   Upon payment of the license fee as established by resolution of the
Council, as may be amended from time to time, the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer
shall issue to the owner a license certificate and metallic tag for each dog
licensed. The tag shall have stamped on it the year for which it is issued and
the number corresponding with the number on the certificate. Every owner shall
be required to provide each dog with a collar to which the license tag must be
affixed, and shall see that the collar and tag are constantly worn. In case a
dog tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate shall be issued by the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer. A charge shall be made for each duplicate tag in
an amount established by resolution of the Council, as it may be amended from
time to time. Dog tags shall not be transferable from one dog to another and no
refunds shall be made on any dog license fee or tag because of death of a dog
or the owner’s leaving the city before the expiration of the license period.
      (4)   The licensing provisions of this division (B) shall not apply to
dogs whose owners are non- residents temporarily within the city, nor to dogs
brought into the city for the purpose of participating in any dog show, nor
shall this provision apply to “seeing eye” dogs properly trained to assist
blind persons for the purpose of aiding them in going from place to place.
      (5)   The funds received by the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer from
all dog licenses and metallic tags fees as established by resolution of the
Council, as may be amended from time to time, shall first be used to defray any
costs incidental to the enforcement of this chapter; including, but not
restricted to, the costs of licenses, metallic tags, and impounding and
maintenance of the dogs.
   (C)   Cats. Cats shall be included as controlled by this division insofar as
running-at-large, pickup, impounding, boarding, licensing and proof of anti-
rabies vaccine is concerned. All other provisions of this section shall also
apply to cats unless otherwise provided.
   (D)   Vaccination.
      (1)   All dogs and cats kept harbored, maintained, or transported within
the city shall be vaccinated at least once every three years by a licensed
veterinarian for:
         (a)   Rabies — with a live modified vaccine; and
         (b)   Distemper.
      (2)   A certificate of vaccination must be kept on which is stated the
date of vaccination, owner’s name and address, the animal’s name (if
applicable), sex, description and weight, the type of vaccine, and the
veterinarian’s signature. Upon demand made by the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer, the Animal Control Officer or a police officer, the owner shall
present for examination the required certificate(s) of vaccination for the
animal(s). In cases where certificates are not presented, the owner or keeper
of the animal(s) shall have seven days in which to present the certificate(s)
to the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer or officer. Failure to do so shall be
deemed a violation of this section.
Penalty, see § 91.99
§ 91.03 NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS.
   It shall be illegal for any person to own, possess, harbor, or offer for
sale, any non-domestic animal within the city. Any owner of a non-domestic
animal at the time of adoption of this code shall have 30 days in which to
remove the animal from the city after which time the city may impound the
animal as provided for in this section. An exception shall be made to this
prohibition for animals specifically trained for and actually providing
assistance to the handicapped or disabled, and for those animals brought into
the city as part of an operating zoo, veterinarian clinic, scientific research
laboratory, or a licensed show or exhibition.
Penalty, see § 91.99
§ 91.04 FARM ANIMALS.
   Farm animals shall only be kept in an agricultural district of the city, or
on a residential lot of at least ten acres in size provided that no animal
shelter shall be within 300 feet of an adjoining piece of property. An
exception shall be made to this section for those animals brought into the city
as part of an operating zoo, veterinarian clinic, scientific research
laboratory, or a licensed show or exhibition.
§ 91.05 IMPOUNDING.
   (A)   Running at large. Any unlicensed animal running at large is hereby
declared a public nuisance. Any Animal Control Officer or police officer may
impound any dog or other animal found unlicensed or any animal found running at
large and shall give notice of the impounding to the owner of the dog or other
animal, if known. In case the owner is unknown, the officer shall post notice
at the city office that if the dog or other animal is not claimed within the
time specified in division (C) of this section, it will be sold or otherwise
disposed of. Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful
to kill, destroy, or otherwise cause injury to any animal, including dogs and
cats running at large.
   (B)   Biting animals. Any animal that has not been inoculated by a live
modified rabies vaccine and which has bitten any person, wherein the skin has
been punctured or the services of a doctor are required, shall be confined in
the city pound for a period of not less than ten days, at the expense of the
owner. The animal may be released at the end of the time if healthy and free
from symptoms of rabies, and by the payment of all costs by the owner. However,
if the owner of the animal shall elect immediately upon receipt of notice of
need for the confinement by the officer to voluntarily and immediately confine
the animal for the required period of time in a veterinary hospital of the
owner’s choosing, not outside of the county in which this city is located, and
provide immediate proof of confinement in the manner as may be required, the
owner may do so. If, however, the animal has been inoculated with a live
modified rabies vaccine and the owner has proof of the vaccination by a
certificate from a licensed veterinarian, the owner may confine the dog or
other animal to the owner’s property.
   (C)   Reclaiming. All animals conveyed to the pound shall be kept, with
humane treatment and sufficient food and water for their comfort, at least five
regular business days, unless the animal is a dangerous animal as defined under
§ 91.11 in which case it shall be kept for seven regular business days or the
times specified in § 91.11, and except if the animal is a cruelly-treated
animal in which case it shall be kept for ten regular business days, unless
sooner reclaimed by their owners or keepers as provided by this section. In
case the owner or keeper shall desire to reclaim the animal from the pound, the
following shall be required, unless otherwise provided for in this code or
established from time to time by resolution of the City Council:
      (1)   Payment of the release fee and receipt of a release permit as
established by resolution of the Council, as may be amended from time to time.
      (2)    Payment of maintenance costs, as provided by the pound, per day or
any part of day while animal is in the pound; and
      (3)   If a dog is unlicensed, payment of a regular license fee as
established by resolution of the Council, as may be amended from time to time,
and valid certificate of vaccination for rabies and distemper shots is
required.
   (D)   Unclaimed animals. At the expiration of the times established in
division (C) of this section, if the animal has not been reclaimed in
accordance with the provisions of this section, the officer appointed to
enforce this section may let any person claim the animal by complying with all
provisions in this section, or the officer may sell the animal to the
University of Minnesota, or cause the animal to be destroyed in a proper and
humane manner and shall properly dispose of the remains thereof. Any money
collected under this section shall be payable to the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer.
Penalty, see § 91.99
§ 91.06 KENNELS.
   (A)   Definition. Each of the following divisions shall constitute a dog
kennel for the purposes of this section:
      (1)   The keeping of four or more dogs four months old or older within
the city, on the same premises, whether owned by the same person or not for the
purpose of sale, breeding or for any other reason; or
      (2)   Either the breeding, raising, sale, or boarding of any number of
dogs within the city, if engaged in as a regular business.
   (B)   Annual license fee.
      (1)   A dog kennel shall be subject to an annual license fee for its
operation and maintenance. Either the owner or the occupant of the premises on
which the dog kennel is located shall be liable for the annual license fee.
      (2)   The owner, keeper or harborer of a dog kennel shall pay an annual
license fee of $15 plus $5 for each dog kept in the kennel in excess of eight.
Such person shall also be liable for the regular dog license fee on each and
every dog in the kennel as provided by Ordinance No. 143 and for the restraint
of all dogs in the kennel as provided in Ordinance No. 144.
   (C)   Conditions of kennel license.
      (1)   Only one dog kennel license can be issued to one location or
premises, all parts of which are abutting to each other.
      (2)   Kennel licenses are not transferable, and no refund shall be made
on any kennel licenses because of leaving the city or death of dogs before
expiration of the license.
   (D)   Application for license; approval.
      (1)   (a)   All applications for kennel licenses shall be submitted to
the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer. This application must include the
following information.
            1.   The number of dogs the applicant proposes to keep.
            2.   The breed and sex of the dogs.
            3.   The premises on which the dogs will be kept.
            4.   Any other information that may be requested from time to time
by the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer.
         (b)   All applications for kennel licenses shall then be submitted to
the City Council for approval prior to the issuance of a license by the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer. The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall
prepare and submit to the Council such information as may be requested in
regard to the license application. The Council may attach restrictions and
conditions to the issuance of any kennel license as may be found to be
necessary in the public interest.
      (2)   Upon approval by the City Council, a license shall be issued by the
City Administrator/ Clerk-Treasurer for periods of one year, commencing on June
1, or for the unexpired portion of any year, and all licenses shall expire on
the May 31 next following the issuance thereof. Applications for licenses must
be made between May 1, and June 1, if for a whole year, and within eight weeks
from the time the above definitions of a dog kennel are met.
   (E)   Sanitary conditions required.
      (1)   Dog kennels must be kept in a sanitary and healthful condition at
all times.
      (2)   Whenever a dog kennel is kept in an unsanitary or unhealthful
condition (or both) or when the dog or dogs confined in the kennel set up so
much noise as to constitute a public nuisance, the owner, keeper or harborer of
the kennel, upon proper legal notice, shall see that the nuisance is abated,
and if not so abated, will be subject to all the provisions and penalties in
any and all of the ordinances enforced in this municipality in addition to the
state law covering nuisances and their abatement.
(Ord. 145, passed 6-5-1972)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.07 NUISANCES.
   (A)   Habitual barking.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor a dog which
habitually barks, whines, howls, bays or cries excessively so as to cause
disturbance or discomfort to an individual, provided that the noise lasts for a
period of more than ten minutes continuously, or intermittent barking that
continues for more than an hour and is plainly audible from a distance of 100
feet or more from the premises where the dog is kept. It shall not be a
violation of this section if the dog was barking, crying, or making other noise
due to harassment or injury to the dog or a trespass upon the premises where
the dog is located.
      (2)   A complaining citizen shall first notify the Police Department or
the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer of an alleged violation of this
subchapter. A city law enforcement officer shall then investigate the
complaint, and shall then determine whether there is probable cause that a
violation of this subchapter has taken place. If probable cause exists, the
officer shall request the person possessing the dog to take whatever action is
necessary to stop the annoyance. If the person keeping or harboring the dog
fails to stop or prevent the annoyance, the officer shall issue to that person
a citation, or may arrest the person in accordance with the Minnesota Rules of
Criminal Procedure. If the officer deems it necessary, he or she may have the
dog impounded to stop the continuing annoyance.
   (B)   Damage to property. It shall be unlawful for any person’s dog or other
animal to damage any lawn, garden, or other property, whether or not the owner
has knowledge of the damage.
   (C)   Cleaning up litter. The owner of any animal or person having the
custody or control of any animal shall be responsible for cleaning up any feces
of the animal and disposing of the feces in a sanitary manner whether on their
own property, on the property of others or on public property.
   (D)   Other. Any animals kept contrary to this section are subject to
impoundment as provided in § 91.05.
(Ord. 196, passed 2-15-1990)
Penalty, see § 91.99
§ 91.08 SEIZURE OF ANIMALS.
   Any police officer or Animal Control Officer may enter upon private property
and seize any animal provided that the following exist:
   (A)   There is an identified complainant other than the police officer or
Animal Control Officer making a contemporaneous complaint about the animal;
   (B)   The officer reasonably believes that the animal meets either the
barking dog criteria set out in § 91.07(A); the criteria for cruelty set out in
§ 91.13; or the criteria for an at large animal set out in § 91.01(E);
   (C)   The officer can demonstrate that there has been at least one previous
complaint of a barking dog; inhumane treatment of the animal; or that the
animal was at large at this address on a prior date;
   (D)   The officer has made a reasonable attempt to contact the owner of the
dog and the property to be entered and those attempts have either failed or
have been ignored;
   (E)   The seizure will not involve the forced entry into a private
residence. Use of a pass key obtained from a property manager, landlord,
innkeeper, or other authorized person to have that key shall not be considered
unauthorized entry; and
   (F)   Written notice of the seizure is left in a conspicuous place if
personal contact with the owner of the dog is not possible.
§ 91.09 ANIMALS PRESENTING A DANGER TO HEALTH AND SAFETY OF CITY.
   If, in the reasonable belief of any person or the Animal Control Officer or
police officer, an animal presents an immediate danger to the health and safety
of any person, or the animal is threatening imminent harm to any person, or the
animal is in the process of attacking any person, the person or officer may
destroy the animal in a proper and humane manner. Otherwise, the person or
officer may apprehend the animal and deliver it to the pound for confinement
under § 91.05. If the animal is destroyed, the owner or keeper of the animal
destroyed shall be liable to the city for the cost of maintaining and disposing
of the animal, plus the costs of any veterinarian examination. If the animal is
found not to be a danger to the health and safety of the city, it may be
released to the owner or keeper in accordance with § 91.05(C).
§ 91.10 DISEASED ANIMALS.
   (A)   Running at large. No person shall keep or allow to be kept on his or
her premises, or on premises occupied by them, nor permit to run at large in
the city, any animal which is diseased so as to be a danger to the health and
safety of the city, even though the animal be properly licensed under this
section.
   (B)   Confinement. Any animal reasonably suspected of being diseased and
presenting a threat to the health and safety of the public, may be apprehended
and confined in the pound by any person, the Animal Control Officer or a police
officer. The officer shall have a qualified veterinarian examine the animal. If
the animal is found to be diseased in a manner so as to be a danger to the
health and safety of the city, the officer shall cause the animal to be
painlessly killed and shall properly dispose of the remains. The owner or
keeper of the animal killed under this section shall be liable to the city for
the cost of maintaining and disposing of the animal, plus the costs of any
veterinarian examinations.
   (C)   Release. If the animal, upon examination, is not found to be diseased
the animal shall be released to the owner or keeper free of charge.
Penalty, see § 91.99
§ 91.11 DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   Attack by an animal. It shall be unlawful for any person’s animal to
inflict or attempt to inflict bodily injury to any person or other animal
whether or not the owner is present. This section shall not apply to an attack
by a dog under the control of an on-duty law enforcement officer or to an
attack upon an uninvited intruder who has entered the owner’s home with
criminal intent.
   (B)   Destruction of dangerous animal. The Animal Control Officer shall have
the authority to order the destruction of dangerous animals in accordance with
the terms established by this chapter.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this division, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   DANGEROUS ANIMAL. An animal which has:
         (a)   Caused bodily injury or disfigurement to any person on public or
private property;
         (b)   Engaged in any attack on any person under circumstances which
would indicate danger to personal safety;
         (c)   Exhibited unusually aggressive behavior, such as an attack on
another animal;
         (d)   Bitten one or more persons on two or more occasions; or
         (e)   Been found to be potentially dangerous and/or the owner has
personal knowledge of the same, the animal aggressively bites, attacks, or
endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals.
      (2)   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMAL.  An animal which has:
         (a)   Bitten a human or a domestic animal on public or private
property;
         (b)   When unprovoked, chased or approached a person upon the streets,
sidewalks, or any public property in an apparent attitude of attack; or
         (c)   Has engaged in unprovoked attacks causing injury or otherwise
threatening the safety of humans or domestic animals.
      (3)   PROPER ENCLOSURE.  Securely confined indoors or in a securely
locked pen or structure suitable to prevent the animal from escaping and to
provide protection for the animal from the elements. A proper enclosure does
not include a porch, patio, or any part of a house, garage, or other structure
that would allow the animal to exit of its own volition, or any house or
structure in which windows are open or in which door or window screens are the
only barriers which prevent the animal from exiting. The enclosure shall not
allow the egress of the animal in any manner without human assistance. A pen or
kennel shall meet the following minimum specifications:
         (a)   Have a minimum overall floor size of 32 square feet.
         (b)   Sidewalls shall have a minimum height of five feet and be
constructed of 11-gauge or heavier wire. Openings in the wire shall not exceed
two inches, support posts shall be 1¼-inch or larger steel pipe buried in the
ground 18 inches or more. When a concrete floor is not provided, the sidewalls
shall be buried a minimum of 18 inches in the ground.
         (c)   A cover over the entire pen or kennel shall be provided. The
cover shall be constructed of the same gauge wire or heavier as the sidewalls
and shall also have no openings in the wire greater than two inches.
         (d)   An entrance/exit gate shall be provided and be constructed of
the same material as the sidewalls and shall also have no openings in the wire
greater than two inches. The gate shall be equipped with a device capable of
being locked and shall be locked at all times when the animal is in the pen or
kennel.
      (4)   UNPROVOKED. The condition in which the animal is not purposely
excited, stimulated, agitated or disturbed.
   (D)   Designation as potentially dangerous animal. The Animal Control
Officer shall designate any animal as a potentially dangerous animal upon
receiving evidence that the potentially dangerous animal
has, when unprovoked, then bitten, attacked, or threatened the safety of a
person or a domestic animal as stated in division (C)(2). When an animal is
declared potentially dangerous, the Animal Control Officer shall cause one
owner of the potentially dangerous animal to be notified in writing that the
animal is potentially dangerous.
   (E)   Evidence justifying designation. The Animal Control Officer shall have
the authority to designate any animal as a dangerous animal upon receiving
evidence of the following:
      (1)   That the animal has, when unprovoked, bitten, attacked, or
threatened the safety of a person or domestic animal as stated in division (C)
(1).
      (2)   That the animal has been declared potentially dangerous and the
animal has then bitten, attacked, or threatened the safety of a person or
domestic animal as stated in division (C)(1).
   (F)   Authority to order destruction. The Animal Control Officer, upon
finding that an animal is dangerous hereunder, is authorized to order, as part
of the disposition of the case, that the animal be destroyed based on a written
order containing one or more of the following findings of fact:
      (1)   The animal is dangerous as demonstrated by a vicious attack, an
unprovoked attack, an attack without warning or multiple attacks; or
      (2)   The owner of the animal has demonstrated an inability or
unwillingness to control the animal in order to prevent injury to persons or
other animals.
   (G)   Procedure. The Animal Control Officer, after having determined that an
animal is dangerous, may proceed in the following manner: The Animal Control
Officer shall cause one owner of the animal to be notified in writing or in
person that the animal is dangerous and may order the animal seized or make
orders as deemed proper. This owner shall be notified as to dates, times,
places and parties bitten, and shall be given 14 days to appeal this order by
requesting a hearing before the City Council for a review of this
determination.
      (1)   If no appeal is filed, the orders issued will stand or the Animal
Control Officer may order the animal destroyed.
      (2)   If an owner requests a hearing for determination as to the
dangerous nature of the animal, the hearing shall be held before the City
Council, which shall set a date for hearing not more than three weeks after
demand for the hearing. The records of the Animal Control or City
Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer’s office shall be admissible for consideration
by the Animal Control Officer without further foundation. After considering all
evidence pertaining to the temperament of the animal, the City Council shall
make an order as it deems proper. The City Council may order that the Animal
Control Officer take the animal into custody for destruction, if the animal is
not currently in custody. If the animal is ordered into custody for
destruction, the owner shall immediately make the animal available to the
Animal Control Officer.
      (3)   No person shall harbor an animal after it has been found by to be
dangerous and ordered into custody for destruction.
   (H)   Stopping an attack. If any police officer or Animal Control Officer is
witness to an attack by an animal upon a person or another animal, the officer
may take whatever means the officer deems appropriate to bring the attack to an
end and prevent further injury to the victim.
   (I)   Notification of new address. The owner of an animal which has been
identified as dangerous or potentially dangerous shall notify the Animal
Control Officer in writing if the animal is to be relocated from its current
address or given or sold to another person. The notification shall be given in
writing at least 14 days prior to the relocation or transfer of ownership. The
notification shall include the current owner’s name and address, the relocation
address, and the name of the new owner, if any.
Penalty, see § 91.99
§ 91.12 DANGEROUS ANIMAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Requirements. If the City Council does not order the destruction of an
animal that has been declared dangerous, the City Council may, as an
alternative, order any or all of the following:
      (1)   That the owner provide and maintain a proper enclosure for the
dangerous animal as specified in § 91.11(C)(3);
      (2)   Post the front and the rear of the premises with clearly visible
warning signs, including a warning symbol to inform children, that there is a
dangerous animal on the property as specified in M.S. § 347.51 as may be
amended from time to time;
      (3)   Provide and show proof annually of public liability insurance in
the minimum amount of $300,000;
      (4)   If the animal is a dog and is outside the proper enclosure, the dog
must be muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash (not to exceed
six feet in length) and under the physical restraint of a person 16 years of
age or older. The muzzle must be of a design as to prevent the dog from biting
any person or animal, but will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with
its vision or respiration;
      (5)   If the animal is a dog, it must have an easily identifiable,
standardized tag identifying the dog as dangerous affixed to its collar at all
times as specified in M.S. § 347.51 as it may be amended from time to time;
      (6)   All animals deemed dangerous by the Animal Control Officer shall be
registered with the county in which this city is located within 14 days after
the date the animal was so deemed and provide satisfactory proof thereof to the
Animal Control Officer.
      (7)   If the animal is a dog, the dog must be licensed and up to date on
rabies vaccination. If the animal is a cat or ferret, it must be up to date
with rabies vaccination.
   (B)   Seizure. The Animal Control Officer shall immediately seize any
dangerous animal if the owner does not meet each of the above requirements
within 14 days after the date notice is sent to the owner that the animal is
dangerous. Seizure may be appealed to district court by serving a summons and
petition upon the city and filing it with the district court.
   (C)   Reclaiming animals. A dangerous animal seized under § 91.12(B), may be
reclaimed by the owner of the animal upon payment of impounding and boarding
fees and presenting proof to animal control that each of the requirements under
§ 91.12(B), is fulfilled. An animal not reclaimed under this section within 14
days may be disposed of as provided under § 91.11(F), and the owner is liable
to the city for costs incurred in confining and impounding the animal.
   (D)   Subsequent offenses. If an owner of an animal has subsequently
violated the provisions under § 91.11 with the same animal, the animal must be
seized by animal control. The owner may request a hearing as defined in § 91.11
(F). If the owner is found to have violated the provisions for which the animal
was seized, the Animal Control Officer shall order the animal destroyed in a
proper and humane manner and the owner shall pay the costs of confining the
animal. If the person is found not to have violated the provisions for which
the animal was seized, the owner may reclaim the animal under the provisions of
§ 91.12(C). If the animal is not yet reclaimed by the owner within 14 days
after the date the owner is notified that the animal may be reclaimed, the
animal may be disposed of as provided under § 91.11(F) and the owner is liable
to the animal control for the costs incurred in confining, impounding and
disposing of the animal.
§ 91.13 BASIC CARE.
   All animals shall receive from their owners or keepers kind treatment,
housing in the winter, and sufficient food and water for their comfort. Any
person not treating their pet in a humane manner will be subject to the
penalties provided in this section.
§ 91.14 BREEDING MORATORIUM.
   Every female dog or female cat in heat shall be confined in a building or
other enclosure in a manner that it cannot come in contact with another dog or
cat except for planned breeding. Upon capture and failure to reclaim the
animal, every dog or cat shall be neutered or spayed prior to being transferred
to a new owner.
§ 91.15 ENFORCING OFFICER.
   The Council is hereby authorized to appoint an animal control officer(s) to
enforce the provisions of this section. In the officer’s duty of enforcing the
provisions of this section, he or she may from time to time, with the consent
of the City Council, designate assistants.
§ 91.16 POUND.
   Every year the Council shall designate an official pound to which animals
found in violation of this chapter shall be taken for safe treatment, and if
necessary, for destruction.
§ 91.17 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICERS.
   No person shall in any manner molest, hinder, or interfere with any person
authorized by the City Council to capture dogs, cats or other animals and
convey them to the pound while engaged in that operation. Nor shall any
unauthorized person break open the pound, or attempt to do so, or take or
attempt to take from any agent any animal taken up by him or her in compliance
with this chapter, or in any other manner to interfere with or hinder the
officer in the discharge of his or her duties under this chapter.
Penalty, see § 91.99
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Separate offenses. Each day a violation of this chapter is committed
or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable under this section.
   (B)   Misdemeanor. Unless otherwise provided, violation of this chapter
shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as provided in § 10.99.
   (C)   Petty misdemeanor. Violations of §§ 91.02, 91.07, 91.13 and 91.14 are
petty misdemeanors punishable as provided in § 10.99.
CHAPTER 92: HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Assessable current services
   
92.02   Tree diseases
Nuisances
   
92.15   Public nuisance
   
92.16   Public nuisances affecting health
   
92.17   Public nuisances affecting morals and decency
   
92.18   Public nuisances affecting peace and safety
   
92.19   Duties of city officers
   
92.20   Abatement
   
92.21   Recovery of cost
Noxious Weed and Plant Control
   
92.35   Short title
   
92.36   Jurisdiction
   
92.37   Definitions; exclusions
   
92.38   Lawn establishment
   
92.39   Native grasses or gardens
   
92.40   Woodland preserve or restoration
   
92.41   Turfgrass maintenance
   
92.42   Trimming plants at intersections
   
92.43   Owners’ responsibilities for removal and disposal of noxious weeds and
vegetation
   
92.44   Filing complaint
   
92.45   Notice of violations; procedures
   
92.46   Response by property owner; procedure and abatement
   
92.47   Appeal to district court
   
92.48   Liability
Open Burning
   
92.60   Definitions
   
92.61   Prohibited materials
   
92.62   Permit required for open burning
   
92.63   Purposes allowed for open burning
   
92.64   Permit application for open burning; permit fees
   
92.65   Permit process for open burning
   
92.66   Permit holder responsibility
   
92.67   Revocation of open burning permit
   
92.68   Denial of open burning permit
   
92.69   Burning ban or air quality alert
   
92.70   Rules and laws adopted by reference
Application of Lawn and Garden Pesticides within the City
   
92.85   Scope
   
92.86   Definitions
   
92.87   Operating permit
   
92.88   Safety
   
92.89   Customer notification
   
92.90   Application posting
   
92.91   Penalty
Outdoor Wood Burning Furnaces
   
92.100   Intent and purpose
   
92.101   Definition
   
92.102   Regulation of outdoor wood burning furnaces
   
92.103   Nonconforming use
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 ASSESSABLE CURRENT SERVICES.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CURRENT SERVICE. Shall mean one or more of the following: snow, ice, or
rubbish removal from sidewalks; weed elimination from street grass plots
adjacent to sidewalks or from private property; removal or elimination of
public health or safety hazards from private property, excluding any hazardous
building included in M.S. §§ 463.15 through 463.26 as they may amended from
time to time; installation or repair of water service lines; street sprinkling,
street flushing, light street oiling, or other dust treatment of streets;
repair of sidewalks and alleys; trimming and care of trees and removal of
unsound and insect-infected trees from the public streets or private property;
and the operation of a street lighting system.
   (B)   Snow, ice, dirt and rubbish.
      (1)   Duty of owners and occupants. The owner and the occupant of any
property adjacent to a public sidewalk shall use diligence to keep the walk
safe for pedestrians. No owner or occupant shall allow snow, ice, dirt or
rubbish to remain on the walk longer than 24 hours after its deposit thereon.
Failure to comply with this section shall constitute a violation.
      (2)   Removal by city. The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer or other
person designated by the City Council may cause removal from all public
sidewalks all snow, ice, dirt and rubbish as soon as possible beginning 24
hours after any matter has been deposited thereon or after the snow has ceased
to fall. The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer or other designated person
shall keep a record showing the cost of removal adjacent to each separate lot
and parcel.
   (C)   Public health and safety hazards. When the city removes or eliminates
public health or safety hazards from private property under the following
provisions of this chapter, the administrative officer responsible for doing
the work shall keep a record of the cost of the removal or elimination against
each parcel of property affected and annually deliver that information to the
City Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer.
   (D)   Installation and repair of water service lines. Whenever the city
installs or repairs water service lines serving private property under Chapter
51 of this code, the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall keep a record of
the total cost of the installation or repair against the property.
   (E)   Repair of sidewalks and alleys.
      (1)   Duty of owner. The owner of any property within the city abutting a
public sidewalk or alley shall keep the sidewalk or alley in repair and safe
for pedestrians. Repairs shall be made in accordance with the standard
specifications approved by the City Council and on file in the office of the
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer.
      (2)   Inspections; notice. The City Council or its designee shall make
inspections as are necessary to determine that public sidewalks and alleys
within the city are kept in repair and safe for pedestrians or vehicles. If it
is found that any sidewalk or alley abutting on private property is unsafe and
in need of repairs, the City Council shall cause a notice to be served, by
registered or certified mail or by personal service, upon the record owner of
the property, ordering the owner to have the sidewalk or alley repaired and
made safe within 30 days, and stating that if the owner fails to do so, the
city will do so, and that the expense thereof must be paid by the owner, and if
unpaid it will be made a special assessment against the property concerned.
      (3)   Repair by city. If the sidewalk or alley is not repaired within 30
days after receipt of the notice, the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall
report the facts to the City Council and the City Council shall by resolution
order the work done by contract in accordance with law. The City Administrator/
Clerk-Treasurer shall keep a record of the total cost of the repair
attributable to each lot or parcel of property.
   (F)   Personal liability. The owner of property on which or adjacent to
which a current service has been performed shall be personally liable for the
cost of the service. As soon as the service has been completed and the cost
determined, the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, or other designated
official, shall prepare a bill and mail it to the owner, and thereupon the
amount shall be immediately due and payable at the office of the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer.
   (G)   Damage to public property. Any person driving any vehicle, equipment,
object or contrivance upon any street, road, highway or structure shall be
liable for all damages which the surface or structure thereof may sustain as a
result of any illegal operation, or driving or moving of the vehicle, equipment
or object or contrivance; or as a result of operating, driving or moving any
vehicle, equipment, object or contrivance weighing in excess of the maximum
weight permitted by statute or this code. When the driver is not the owner of
the vehicle, equipment, object or contrivance, but is operating, driving or
moving it with the express or implied permission of the owner, then the owner
and the driver shall be jointly and severally liable for any damage. Any person
who willfully acts or fails to exercise due care and by that act damages any
public property shall be liable for the amount thereof, which amount shall be
collectable by action or as a lien under M.S. § 514.67, as it may be amended
from time to time.
   (H)   Assessment. On or before September 1 of each year, the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall list the total unpaid charges for each type
of current service and charges under this section against each separate lot or
parcel to which they are attributable under this section. The City Council may
then spread the charges against property benefitted as a special assessment
under the authority of M.S. § 429.101 as it may be amended from time to time,
and other pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor and
collection along with current taxes the following year or in annual
installments, not exceeding ten, as the City Council may determine in each
case.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.02 TREE DISEASES.
   (A)   Trees constituting nuisance declared. The following are public
nuisances whenever they may be found within the city.
      (1)   Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected to any
degree with the Dutch Elm disease fungus Ceratocystis Ulmi (Buisman) Moreau or
which harbors any of the elm bark beetles Scolytus Multistriatus (Eichh.) or
Hylungopinus Rufipes (Marsh).
      (2)   Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including branches, stumps,
firewood or other elm material from which the bark has not been removed and
burned or sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle insecticide.
      (3)   Any living or standing oak tree or part thereof infected to any
degree with the Oak Wilt fungus Ceratocystis fagacearum.
      (4)   Any dead oak tree or part thereof which in the opinion of the
designated officer constitutes a hazard, including but not limited to logs,
branches, stumps, roots, firewood or other oak material which has not been
stripped of its bark and burned or sprayed with an effective fungicide.
      (5)   Any other shade tree with an epidemic disease.
   (B)   Abatement of nuisance. It is unlawful for any person to permit any
public nuisance as defined in division (A) of this section to remain on any
premises the person owns or controls within the city. The City Council may by
resolution order the nuisance abated. Before action is taken on that
resolution, the City Council shall publish notice of its intention to meet to
consider taking action to abate the nuisance. This notice shall be mailed to
the affected property owner and published once no less than one week prior to
the meeting. The notice shall state the time and place of the meeting, the
street affected, action proposed, the estimated cost of the abatement, and the
proposed basis of assessment, if any, of costs. At the hearing or adjournment
thereof, the City Council shall hear any property owner with reference to the
scope and desirability of the proposed project. The City Council shall
thereafter adopt a resolution confirming the original resolution with
modifications as it considers desirable and provide for the doing of the work
by day labor or by contract.
   (C)   Record of costs. The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall keep a
record of the costs of abatement done under this section for all work done for
which assessments are to be made, stating and certifying the description of the
land, lots, parcels involved, and the amount chargeable to each.
   (D)   Unpaid charges. On or before September 1 of each year, the City
Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer shall list the total unpaid charges for each
abatement against each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable
under this section. The City Council may then spread the charges or any portion
thereof against the property involved as a special assessment as authorized by
M.S. § 429.101 as it may be amended from time to time and other pertinent
statutes for certification to the County Auditor and collection the following
year along with the current taxes.
Penalty, see § 10.99
NUISANCES
§ 92.15 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Whoever by his or her act or failure to perform a legal duty intentionally
does any of the following is guilty of maintaining a public nuisance, which is
a misdemeanor.
   (A)   Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures or
endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort or repose of any considerable
number of members of the public.
   (B)   Interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous for passage any public
highway or right-of-way, or waters used by the public.
   (C)   Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law or §§ 92.16,
92.17 or 92.18, or any other part of this code to be a public nuisance and for
which no sentence is specifically provided.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.16 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.
   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health.
   (A)   Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or vegetable
matter.
   (B)   All diseased animals running at large.
   (C)   All ponds or pools of stagnant water.
   (D)   Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours after
death.
   (E)   Accumulations of manure, refuse or other debris.
   (F)   Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent-free or fly-tight
or which are so maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to emit foul and
disagreeable odors.
   (G)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake, canal or
body of water by sewage, industrial waste or other substances.
   (H)   All noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation upon public or
private property.
   (I)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders, in unreasonable
quantities.
   (J)   All public exposure of people having a contagious disease.
   (K)   Any offensive trade or business as defined by statute not operating
under local license.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.17 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY.
   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public morals
and decency.
   (A)   All gambling devices, slot machines and punch boards, except as
otherwise authorized by federal, state or local law.
   (B)   Betting, bookmaking and all apparatus used in those occupations.
   (C)   All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual
intercourse, gambling houses, houses of ill fame and bawdy houses.
   (D)   All places where intoxicating liquor is manufactured or disposed of in
violation of law or where, in violation of law, people are permitted to resort
for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor, or where intoxicating liquor
is kept for sale or other disposition in violation of law, and all liquor and
other property used for maintaining that place.
   (E)   Any vehicle used for the unlawful transportation of intoxicating
liquor, or for promiscuous sexual intercourse, or any other immoral or illegal
purpose.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.18 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.
   The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and
safety.
   (A)   All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks 24 hours after the
snow or other precipitation causing the condition has ceased to fall.
   (B)   All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent
people from having a clear view of all traffic approaching an intersection.
   (C)   All wires and limbs of trees which are so close to the surface of a
sidewalk or street as to constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles.
   (D)   All obnoxious noises in violation of Minnesota Rules Chapter 7030, as
they may be amended from time to time which are hereby incorporated by
reference into this code.
   (E)   The discharging of the exhaust or permitting the discharging of the
exhaust of any stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat, motor
vehicle, motorcycle, all terrain vehicle, snowmobile or any recreational device
except through a muffler or other device that effectively prevents loud or
explosive noises therefrom and complies with all applicable state laws and
regulations.
   (F)   The using or operation or permitting the using or operation of any
radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, paging system, machine or
other device for producing or reproduction of sound in a distinctly and loudly
audible manner so as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of any person
nearby. Operation of any device referred to above between the hours of 10 p.m.
and 7 a.m. in a manner so as to be plainly audible at the property line of the
structure or building in which it is located, or at a distance of 50 feet if
the source is located outside a structure or building shall be prima facie
evidence of violation of this section.
   (G)   The participation in a party or gathering of people giving rise to
noise which disturbs the peace, quiet or repose of the occupants of adjoining
or other property.
   (H)   Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary public use of
streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds except under conditions as are
permitted by this code or other applicable law.
   (I)   Radio aerials or television antennae erected or maintained in a
dangerous manner.
   (J)   Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use
of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather,
obstructing traffic and the free use of the street or sidewalk.
   (K)   All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures over streets
and sidewalks, so situated so as to endanger public safety, or not constructed
and maintained as provided by ordinance.
   (L)   The allowing of rain water, ice or snow to fall from any building or
structure upon any street or sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk.
   (M)   Any barbed wire fence less than six feet above the ground and within
three feet of a public sidewalk or way.
   (N)   All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so situated
or operated on private property as to attract the public.
   (O)   Waste water cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or other
public properties.
   (P)   Accumulations in the open of discarded or disused machinery, household
appliances, automobile bodies or other material in a manner conducive to the
harboring of rats, mice, snakes or vermin, or the rank growth of vegetation
among the items so accumulated, or in a manner creating fire, health or safety
hazards from accumulation.
   (Q)   Any well, hole or similar excavation which is left uncovered or in
another condition as to constitute a hazard to any child or other person coming
on the premises where it is located.
   (R)   Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or a
public street drain, gutter or ditch with trash of other materials.
   (S)   The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk or other public
property of any glass, tacks, nails, bottles or other substance which may
injure any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire when passing over the
substance.
   (T)   The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public right-of-way or on
adjacent private property.
   (U)   All other conditions or things which are likely to cause injury to the
person or property of anyone.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.19 DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.
   The Police Department or Sheriff shall enforce the provisions relating to
nuisances. Any peace officer shall have the power to inspect private premises
and take all reasonable precautions to prevent the commission and maintenance
of public nuisances.
§ 92.20 ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Notice. Written notice of violation; notice of the time, date, place
and subject of any hearing before the City Council; notice of City Council
order; and notice of motion for summary enforcement hearing shall be given as
set forth in this section.
      (1)   Notice of violation. Written notice of violation shall be served by
a peace officer on the owner of record or occupant of the premises either in
person or by certified or registered mail. If the premises is not occupied, the
owner of record is unknown, or the owner of record or occupant refuses to
accept notice of violation, notice of violation shall be served by posting it
on the premises.
      (2)   Notice of City Council hearing. Written notice of any City Council
hearing to determine or abate a nuisance shall be served on the owner of record
and occupant of the premises either in person or by certified or registered
mail. If the premises is not occupied, the owner of record is unknown, or the
owner of record or occupant refuses to accept notice of the City Council
hearing, notice of City Council hearing shall be served by posting it on the
premises.
      (3)   Notice of City Council order. Except for those cases determined by
the city to require summary enforcement, written notice of any City Council
order shall be made as provided in M.S. § 463.17 (Hazardous and Substandard
Building Act), as it may be amended from time to time.
      (4)   Notice of motion for summary enforcement. Written notice of any
motion for summary enforcement shall be made as provided for in M.S. § 463.17
(Hazardous and Substandard Building Act), as it may be amended from time to
time.
   (B)   Procedure. Whenever a peace officer determines that a public nuisance
is being maintained or exists on the premises in the city, the officer shall
notify in writing the owner of record or occupant of the premises of such fact
and order that the nuisance be terminated or abated. The notice of violation
shall specify the steps to be taken to abate the nuisance and the time within
which the nuisance is to be abated. If the notice of violation is not complied
with within the time specified, the officer shall report that fact forthwith to
the City Council. Thereafter, the City Council may, after notice to the owner
or occupant and an opportunity to be heard, determine that the condition
identified in the notice of violation is a nuisance and further order that if
the nuisance is not abated within the time prescribed by the City Council, the
city may seek injunctive relief by serving a copy of the City Council order and
notice of motion for summary enforcement.
   (C)   Emergency procedure; summary enforcement. In cases of emergency, where
delay in abatement required to complete the notice and procedure requirements
set forth in divisions (A) and (B) of this section will permit a continuing
nuisance to unreasonably endanger public health safety or welfare, the City
Council may order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance. To proceed with
summary enforcement, the officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists
or is being maintained on premises in the city and that delay in abatement of
the nuisance will unreasonably endanger public health, safety or welfare. The
officer shall notify in writing the occupant or owner of the premises of the
nature of the nuisance and of the city’s intention to seek summary enforcement
and the time and place of the City Council meeting to consider the question of
summary enforcement. The City Council shall determine whether or not the
condition identified in the notice to the owner or occupant is a nuisance,
whether public health, safety or welfare will be unreasonably endangered by
delay in abatement required to complete the procedure set forth in division (A)
of this section, and may order that the nuisance be immediately terminated or
abated. If the nuisance is not immediately terminated or abated, the City
Council may order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance.
   (D)   Immediate abatement. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city,
without notice or other process, from immediately abating any condition which
poses an imminent and serious hazard to human life or safety.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.21 RECOVERY OF COST.
   (A)   Personal liability. The owner of premises on which a nuisance has been
abated by the city shall be personally liable for the cost to the city of the
abatement, including administrative costs. As soon as the work has been
completed and the cost determined, the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer or
other official shall prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner.
Thereupon the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the office of the
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer.
   (B)   Assessment. If the nuisance is a public health or safety hazard on
private property, the accumulation of snow and ice on public sidewalks, the
growth of weeds on private property or outside the traveled portion of streets,
or unsound or insect-infected trees, the City Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer
shall, on or before September 1 next following abatement of the nuisance, list
the total unpaid charges along with all other the charges, as well as other
charges for current services to be assessed under M.S. § 429.101, as it may be
amended from time to time, against each separate lot or parcel to which the
charges are attributable. The City Council may then spread the charges against
the property under that statute and other pertinent statutes for certification
to the County Auditor and collection along with current taxes the following
year or in annual installments, not exceeding ten, as the City Council may
determine in each case.
Penalty, see § 10.99
NOXIOUS WEED AND PLANT CONTROL
§ 92.35 SHORT TITLE.
    This subchapter shall be cited as the "Noxious Weed and Plant Control
Ordinance".
(Ord. 245, passed 11-3-2003)
§ 92.36 JURISDICTION.
    This subchapter shall be in addition to any state statute, county ordinance
or administrative rule presently in effect, subsequently added, amended or
repealed.
(Ord. 245, passed 11-3-2003)
§ 92.37 DEFINITIONS; EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)    For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   DESTRUCTION ORDER. The notice of ordinance violation served by the city
official on the property owner.
   NOXIOUS WEEDS. Also includes those plants designated as such by M.S. §
18.171 subd. 5 or as amended.
   PROPERTY. All lots or parcels within the city.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The person occupying the property, the holder of legal title
or a person having control over the property of another, such as a right-of-
way, easement, license or lease.
   REGULARLY CUT. Mowing or otherwise cutting vegetation so it does not exceed
ten inches in height.
   TURFGRASSES. An area of land, which is occupied by a minimum of 90% of
turfgrasses. Turfgrasses are commercially available cultured turfgrass
varieties including blue grass, fescue, rye grass blends, commonly used in
regularly cut lawn areas.
   VEGETATION. Any non-woody plant.
   WEEDS, GRASSES, RANK VEGETATION and DEAD TREES, includes but is not limited
to the following:
      (1)   Noxious weeds and rank vegetation shall include but not be limited
to alum (allium), Buchthorn, Bur Cucumber, Canada Thistle, Corncockle,
Cressleaf Groundsel, Curly Dock, Dodder, Field Findweed, French Weed, Hairy
Whitetop, Hedge Bindweed, Hoary Cress, Horsenettle, Johnsongrass, Leafy Spurge,
Mile-a-Minute Weed, Musk Thistle, Oxeye Daisy, Perennial Sowthistle, Poison
Hemlock, Purple Loosestrife, Quackgrass, Russian Knapweed, Russian Thistle,
Serrated Tussock, Shatter Cane, Sorghum, Wild Carrot, Wild Garlic, Wild
Mustard, Wild Onion, Wild Parsnip.
      (2)   Grapevines when growing in groups of 100 or more and not pruned,
sprayed, cultivated, or otherwise maintained for two consecutive years.
      (3)   Bushes of the species of tall, common, or European barberry,
further known as berberis vulgaris or its horticultural varieties.
      (4)   Any plants which have been defined by state statute or
administrative rule as being noxious weeds or plants.
      (5)   Dead trees that are so situated that they may fall on an adjoining
owner's property, or that may be a probable safety hazard; also, dead trees
that should be removed because of interference with electrical or other
utilities.
      (6)   Native grasses, forbs, and cultivated wildflowers are specifically
allowed and are not considered weeds or rank vegetation.
   WOODLAND. An area of coniferous or deciduous trees interspersed with shrubs,
grasses, broad-leaf plants, and other vegetation, excluding noxious weeds,
which are native or adaptive to the State of Minnesota.
(Ord. 245, passed 11-3-2003)
§ 92.38 LAWN ESTABLISHMENT.
   All disturbed or occupied areas, which are not occupied by buildings,
storage, landscape beds, or other physical improvements, shall be covered by
maintainable turfgrasses. It is the duty of all property owners to establish a
lawn within eight months of issuance of certificate of occupancy or 12 months
of issuance of building permit, whichever is earlier. The property owner shall
be responsible for supplemental watering of all areas established with turf
grass to insure sufficient establishment and root development. All areas shall
have sufficient ground cover as to prevent erosion. At the discretion of the
city a shorter time period may be imposed.
(Ord. 245, passed 11-3-2003)
§ 92.39 NATIVE GRASSES OR GARDENS.
   No more than 50% of all disturbed areas may be restored to native grasses or
wildflowers indigenous to the State of Minnesota, which are planted and
maintained on any property, as part of a garden, or landscape treatment. A
minimum width of three feet of turfgrass shall be established and maintained
along the edge of the property and abutting both sidewalk and roadway if native
grasses are to be used.
(Ord. 245, passed 11-3-2003)
§ 92.40 WOODLAND PRESERVE OR RESTORATION.
   No more than 50% of areas within the lot can be devoted to woodlands.
Property owners must trim and maintain the woodland areas such that public ways
are kept clear for passage.
(Ord. 245, passed 11-3-2003)
§ 92.41 TURFGRASS MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   All property within the City of Preston shall have turfgrass
maintained through regularly cutting to prevent grass vegetation from exceeding
ten inches.
   (B)   On vacant property where mowing of grass is physically difficult
because of topography or other physical constraints the height requirement as
in division (A) of this section shall only apply to six foot strip of land
abutting roadways or developed properties.
   (C)   Division (A) of this section shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   Highway ditches;
      (2)   Railroad track ditches;
      (3)   Agricultural areas;
      (4)   Designated wetlands areas (based on DNR standards);
      (5)   Large tracts of undeveloped land;
      (6)   Residential subdivisions that are less than 50% developed except
where lots abut developed and improved property. In this instance division (B)
of this section shall apply;
      (7)   Designated areas in city parks;
      (8)   Up to a 50-foot buffer surrounding drainage ponds, water quality
ponds, streams, lakes, and floodplain areas; and
      (9)   Woodlands.
(Ord. 245, passed 11-3-2003)
§ 92.42 TRIMMING PLANTS AT INTERSECTIONS.
   The owner or occupant of any property lying and abutting any intersection of
two streets, having shrubs or bushes on such property, shall trim or cause to
be trimmed bushes or shrubbery so that they shall not exceed three feet in
height. The area included in this restriction is defined by a triangle, created
20 feet back from the intersection of property lines on both sides.
(Ord. 245, passed 11-3-2003)
§ 92.43 OWNERS' RESPONSIBILITIES FOR REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL OF NOXIOUS WEEDS AND
VEGETATION.
   All property owners shall be responsible for the removal, cutting, or
disposal and elimination of noxious weeds, grasses and rank vegetation
identified and described above.
(Ord. 245, passed 11-3-2003)
§ 92.44 FILING COMPLAINT.
   Any person, including the city or any of its officials, who believes there
is property located within the corporate limits of the city that has growing
plant matter in violation of this subchapter, may file a signed written
complaint with the City Administrator.
(Ord. 245, passed 11-3-2003)
§ 92.45 NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS; PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Upon receiving a written and signed complaint of the existence of
weeds in violation of this subchapter, the City Administrator or his staff,
including the City Weed Inspector, shall make an inspection and prepare a
written report to the City Council regarding the condition. The City Council,
upon concluding that there is probable cause that this subchapter has been
violated, shall direct the City Administrator to forward written notification
in the form of a "Destruction Order" to the property owner involved as that
information is contained within the city or county records. The notice shall be
served by certified mail with return receipt requested. The notice shall
provide that within seven regular business days after the receipt of the notice
that the designated violation shall be removed by the property owner.
   (B)   All notices are to be in writing and all filings are to be with the
City Administrator.
(Ord. 245, passed 11-3-2003)
§ 92.46 RESPONSE BY PROPERTY OWNER; PROCEDURE AND ABATEMENT.
   (A)   The property owner may respond to the destruction order by filing
written notice of objections and request for hearing with the City
Administrator within five business days of receipt of the order.
   (B)   Upon receipt of the property owner's written notice of objections and
request for hearing, the City Administrator shall then set the matter on for
hearing before the City Council and shall give written notice of such hearing
by certified mail with return receipt requested at least five business days
prior to the date of the Council meeting when the hearing will be held. At the
hearing, all interested parties, including the City Weed Inspector, may give
testimony and comments to the City Council on the issue of whether the
ordinance has been violated, and after all parties have been heard, the Council
shall by majority vote decide whether or not the ordinance has been violated.
After the City Council has by majority vote made its decision, the City
Administrator shall serve written notice of such decision upon the affected
property owner by certified mail with return receipt requested. If the City
Council finds that the property owner has violated the ordinance, the notice
shall include a "destruction order" directed to the property owner to take
action within seven days from and after receipt of the notice to bring the
affected property in compliance with all sections of this subchapter. The order
shall be specific as to the particular actions that the property owner must
take to accomplish compliance. If the property owner shall fail to do so, the
City Council may employ the services of city employees or outside contractors
to take any action necessary to bring the affected real property into
compliance with this subchapter.
(Ord. 245, passed 11-3-2003)
§ 92.47 APPEAL TO DISTRICT COURT.
   The affected property owner may file an appeal to the Fillmore County
District Court from the destruction ordered referred to in §
92.46(B), within seven calendar days from and after receipt of the destruction
order in which case all proceedings under this subchapter shall be suspended
pending final disposition of all court appeals.
(Ord. 245, passed 11-3-2003)
§ 92.48 LIABILITY.
   (A)   The property owner is responsible for all collection costs associated
with necessary action to bring the real property into compliance with this
subchapter, including but not limited to court costs, attorney's fees and
interest on any unpaid amounts incurred by the city. If the city uses municipal
employees, it shall set and assign an appropriate per hour rate for employees,
equipment, supplies and chemicals which may be used.
   (B)   All sums payable by the property owner are to be paid to the City
Administrator and shall be deposited in the general fund as compensation for
expenses and costs incurred by the city.
   (C)   All sums payable by the property owner may be collected as a special
assessment as provided by M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to
time.
(Ord. 245, passed 11-3-2003)
OPEN BURNING
§ 92.60 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIRE CHIEF, FIRE MARSHAL, and ASSISTANT FIRE MARSHALS. The Fire Chief, Fire
Marshal, and Assistant Fire Marshals of the Fire Department which provides fire
protection services to the city.
   OPEN BURNING. The burning of any matter if the resultant combustion products
are emitted directly to the atmosphere without passing through a stack, duct or
chimney, except a “recreational fire” as defined herein. Mobile cooking devices
such as manufactured hibachis, charcoal grills, wood smokers, and propane or
natural gas devices are not defined as “open burning.”
   RECREATIONAL FIRE. A fire set with approved starter fuel no more than three
feet in height, contained within the border of a “recreational fire site” using
dry, clean wood; producing little detectable smoke, odor or soot beyond the
property line; conducted with an adult tending the fire at all times; for
recreational, ceremonial, food preparation for social purposes; extinguished
completely before quitting the occasion; and respecting weather conditions,
neighbors, burning bans, and air quality so that nuisance, health or safety
hazards will not be created. No more than one recreational fire is allowed on
any property at one time.
   RECREATIONAL FIRE SITE. An area of no more than a three foot diameter circle
(measured from the inside of the fire ring or border); completely surrounded by
non-combustible and non-smoke or odor producing material, either of natural
rock, cement, brick, tile or blocks or ferrous metal only an which area is
depressed below ground, on the ground, or on a raised bed. Included are
permanent outdoor wood burning fireplaces. Burning barrels are not a
“recreation fire site” as defined herein. Recreational fire sites shall not be
located closer than 25 feet to any structure.
   STARTER FUELS. Dry, untreated, unpainted, kindling, branches, cardboard or
charcoal fire starter. Paraffin candles and alcohols are permitted as starter
fuels and as aids to ignition only. Propane gas torches or other clean gas
burning devices causing minimal pollution must be used to start an open burn.
   WOOD. Dry, clean fuel only such as twigs, branches, limbs, “presto logs,”
charcoal, cord wood or untreated dimensional lumber. The term does not include
wood that is green with leaves or needles, rotten, wet, oil soaked, or treated
with paint, glue or preservatives. Clean pallets may be used for recreational
fires when cut into three foot lengths.
§ 92.61 PROHIBITED MATERIALS.
   (A)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning oils, petro
fuels, rubber, plastics, chemically treated materials, or other materials which
produce excessive or noxious smoke such as tires, railroad ties, treated,
painted or glued wood composite shingles, tar paper, insulation, composition
board, sheet rock, wiring, paint or paint fillers.
   (B)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of hazardous
waste or salvage operations, open burning of solid waste generated from an
industrial or manufacturing process or from a service or commercial
establishment or building material generated from demolition of commercial or
institutional structures.
   (C)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of discarded
material resulting from the handling, processing, storage, preparation, serving
or consumption of food.
   (D)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of any leaves or
grass clippings.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.62 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR OPEN BURNING.
   No person shall start or allow any open burning on any property in the city
without first having obtained an open burn permit, except that a permit is not
required for any fire which is a recreational fire as defined in § 92.60.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.63 PURPOSES ALLOWED FOR OPEN BURNING.
   (A)   Open burn permits may be issued only for the following purposes.
      (1)   Elimination of fire of health hazard that cannot be abated by other
practical means.
      (2)   Ground thawing for utility repair and construction.
      (3)   Disposal of vegetative matter for managing forest, prairie or
wildlife habitat, and in the development and maintenance of land and rights-of-
way where chipping, composting, land spreading or other alternative methods are
not practical.
      (4)   Disposal of diseased trees generated on site, diseased or infected
nursery stock, diseased bee hives.
      (5)   Disposal of unpainted, untreated, non-glued lumber and wood shakes
generated from construction, where recycling, reuse, removal or other
alternative disposal methods are not practical.
   (B)   Fire Training permits can only issued by the Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.64 PERMIT APPLICATION FOR OPEN BURNING; PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Open burning permits shall be obtained by making application on a form
prescribed the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and adopted by the Fire
Department. The permit application shall be presented to the Fire Chief, Fire
Marshal, and Assistant Fire Marshals for reviewing and processing those
applications.
   (B)   An open burning permit shall require the payment of a fee. Permit fees
shall be amended from time to time.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.65 PERMIT PROCESS FOR OPEN BURNING.
   Upon receipt of the completed open burning permit application and permit
fee, the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, or Assistant Fire Marshals shall schedule a
preliminary site inspection to locate the proposed burn site, note special
conditions, and set dates and time of permitted burn and review fire safety
considerations.
§ 92.66 PERMIT HOLDER RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Prior to starting an open burn, the permit holder shall be responsible
for confirming that no burning ban or air quality alert is in effect. Every
open burn event shall be constantly attended by the permit holder or his or her
competent representative. The open burning site shall have available,
appropriate communication and fire suppression equipment as set out in the fire
safety plan.
   (B)   The open burn fire shall be completely extinguished before the permit
holder or his or her representative leaves the site. No fire may be allowed to
smolder with no person present. It is the responsibility of the permit holder
to have a valid permit, as required by this subchapter, available for
inspection on the site by the Police Department, Fire Department, MPCA
representative or DNR forest officer.
   (C)   The permit holder is responsible for compliance and implementation of
all general conditions, special conditions, and the burn event safety plan as
established in the permit issued. The permit holder shall be responsible for
all costs incurred as a result of the burn, including but not limited to fire
suppression and administrative fees.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.67 REVOCATION OF OPEN BURNING PERMIT.
   The open burning permit is subject to revocation at the discretion of DNR
forest officer, the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, or Assistant Fire Marshals.
Reasons for revocation include but are not limited to a fire hazard existing or
developing during the course of the burn, any of the conditions of the permit
being violated during the course of the burn, pollution or nuisance conditions
developing during the course of the burn, or a fire smoldering with no flame
present.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.68 DENIAL OF OPEN BURNING PERMIT.
   If established criteria for the issuance of an open burning permit are not
met during review of the application, it is determined that a practical
alternative method for disposal of the material exists, or a pollution or
nuisance condition would result, or if a burn event safety plan cannot be
drafted to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, or Assistant Fire
Marshals, these officers may deny the application for the open burn permit.
§ 92.69 BURNING BAN OR AIR QUALITY ALERT.
   No recreational fire or open burn will be permitted when the city or DNR has
officially declared a burning ban due to potential hazardous fire conditions or
when the MPCA has declared an Air Quality Alert.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.70 RULES AND LAWS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The provisions of M.S. §§ 88.16 to 88.22 and the Minnesota Uniform Fire
Code, Minnesota Rules Chapter 1510, as these statutes and rules may be amended
from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
subchapter as if fully set forth at this point.
APPLICATION OF LAWN AND GARDEN PESTICIDES WITHIN THE CITY
§ 92.85 SCOPE.
   The sections of this subchapter shall apply only to commercial lawn
herbicide and pesticide applicators within the city.
(Ord. 237, passed 5-21-2001)
§ 92.86 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL APPLICATOR.  An applicator of lawn herbicide and lawn pesticide,
as an occupation, employment or enterprise for competition.
   CUSTOMER. A resident or business owner or governmental unit or religious
organization within the city who is recipient of commercial lawn herbicide or
lawn pesticide services.
   HERBICIDE.  Any substance or mixture of substances intended for use as a
plant regulator, defoliant or desiccant.
   LABEL.  The written, printed or graphic words or symbols on, or attached to,
the herbicide, the pesticide, or its containers or wrappers.
   PESTICIDE.  Any substance or mixture of substances intended for preventing,
destroying, repelling or mitigating any pest.
   SPILL. The discharge of any amount of herbicide or pesticide into the
ground, or water, other than the actual herbicide or pesticide application
during a lawn treatment.
(Ord. 237, passed 5-21-2001)
§ 92.87 OPERATING PERMIT.
   (A)   Permit required.  No person shall engage in the commercial application
of lawn herbicide or lawn pesticide without an annual permit issued by the
city.
   (B)   Permit procedure.  Applications for a lawn herbicide or lawn pesticide
applicator permit shall be submitted to the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer
at least 30 days in advance of the proposed initial lawn pesticide applications
each year within the city.
   (C)   Application form.  Permit application forms shall be provided by the
city and shall include the following information:
      (1)   Name, address and telephone number of the commercial applicator;
      (2)   Names of employees applying herbicides or pesticides to lawns; and
      (3)   Minnesota Department of Agriculture herbicide and pesticide
applicator license numbers for all persons employed who engage in the
commercial application of lawn herbicides or lawn pesticides.
   (D)   Permit fee. The annual permit fee for a commercial lawn herbicide or
lawn pesticide applicator company shall be $25.
(Ord. 237, passed 5-21-2001)
§ 92.88 SAFETY.
   (A)   Spills prohibited.  It is unlawful to discharge or cause to be
discharged any lawn herbicide or lawn pesticide into any public sewer or
natural outlet within the city.
   (B)   Disposal. All lawn herbicides or lawn pesticides and their containers
shall be disposed of in accordance with the Minnesota Pesticide Control Law of
1976, M.S. Chapter 18A, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   Pesticide and herbicide drift.  No application of any lawn herbicide
or lawn pesticide mixture shall result in permanent damage to any non-target
organism or non-target area.
(Ord. 237, passed 5-21-2001)
§ 92.89 CUSTOMER NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   Notification requirements.  Commercial lawn herbicide or lawn
pesticide applicators shall provide any customer within the city limits
receiving an herbicide or pesticide lawn treatment with the information listed
in subsections (1) through (3) below:
      (1)   Date, time and address of property treated;
      (2)   Name, address, telephone number, state license number, and
signature of the applicator;
      (3)   Name of the herbicide or pesticide, dosage used, and the location
of the area treated.
   (B)   Record retention.  Copies of customer notification shall be retained
by the commercial lawn herbicide or lawn pesticide applicator for a period of
two years after the date of treatment.
(Ord. 237, passed 5-21-2001)
§ 92.90 APPLICATION POSTING.
   (A)   All commercial applicators who apply lawn herbicides or lawn
pesticides outdoors are required to attach or affix warning markers on the
street frontage of the property so treated. The warning markers must be a
minimum of 18 inches above the top of the grass line or grade line, whichever
is higher. The markers shall also be posted on the lawn or yard no closer than
two feet from the sidewalk or right-of- way and no further than five feet from
the sidewalk or right-of-way. The markers shall be posted for a minimum or 24
hours after the application.
   (B)   The warning markers must be a rain resistant material and shall
provide the following information:
      (1)   The name of the company applying the herbicide or, if not a
company, the name of the person having done the application; and
      (2)   The following language: “This lawn chemically treated on (date).
Please stay off lawn for 24 hours,” or a universally accepted symbol which is
recognized as having the same meaning or intent.
(Ord. 237, passed 5-21-2001)
§ 92.91 PENALTY.
   A violation of any provision of this subchapter shall be a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 237, passed 5-21-2001)
OUTDOOR WOOD BURNING FURNACES
§ 92.100 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   The Preston City Council hereby find that:
   (A)   It is recognized and found that wood smoke is hazardous to an
individual's health and may affect the health of the general public when they
are involuntarily exposed to the presence of wood smoke.
   (B)   Reliable scientific studies, including studies conducted by the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), have shown that breathing wood smoke is
a significant health hazard particularly to children, elderly people,
individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired
respiratory functions, including asthmatics and those with obstructive airway
disease.
   (C)   It is recognized that "outdoor wood burning furnaces" are designed and
intended to be a primary heat source and therefore burn, and emit smoke, on a
continual basis. A distinction is drawn between "Outdoor wood burning furnaces"
and indoor wood stoves and fireplaces that, by nature, provide supplemental
heat and are generally used on a less-frequent basis.
   (D)   This subchapter is adopted for the purpose of protecting the public
health, safety, comfort, and the general welfare of the people of the City of
Preston; educating citizens affected by this subchapter; and assisting property
owners and managers in maintaining compliance.
(Ord. 248, passed 12-6-2005)
§ 92.101 DEFINITION.
   OUTDOOR WOOD BURNING FURNACE. A furnace, or similar device, designed and
intended, and/or used, through the burning of wood or other fuel sources, for
the purpose of heating the principal structure or another accessory structure
on the premises. These types of furnaces are characterized by a short stack
height. They are located outside of the principal structure and are contained
in free-standing structures. This definition includes outside wood burning
water stoves. This definition does not include furnaces that burn wood pellets
or corn that is augured to the fire box.
(Ord. 248, passed 12-6-2005)
§ 92.102 REGULATION OF OUTDOOR WOOD BURNING FURNACES.
   (A)   Fuel. The only fuel permitted to be burned is untreated fuel. Wood may
not be treated, processed, stained, finished or painted - specifically
prohibited woods include plywood, particle board and similar products. Other
fuels, such as corn, shall not contain any additives, treatments or chemicals.
No petroleum products or processed materials of any kind may be burned.
   (B)   EPA approved. Any outdoor wood burning furnace shall be an EPA
certified stove.
   (C)   Permitted zones. Outdoor wood burning furnaces shall only be permitted
in R-1 and R-2 zones.
   (D)   Property line setbacks. An outdoor wood burning furnace must be
setback a minimum of 50 feet from all property lines.
   (E)   Structure setback. An outdoor wood burning furnace must be setback a
minimum of ten feet from any principal or accessory structure.
   (F)   Chimney stack height. An outdoor wood burning furnace shall have a
chimney height that extends at least 15 feet above ground level unless the
furnace is within 100 feet of a dwelling unit not on the same property of the
wood burning furnace. If the furnace is within 100 feet of a dwelling unit of
adjacent properties the chimney terminus is to extend above ground level to
equal the height of the roofs of all such residences.
   (G)   Dates of use. An outdoor wood burning furnace may not be used from
April 15 to October 15 of each year.
(Ord. 248, passed 12-6-2005)
§ 92.103 NONCONFORMING USE.
   (A)   Continuation of nonconforming uses. The lawful use of any existing
"outdoor wood burning furnace" existing at the time of the effective date of
this subchapter may be continued, although such use may not conform to the
provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   Extension or enlargement. No pre-existing, non-conforming "outdoor
wood burning furnace" shall hereafter be extended, enlarged, or expanded.
   (C)   Abandonment and discontinuance. Any pre-existing, non-conforming
"outdoor wood burning furnace" which is abandoned or not used for a period of
12 consecutive months shall not be permitted to be re-established as a non-
conforming use, cannot be used, and must be immediately removed by the property
owner from the subject premises. If the property owner fails to remove the
"outdoor wood burning furnace" by the end of said 12 months, the City of
Preston Zoning Administrator shall give written notice by certified mail,
personal service, or posting to the property owner upon which the "outdoor wood
burning furnace" is located. Such notice shall provide that such person shall
remove the same within 15 days of the notice.
   (D)   Termination. At such time as the useful life of a non pre-existing,
nonconforming "outdoor wood burning furnace" has elapsed or would need to be
repaired to function properly, the unit cannot be replaced and must be
abandoned, not used, and removed from the property immediately.
   (E)   Enforcement. Any person committing violation of the provisions of this
subchapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction for a
violation hereof shall be subject to the terms of §
10.99.
(Ord. 248, passed 12-6-2005)
CHAPTER 93: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
Sidewalks
   
93.01   Declaration of policy
   
93.02   Construction, maintenance and repair
   
93.03   Inventory of existing sidewalks
   
93.04   Installation, repair, removal and maintenance
   
93.05   Duty of City Engineer
   
93.06   Costs, special assessments
   
93.07   Removal, construction or alteration without city approval prohibited
   
93.08   Use of sidewalks
   
93.09   Responsibility for personal injuries
   
93.10   Violations; enforcement procedures
Right-Of-Way Construction Regulations
   
93.20   Election to manage the public right-of-way
   
93.21   Definitions and adoption of rules by reference
   
93.22   Permit requirement
   
93.23   Permit applications
   
93.24   Issuance of permit; conditions
   
93.25   Permit fees
   
93.26   Right-of-way patching and restoration
   
93.27   Supplementary applications
   
93.28   Denial of permit
   
93.29   Installation requirements
   
93.30   Inspection
   
93.31   Work done without a permit
   
93.32   Supplementary notification
   
93.33   Revocation of permits
   
93.34   Mapping data; information required
   
93.35   Location of facilities
   
93.36   Damage to other facilities
   
93.37   Right-of-way vacation
   
93.38   Indemnification and liability
   
93.39   Abandoned facilities; removal of abandoned facilities
   
93.40   Appeal
   
93.41   Reservation of regulatory and police powers
SIDEWALKS
§ 93.01 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   The City Council declares that the retention, repair and replacement of
existing sidewalks within the city is in the public interest, and that the
existing sidewalk system should be maintained, repaired and replaced, except in
circumstances where the Council determines that it is unnecessary, unfair or
not in the public interest to continue the sidewalk system; and that new
sidewalks should be constructed in those locations where the City Council deems
necessary for the safety and convenience of the public.
(Ord. 208, passed 6-23-1992)
§ 93.02 CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE, AND REPAIR. 
   The City Council may in its discretion and for the public interest and
safety require the construction, maintenance or repair of sidewalks or require
the removal of existing sidewalks upon due notice and opportunity for hearing
to the public and the affected property owners in the same manner as
established for other improvements to be assessed to abutting property owners
under M.S. Chapter 429, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 208, passed 6-23-1992)
§ 93.03 INVENTORY OF EXISTING SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   The Superintendent of the Street Department or other person designated
by the City Council shall, prior to May 1 of each year, make an inventory of
all of the existing sidewalks within the city and shall report to the City
Council his or her findings with particular reference to the following.
      (1)   The location of all existing sidewalks.
      (2)   Locations where the construction of new sidewalks may be necessary
for the public interest and safety.
      (3)   Any deteriorated condition upon any particular portion of any
sidewalk causing it to be unsafe or otherwise unusable.
   (B)   Upon receipt of the report from street superintendent, the City
Council shall review the report and cause appropriate maps thereof to be
prepared. The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall maintain a permanent
file on the location and existence of all sidewalks within the city, and shall
update maps and other data as required, showing the location of sidewalks,
including the addition, removal and maintenance thereof.
(Ord. 208, passed 6-23-1992)
§ 93.04 INSTALLATION, REPAIR, REMOVAL AND MAINTENANCE.
   The City Council shall develop a plan for the installation, repair, removal
and maintenance of sidewalks within the city, and shall set a timetable for the
implementation of the plan as may be reasonably accomplished. Sidewalks within
the city determined by the City Council to be deteriorated or otherwise in a
condition unsafe or unfit for use shall be remedied by replacement or repair
according to the specifications provided for in this subchapter; new sidewalks
determined by the City Council to be necessary for the public interest and
safety shall likewise be constructed in accordance with specifications provided
for in this subchapter.
(Ord. 208, passed 6-23-1992)
§ 93.05 DUTY OF CITY ENGINEER.
   The City Council may direct the City Engineer to prepare specifications for
various sidewalks in the city, giving due consideration to residential areas,
commercial areas and business district areas, all in accordance with any state
or federal regulations.
(Ord. 208, passed 6-23-1992)
§ 93.06 COSTS; SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   The city shall have the authority to require the abutting property owner to
bear part or all of the cost of the installation, maintenance, or repair of
sidewalks, and to expend city funds for those purposes. The installation,
maintenance and repair may be undertaken by the property owner, privately or
through privately retained contractors, provided the installation, maintenance
and repair is in strict conformity with the specifications adopted by the City
Council. During the course of installation, maintenance and repair, the street
superintendent or his or her designee shall inspect and supervise the
installation to insure conformity with the specifications. The City Council
shall have the authority to install sidewalks and to assess the costs to the
benefitted property owner in the mode and manner provided by M.S. Chapter 429
as may be amended from time to time. Any costs associated with the
implementation of a sidewalk system within the city which is in excess of the
normal and customary cost of the installation of sidewalks within the city is
an appropriate expenditure of city funds.
(Ord. 208, passed 6-23-1992)
§ 93.07 REMOVAL, CONSTRUCTION OR ALTERATION WITHOUT CITY APPROVAL PROHIBITED.
   No person shall construct, remove, deface, damage, destroy or otherwise
alter the condition of any sidewalks abutting on any city street within the
city without the express written authorization of the City Council. Any damage
or destruction which is occasioned by any party, whether it be accidental or
otherwise, shall be repaired or placed immediately by the abutting property
owner at the abutting property owner’s expense.
(Ord. 208, passed 6-23-1992)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.08 USE OF SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall use a sidewalk for any purpose other than pedestrian
traffic. The use of motor scooters, motorcycles or other motor vehicles on
sidewalks shall be prohibited.
(Ord. 208, passed 6-23-1992)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.09 RESPONSIBILITY FOR PERSONAL INJURIES. 
   The abutting property owner of any sidewalk within the city, upon which any
person is injured by reason of a defect in or upon the sidewalk, any object
whatsoever left upon the sidewalk, or any unauthorized use of a sidewalk by the
property owner or property owner’s licensee or lessee or others residing
within, or upon, the property owner’s premises, shall be responsible for any
damages that result, and shall hold the city harmless and indemnify the city
for any losses that the city may be required to pay to any third person.
(Ord. 208, passed 6-23-1992)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.10 VIOLATIONS; ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Any violation of this subchapter shall constitute a misdemeanor.
   (B)   In addition to any criminal penalty, the City Council shall have the
power to enforce this subchapter by means of injunctive relief or any other
remedy available at law.
(Ord. 208, passed 6-23-1992)
Penalty, see § 10.99
RIGHT-OF-WAY CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS
§ 93.20 ELECTION TO MANAGE THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   In accordance with the authority granted to the city under state and federal
statutory, administrative, and common law, the city hereby elects pursuant to
this chapter to manage rights-of-way within its jurisdiction.
§ 93.21 DEFINITIONS AND ADOPTION OF RULES BY REFERENCE.
   Minnesota Rules Chapter 7819, as it may be amended from time to time, is
hereby adopted by reference and is incorporated into this code as if set out in
full. The definitions included in Minnesota Rules part 7819.0100 Subparts 1
through 23, as it may be amended from time to time, are the definitions of the
terms used in the following provisions of this subchapter.
§ 93.22 PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this code, no person
may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way without first having obtained the
appropriate permit from the city.
      (1)   Excavation permit. An excavation permit is required to excavate
that part of the right-of- way described in the permit and to hinder free and
open passage over the specified portion of the right- of-way by placing
facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified
therein.
      (2)   Obstruction permit.  An obstruction permit is required to hinder
free and open passage over the specified portion of right-of-way by placing
equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the extent and for the
duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not required if a person
already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same project.
   (B)   Permit extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-way
beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless the person makes a
supplementary application for another right-of- way permit before the
expiration of the initial permit, and a new permit or permit extension is
granted.
   (C)   Delay penalty. In accordance with Minnesota Rules part 7819.1000
Subpart 3, as it may be amended from time to time and notwithstanding division
(B) of this section, the city shall establish and impose a delay penalty for
unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or
restoration. The delay penalty shall be established from time to time by
resolution of the Council as may be amended from time to time.
   (D)   Permit display. Permits issued under this subchapter shall be
conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated
work site and shall be available for inspection by the Director.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.23 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   Application for a permit shall contain, and will be considered complete only
upon compliance with the requirements of the following provisions:
   (A)   Submission of a completed permit application form, including all
required attachments, scaled drawings showing the location and area of the
proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed
facilities, and the following information:
      (1)   Each permittee’s name, gopher one-call registration certificate
number, address and e-mail address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile
numbers.
      (2)   The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone
and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local representative or
designee shall be available at all times. Current information regarding how to
contact the local representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time
of registration.
      (3)   A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
         (a)   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the
registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, or a
form of self-insurance acceptable to the Director;
         (b)   Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for
personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising
out of the use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the registrant, its
officers, agents, employees, and permittees, and placement and use of
facilities and equipment in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers,
agents, employees, and permittees, including, but not limited to, protection
against liability arising from completed operations, damage of underground
facilities, and collapse of property;
         (c)   Naming the city as an additional insured as to whom the
coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will
be provided as to all coverages;
         (d)   Requiring that the Director be notified 30 days in advance of
cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term;
         (e)   Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile
liability coverage, workers compensation and umbrella coverage established by
the Director in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the public and to
carry out the purposes and policies of this chapter.
      (4)   The city may require a copy of the actual insurance policies.
      (5)   If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate required
to be filed under M.S. § 300.06, as it may be amended from time to time as
recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State.
      (6)   A copy of the person’s order granting a certificate of authority
from the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other applicable state or
federal agency, where the person is lawfully required to have the certificate
from the Commission or other state or federal agency.
   (B)   Payment of money due the city for:
      (1)   Permit fees as established by resolution of the Council, as may be
amended from time to time, estimated restoration costs and other management
costs;
      (2)   Prior obstructions or excavations;
      (3)   Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city
because of the applicant’s prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-
way or any emergency actions taken by the city; or
      (4)   Franchise fees or other charges as established by resolution of the
Council, as may be amended from time to time, if applicable.
§ 93.24 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Permit issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of
this chapter, the Director shall issue a permit.
   (B)   Conditions. The Director may impose reasonable conditions upon the
issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to
protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-
of-way and its current use.
§ 93.25 PERMIT FEES.
   Permit fees shall be in an amount established by resolution of the Council,
as it may be amended from time to time.
   (A)   Excavation permit fee. The city shall establish an excavation permit
fee as established by resolution of the Council, as may be amended from time to
time, in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:
      (1)   The city management costs; and
      (2)   Degradation costs, if applicable.
   (B)   Obstruction Permit Fee.  The city shall establish the obstruction
permit fee as established by resolution of the Council, as may be amended from
time to time, and shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the city
management costs.
   (C)   Payment of permit fees. No excavation permit or obstruction permit
shall be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit fees. The
city may allow applicant to pay those fees within 30 days of billing.
   (D)   Non-refundable. Permit fees as established by resolution of the
Council, as may be amended from time to time, that were paid for a permit that
the Director has revoked for a breach as stated in § 93.33 are not refundable.
   (E)   Application to franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise,
management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to the
franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise.
   (F)   All permit fees shall be established consistent with the provisions of
Minnesota Rules part 7819.100, as it may be amended from time to time.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.26 RIGHT-OF-WAY PATCHING AND RESTORATION.
   (A)   Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the
patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under this
subchapter.
   (B)   Patch and restoration. The permittee shall patch its own work. The
city may choose either to have the city restore the right-of-way or to restore
the right-of-way itself.
      (1)   City restoration. If the city restores the right-of-way, the
permittee shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing. If following
the restoration, the pavement settles due to the permittee’s improper
backfilling, the permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing,
all costs associated with having to correct the defective work.
      (2)   Permittee restoration. If the permittee restores the right-of-way
itself, it shall at the time of application for an excavation permit post a
construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota
Rules part 7819.3000, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   Standards. The permittee shall perform patching and restoration
according to the standards and with the materials specified by the city and
shall comply with Minnesota Rules part 7819.1100, as it may be amended from
time to time. The Director shall have the authority to prescribe the manner and
extent of the restoration, and may do so in written procedures of general
application or on a case-by-case basis.
   (D)   Duty to correct defects. The permittee shall correct defects in
patching, or restoration performed by the permittee or its agents. The
permittee upon notification from the Director, shall correct all restoration
work to the extent necessary, using the method required by the Director. The
work shall be completed within five calendar days of the receipt of the notice
from the Director, not including days during which work cannot be done because
of circumstances constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as
unseasonal or unreasonable under this subchapter.
   (E)   Failure to restore. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way
in the manner and to the condition required by the Director, or fails to
satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the Director,
the Director at its option may do the work. In that event the permittee shall
pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-
way. If the permittee fails to pay as required, the city may exercise its
rights under the construction performance bond.
   (F)   Degradation fee in lieu of restoration. In lieu of right-of-way
restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation fee as
established by resolution of the Council, as may be amended from time to time.
However, the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for patching and the
degradation fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these
responsibilities.
§ 93.27 SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Limitation on area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area
of the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work
outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any
permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the
permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater area
make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees required
thereby, and be granted a new permit or permit extension.
   (B)   Limitation on dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates
specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the permit
start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the end date.
If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must apply
for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new permit
or an extension of the old permit before working after the end date of the
previous permit. This supplementary application must be submitted before the
permit end date.
§ 93.28 DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and
conditions of this chapter or if the city determines that the denial is
necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to
protect the right-of-way and its current use.
§ 93.29 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other work
performed in the right-of- way shall be done in conformance with Minnesota
Rules part 7819.1100, as it may be amended from time to time and other
applicable local requirements, in so far as they are not inconsistent with M.S.
§§ 237.162 and 237.163, as they may be amended from time to time.
§ 93.30 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Notice of completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is
completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in accordance
Minnesota Rules part 7819.1300, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Site inspection. The permittee shall make the work-site available to
city personnel and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all
reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the work.
   (C)   Authority of Director.
      (1)   At the time of inspection, the Director may order the immediate
cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety,
or well-being of the public.
      (2)   The Director may issue an order to the permittee for any work which
does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards,
conditions, or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the
violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten days after
issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the Director that
the violation has been corrected. If proof has not been presented within the
required time, the Director may revoke the permit pursuant to § 93.33.
§ 93.31 WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.
   (A)   Emergency situations.  
      (1)   Each person with facilities in the right-of-way shall immediately
notify the city of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be
an emergency. The owner of the facilities may proceed
to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency. Within two
business days after the occurrence of the emergency, the owner shall apply for
the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith and fulfill the rest
of the requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this chapter
for the actions it took in response to the emergency.
      (2)   If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding facilities, the
city will attempt to contact the local representative of each facility owner
affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event, the city may
take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost
of which shall be borne by the person whose facilities occasioned the
emergency.
   (B)   Non-emergency situations. Except in an emergency, any person who,
without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a
right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit, and as a penalty pay double the
normal fee for the permit, pay double all the other fees required by this code,
deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct any damage to the right-of-
way and comply with all of the requirements of this chapter.
§ 93.32 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.
   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends
sooner than the date given on the permit, the permittee shall notify the
Director of the accurate information as soon as this information is known.
§ 93.33 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Substantial breach. The city reserves its right, as provided herein,
to revoke any right-of-way permit, without a fee refund if there is a
substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule
or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial breach by
the permittee shall include, but shall not be limited, to the following:
      (1)   The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
      (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-
of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit
upon the city or its citizens;
      (3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a
right-of-way permit;
      (4)   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner; unless a
permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to
reasons beyond the permittees control; or
      (5)   The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not
conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to § 93.30.
   (B)   Written notice of breach. If the city determines that the permittee
has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute,
ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit the city shall make
a written demand upon the permittee to remedy that violation. The demand shall
state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit. A
substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city, at its discretion, to
place additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate and remedy the
breach.
   (C)   Response to notice of breach.  Within 24 hours of receiving
notification of the breach, the permittee shall provide the city with a plan,
acceptable to the city, that will cure the breach. The permittee’s failure to
so contact the city, or the permittee’s failure to submit an acceptable plan,
or the permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be
cause for immediate revocation of the permit.
   (D)   Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee
shall also reimburse the city
for the city’s reasonable costs, including restoration costs and the costs of
collection and reasonable
attorneys’ fees incurred in connection with the revocation.
§ 93.34 MAPPING DATA; INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   Each permittee shall provide mapping information required by the city in
accordance with Minnesota Rules parts 7819.4000 and 7819.4100, as it may be
amended from time to time.
§ 93.35 LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   Compliance required. Placement, location, and relocation of facilities
must comply with applicable laws, and with Minnesota Rules parts 7819.3100,
7819.5000 and 7819.5100, as they may be amended from time to time, to the
extent the rules do not limit authority otherwise available to cities.
   (B)   Corridors. The city may assign specific corridors within the right-of-
way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of
facilities that is or, pursuant to current technology, the city expects will
someday be located within the right-of-way. All excavation, obstruction, or
other permits issued by the city involving the installation or replacement of
facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue.
   (C)   Limitation of space.  To protect the health, safety, and welfare or
when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use, the Director
shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional
facilities within the right-of-way. In making those decisions, the Director
shall strive to the extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential
users of the right-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of
the public interest, the public’s needs for the particular utility service, the
condition of the right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential
utilities, the protection of existing facilities in the right-of-way, and
future city plans for public improvements and development projects which have
been determined to be in the public interest.
§ 93.36 DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES.
   When the city does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to
maintain, support, or move facilities to protect it, the Director shall notify
the local representative as early as is reasonably possible and placed as
required. The costs associated therewith will be billed to that registrant and
must be paid within 30 days from the date of billing. Each facility owner shall
be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the right-of-way
which it or its facilities damages. Each facility owner shall be responsible
for the cost of repairing any damage to the facilities of another registrant
caused during the city’s response to an emergency occasioned by that owner’s
facilities.
§ 93.37 RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.
   If the city vacates a right-of-way which contains the facilities of a
registrant, the registrant’s rights in the vacated right-of-way are governed by
Minnesota Rules part 7819.3200, as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 93.38 INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.
   By applying for and accepting a permit under this chapter, a permittee
agrees to defend and indemnify the city in accordance with the provisions of
Minnesota Rules part 7819.1250, as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 93.39 ABANDONED FACILITIES; REMOVAL OF ABANDONED FACILITIES.
   Any person who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-way shall remove
them from that right-of- way if required in conjunction with other right-of-way
repair, excavation, or construction, unless this requirement is waived by the
Director.
§ 93.40 APPEAL.
   A right-of-way user that has been denied registration; has been denied a
permit; has had permit revoked; or believes that the fees imposed are invalid,
may have the denial, revocation, or fee imposition reviewed, upon written
request, by the City Council. The City Council shall act on a timely written
request at its next regularly scheduled meeting. A decision by the City Council
affirming the denial, revocation, or fee as imposition will be in writing and
supported by written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision.
§ 93.41 RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS.
   A permittees or registrants rights are subject to the regulatory and police
powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to protect
the health, safety and welfare of the public.
CHAPTER 94: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
Use of City Park and City Pool
   
94.01   City Park; hours of operation
   
94.02   Municipal Swimming Pool
USE OF CITY PARK AND CITY POOL
§ 94.01 CITY PARK; HOURS OF OPERATION.
   The area commonly known as the Preston City Park shall be closed to the
public between the hours of 12 midnight to 6 a.m. each and every day. It shall
be unlawful for any person or persons to be in the park during the hours it is
closed.
(Ord. 155, passed 8-12-1974)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.02 MUNICIPAL SWIMMING POOL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to go into the Preston
Municipal Swimming Pool or the swimming pool enclosure during such times as it
is not open for public use. The hours when the swimming pool is open for public
use shall be conspicuously posted at the site of the pool.
(Ord. 155, passed 8-12-1974)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 95: TREES
Section
   
95.01   Purpose
   
95.02   Scope
   
95.03   Planting of trees within streets or easements
   
95.04   Maintenance and trimming
   
95.05   Removal of trees
   
95.06   Sale of trees by landowner
§ 95.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish uniform rules and regulations
for the maintenance, planting and removal of trees within streets, street
easements and utility easements within the city.
(Ord. 219, passed 3-6-1995)
§ 95.02 SCOPE. 
   Sections 95.03 through 95.06 of this chapter shall apply only to trees to be
planted or which exist within streets, street easements or utility easements
within the city; all references to trees in those sections shall refer only to
trees planted, to be planted, or existing within the streets, street easements
or utility easements. Trees to be planted or which exist on boulevards located
within streets, street easements or utility easements are specifically covered
by this chapter.
(Ord. 219, passed 3-6-1995)
§ 95.03 PLANTING OF TREES WITHIN STREETS OR EASEMENTS. 
   The city shall bear all of the cost of the planting of trees. No trees shall
be planted by the city without the consent of the property owner or owners
whereon the trees will be planted. Where the city assumes the responsibility
for costs and where the involved landowner consents, the city shall have the
exclusive control of the type of trees to be planted, when they are planted and
the manner in which they are planted. No trees shall be planted by any person
or entity in any utility easement, or in a location where they may interfere
with overhead or underground utility lines or pipes, unless allowed by specific
permit from the city. The city may remove any trees planted in violation of
this section, and the cost of removal shall be charged to the landowner on
whose property the tree or trees were planted.
Additionally, any utility company permitted to conduct business with the city
shall have the right to remove any trees within a utility easement if, in the
judgment of the City Tree Inspector, the tree or trees may interfere with or
hamper the function of overhead or underground utilities.
(Ord. 219, passed 3-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.04 MAINTENANCE AND TRIMMING.
   The cost of maintenance, including the trimming of trees, shall be shared
equally by the city and the landowner involved. The City Tree Inspector shall
have the sole and exclusive authority to determine the manner and extent of the
maintenance and trimming of trees. The City Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer
shall be notified at least five days in advance by any person intending to trim
trees which exist on any boulevard. The city shall have no responsibility to
pay any of the cost of maintenance unless the maintenance, including trimming,
has been approved in advance by the City Tree Inspector. All maintenance and
trimming shall conform to standards made available by the Minnesota Department
of Forestry.
(Ord. 219, passed 3-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.05 REMOVAL OF TREES.
   (A)   The city shall be responsible for the total cost of the removal of
trees; but no trees shall be removed without the prior written consent of the
City Tree Inspector. The city shall have no responsibility for costs in the
event trees are removed by any person or entity without advance written consent
of the City Tree Inspector.
   (B)   An owner of real property within the city shall promptly remove any
dead or diseased trees and any tree or trees that are hazardous to the public
that exist on his or her property. In any event, a property owner shall remove
any such tree or trees within 20 days after receipt of a notice from the City
Tree Inspector. If the property owner fails to remove the tree or trees as
required by the notice, the city shall have the right to remove the tree or
trees, and to assess the cost of removal against the real property whereon the
tree or trees exist. The costs of removal shall then be payable with and in
addition to the property owner’s regular real estate taxes. In the case of dead
or diseased trees, removal of the tree(s) includes removal and debarking of the
stump or stumps to the ground line, in order to eliminate all possibilities of
beetle habitation or spore formation. M.S. § 18.023, Subdivision 2, and
Minnesota Rules, Parts 1505.0210, 1505.0240 and 1505.0340, as they may be
amended from time to time, shall be and hereby are incorporated herein by
reference and made a part hereof.
(Ord. 219, passed 3-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.06 SALE OF TREES BY LANDOWNER.
   Upon prior written consent of the City Tree Inspector, any landowner may
remove and sell trees at his or her own exclusive expense; in such cases the
city shall have no responsibility for the cost of removal or sale of the tree
or trees involved.
(Ord. 219, passed 3-6-1995)
CHAPTER 96: FAIR HOUSING STANDARDS
Section
   
96.01   Declaration of policy
   
96.02   Prohibited acts regarding housing
   
96.03   Enforcement
   
96.04   Statute of limitations
   
96.05   Civil enforcement procedures
   
96.06   Violations
§ 96.01 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   Discrimination with regard to housing on the basis of race, sex, creed,
religion, marital status, and disability adversely affects the health, welfare,
peace, and safety of the community. Persons subject to such discrimination
suffer depressed living conditions, and create conditions which endanger the
public peace and order. The public policy of the city is declared to be to
foster equal opportunity for all to obtain decent, safe and sanitary housing
without regard to their race, creed, color, national origin, marital status,
disability status or sex, and strictly in accord with their individual merits
as human beings. It is also the policy of the city to protect all persons from
all unfounded charges of discrimination.
(Ord. 189, passed 9-12-1988)
§ 96.02 PROHIBITED ACTS REGARDING HOUSING.
   It is an unlawful discriminatory practice and unlawful to do the following.
   (A)   For any person to discriminate on grounds of race, creed, religion,
color, sex, marital status, status with regard to public assistance, national
origin, age or disability, in the sale, lease, or rental of any housing unit or
units.
   (B)   For any broker, salesman or other person acting in behalf of another
to so discriminate in the sale, lease, or rental of any housing unit or units
belonging to any other person.
   (C)   For any person engaged in the business of financing the purchase,
rehabilitation, remodeling or repair of housing units or in the business of
selling insurance with respect to housing units to refuse to provide financing
or insurance, or to discriminate with regard to the terms or conditions thereof
by reason of the race, color, sex, religion, creed, national origin, marital
status, status with regard to public assistance, age or disability of the
applicant, or because of the location of the unit or units in areas of the city
occupied by persons of a particular race, color, sex, religion, creed, national
origin, marital status, status with regard to public assistance, age or
disability; or to discriminate by treating differently any person or group of
persons who desire to purchase, lease, acquire, construct, rehabilitate, repair
or maintain real property in a specific urban area because of social, economic
or environmental conditions of the area in the granting, withholding,
extending, modifying or renewing, or in the rates, terms, conditions, or
privileges of any financial assistance, or in the extension of services in
connection therewith. The bona fide programs of federal, state or local
governmental units or agencies, however structured or authorized to upgrade or
improve in any manner a specific urban area, shall not be deemed to be a
violation of this section.
   (D)   For any person, having sold, leased, or rented a housing unit or units
to any person, to discriminate with respect to facilities, services, or
privileges of occupancy by reason of race, color, sex, creed, religion,
national origin, age or disability, marital status or status with regard to
public assistance.
   (E)   For any person to make or publish any statement evidencing an intent
to discriminate, on grounds of race, creed, religion, color, sex, national
origin or ancestry, marital status, status with regard to public assistance,
age or disability, in the sale, lease, or rental of a housing unit or units.
   (F)   For any person to make any inquiry regarding race, color, sex, creed,
religion, national origin, marital status, status with regard to public
assistance, age or disability, or to keep any record or use any form of
application, designed to elicit that information, in connection with the sale,
lease, rental, or financing of a housing unit or units.
   (G)   For any person, for the purpose of inducing a real estate transaction
from which he or she may benefit financially, to do the following.
      (1)   To represent that a change has occurred or will or may occur in the
composition of the block, neighborhood, or area in which the property is
located, in respect to the race, color, sex, creed, religion, national origin,
marital status, status with regard to public assistance, age or disability of
those living there.
      (2)   To represent that this change will or may result in the lowering of
property values, an increase in crime, or anti-social behavior, or a decline in
the quality of schools in the block, neighborhood, or area concerned.
   (H)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any person or
group of persons selling, renting or leasing property to modify the property in
any way, or exercise a higher degree of care for a person having a disability
than for a person who does not have a disability; nor shall this section be
construed to relieve any person or persons, regardless of any disability, in a
written lease, rental agreement, or contract or purchase or sale, or to forbid
distinctions based on the inability to fulfill the terms and conditions,
including financial obligations of any lease, agreement or contract.
   (I)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following.
      (1)   The rental of a portion of a dwelling containing accommodations for
two families, one of which is occupied by the owner.
      (2)   The rental by an owner or occupier of a one-family accommodation in
which he or she resides, of a room or rooms in the accommodation to another
person or persons, if the discrimination is by sex, marital status, status with
regard to public assistance or disability. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to require any person or group of persons selling, renting or leasing
property to modify the property in any way, or exercise a higher degree of care
for a person having a disability than for a person who does not have a
disability; nor shall this section be construed to relieve any person or
persons of any obligations generally imposed on all persons, regardless of any
disability, in a written lease, rental agreement, or contract of purchase or
sale, or to forbid distinctions based on the inability to fulfill the terms and
conditions, including financial obligations, of the lease, agreement or
contract.
(Ord. 189, passed 9-12-1988)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.03 ENFORCEMENT. 
   The city is designated as the enforcement agency for this chapter and shall
have the power to receive, hear and determine complaints as provided herein.
The city shall promptly investigate, upon complaint or upon its own motion, any
violations of this chapter. If, after investigation, it shall have reason to
believe a violation has occurred, it may refer the matter to the City Attorney
for criminal prosecution, initiate civil enforcement procedures as herein
provided, or enter into a settlement agreement which, when approved by the
city, shall have the same force as a city order.
(Ord. 189, passed 9-12-1988)
§ 96.04 STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS. 
   No action may be brought for civil enforcement or criminal prosecution
unless the charge of alleged discriminatory practice was filed with the city
within 180 days from the occurrence of the practice.
(Ord. 189, passed 9-12-1988)
§ 96.05 CIVIL ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES. 
   Civil enforcement procedures shall be prosecuted by the city before the
Council in the following manner.
   (A)   The city shall serve upon respondent by certified mail a complaint,
signed by it, which shall set forth a clear and concise statement of the facts
constituting the violation, set a time and place for hearing, and advise the
respondent of his or her right to file an answer, to appear in person or by an
attorney, and to examine and cross-examine witnesses.
   (B)   The hearing shall not be less than 20 days after service of the
complaint. At any time prior to the hearing, the respondent may file an answer.
Facts not denied by the answer shall be deemed admitted. If the answer sets out
new matter, it shall be deemed denied by the city.
   (C)   The complaint or answer may be amended at any given time prior to the
hearing with the consent of the opposing party.
   (D)   Hearings shall be before the Council.
   (E)   The city may obtain subpoenas from the District Court to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of documents at any hearing.
   (F)   If, after hearing, the panel shall conclude that a violation has
occurred, it shall prepare an order which may contain any provision deemed
desirable to do justice to the complainant or to prevent further violations. It
may include provisions which require the respondent to rent, sell, or lease
particular housing to the complainant or to do any other thing as may be just.
The panel’s findings of fact and order shall be served on the respondent and
each member of the Council by mail, and shall become the findings and order of
the city unless, within ten days after mailing of the findings and order, the
city shall revoke or amend the order, but any order of a panel may be modified
by the city at any time.
(Ord. 189, passed 9-12-1988)
§ 96.06 VIOLATIONS.
   Every person violates a provision of this chapter when he or she performs an
act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when failure is
thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or performs an act prohibited or
declared unlawful, or fails to act when failure is prohibited or declared
unlawful by a code adopted by reference by this chapter, and upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor, except as otherwise stated in
specific provisions hereof.
(Ord. 189, passed 9-12-1988)
Penalty, see § 10.99
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
   
110.   AMUSEMENTS
   
111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
   
112.   (RESERVED)
   
113.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
   
114.   ADULT USES AND SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
CHAPTER 110: AMUSEMENTS
Section
Bingo
   
110.01   Purpose
   
110.02   Definitions
   
110.03   License required
Large Exhibitions
   
110.15   Intent
   
110.16   Definitions
   
110.17   License required
   
110.18   Conditions for issuance of license
   
110.19   Application
   
110.20   Issuance of license
   
110.21   License revocation
   
110.22   Enforcement
BINGO
§ 110.01 PURPOSE. 
   The purpose of this subchapter is to closely regulate and control the
conduct of the game of bingo and to prohibit commercialization of bingo.
(Ord. 160, passed 8-2-1976)
§ 110.02 DEFINITIONS. 
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply,
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTIVE MEMBER. A member of the organization requesting a license, whose dues
are paid for the current membership period and who has been a member for at
least six months.
   BINGO. A game in which each player has a card or board for which a
consideration has been paid, containing five horizontal rows of spaces, with
each row except the central one containing five figures. The central row has
four figures with the word FREE marked in the center space thereof. A player
wins a game of bingo by completing any pre-announced combination of spaces, or
in the absence of a pre- announcement of a combination of spaces, any
combination of five spaces in a row, either vertical, horizontal, or diagonal.
   BINGO OCCASION. A single gathering or session at which a series of one or
more successive bingo games is played.
   ELIGIBLE ORGANIZATION. Any fraternal, religious, veterans, or other
nonprofit organization, which has been in existence for at least three years
and has at least 30 active members.
   PROFIT. The gross receipts collected from one or more bingo occasions, less
reasonable sums necessarily and actually expended for bingo supplies and
equipment, prizes, rent and utilities used during the bingo occasions, bingo
license fees, and compensation to persons lawfully hired to conduct or assist
in conducting a bingo occasion.
(Ord. 160, passed 8-2-1976)
§ 110.03 LICENSE REQUIRED. 
   (A)   No bingo occasion shall be conducted except by an eligible
organization which has secured a license for that purpose, as provided in this
subchapter.
   (B)   A license shall be valid for 12 calendar months from the date of
issuance.
   (C)   The annual license fee shall be $50 per year or $10 per session.
(Ord. 160, passed 8-2-1976)
Penalty, see § 10.99
LARGE EXHIBITIONS
§ 110.15 INTENT.
   It is the intent of this Council that all sections and provisions of this
subchapter have an independent existence; and, should any section or provision
be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction,
it is the intent of the Council that any section or provision so declared shall
be severable from and shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the
subchapter.
(Ord. 148, passed 10-17-1972)
§ 110.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply,
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EXHIBITION. A company of persons gathered together at any location at any
single time for any purpose.
   PERSON. Any individual natural human being, partnership, corporation, firm,
company, association, society, or group.
(Ord. 148, passed 10-17-1972)
§ 110.17 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall permit, maintain, promote, conduct, advertise, act as
entrepreneur, undertake, organizes manages or sell or give tickets to an
exhibition for an assemblage of 1,000 or more people, which continues or can be
reasonably expected to continue for eight or more consecutive hours, whether on
public or private property, unless a license to hold the exhibition has first
been issued by the Board, application for which must be made at least 30 days
in advance of the exhibition. When applying for an exhibition license, the
sponsor must submit certified copies of other necessary state licenses and/or
permits to support his or her application. A license to hold an exhibition
issued to one person shall permit any person to engage in any lawful activity
in connection with the holding of the licensed exhibition.
   (B)   A separate license shall be required for each day and each location in
which 1,000 people shall assemble for the exhibition or can reasonably be
anticipated to assemble. The fee for each license shall be $100.
   (C)   A license shall permit the exhibition to only the maximum number of
people stated in the license. The licensee shall not sell tickets to nor permit
to exhibit at the licensed location more than the maximum permissible number of
people.
   (D)   The license shall not permit the sound of the exhibition to carry
unreasonably beyond the enclosed boundaries of the location of the exhibition.
   (E)   This subchapter shall not apply to any regularly established,
permanent place of worship, stadium, athletic field, arena, auditorium,
coliseum, or other similar permanently established place of assembly for
exhibitions, which do not exceed by more than 250 people, the maximum seating
capacity of the structure where the exhibition is held.
   (F)   This subchapter shall not apply to government sponsored fairs held on
regularly established fairgrounds, nor to exhibitions required to be licensed
by other state laws and regulations of Fillmore County.
(Ord. 148, passed 10-17-1972)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.18 CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   Before a license may be issued, the applicant shall first do the following.
   (A)   Determine the maximum number of people which will be assembled or
admitted to the location of the exhibition, provided that the maximum number
shall not exceed the maximum number which can reasonably assemble at the
location of the exhibition, in consideration of the nature of the exhibition,
and provided that where the exhibition is to continue overnight, the maximum
number shall not be more than is allowed to sleep within the boundaries of the
location of the exhibition by the zoning or health ordinances of the political
subdivision, or regulations of the State Board of Health.
   (B)   At the time the application is submitted, the sponsor will provide a
plan, including the provisions herein, for operation of the assembly. Ten days
prior to the start of the exhibition, local authorities will inspect to
determine whether the following requirements of these provisions have been met.
      (1)   A fence or barrier sufficient to prevent ingress/exit except at
established gates, completely enclosing the proposed location, of sufficient
height and strength to prevent people in excess of the maximum permissible
number from gaining access to the exhibition grounds, which shall have
sufficient entrances and exits to allow easy movement into and out of the
exhibition grounds, and provide traffic control onto established public road
systems.
      (2)   Potable water, meeting all federal and state requirements for
sanitary quality, sufficient to provide drinking water for the maximum number
of people to be assembled, at the rate of at least one gallon per person per
day, and where the exhibition is to continue for more than 12 hours, water for
bathing at the rate of at least ten gallons per person per day, or portion of a
day.
      (3)   Separate enclosed toilets for males and females, meeting all state
and local specifications, conveniently located throughout the grounds,
sufficient to provide facilities for the maximum number of people to be
assembled, in accordance with the State Board of Health regulations and
standards.
      (4)   A sanitary method of disposing of solid waste, in compliance with
state and local laws and regulations, sufficient to dispose of the solid waste
production of the maximum number of people to be assembled, at the rate of at
least 2.5 pounds of solid waste per person per day, together with a plan for
holding and collecting all waste at least once each day of the assembly, and
sufficient trash containers and personnel to perform tasks.
      (5)   Physicians and nurses licensed to practice in Minnesota, sufficient
to provide the average medical care enjoyed by residents of Minnesota for the
maximum number of people to be assembled, at the rate of at least one physician
and nurse for every 5,000 people, together with an enclosed covered structure
where treatment may be rendered, containing separately enclosed treatment rooms
for each physician, and at least two emergency ambulances with attendants for
each 5,000 people.
      (6)   If the exhibition is to continue during hours of darkness,
illumination sufficient to light the entire area of the exhibition at the rate
of at least five foot-candles, but not to shine unreasonably beyond the
boundaries of the enclosed location of the exhibition.
      (7)   A free parking area inside of the exhibition grounds sufficient to
provide parking space for the maximum number of people to be assembled, at the
rate of at least one parking space for every four persons.
      (8)   Telephones connected to outside lines, sufficient to provide
service to the maximum number of people to be assembled, at the rate of at
least one separate line and receiver for each 1,000 persons.
      (9)   If the exhibition is to continue overnight, camping facilities in
compliance with all state and local requirements as set forth in Minnesota
Statutes and regulations and resolutions of this political subdivision,
sufficient to provide camping accommodations for the maximum number of people
to be assembled.
      (10)   Security and traffic and narcotics control plan which will meet
the requirements of local authorities and the Minnesota Department of Public
Safety; regularly employed off-duty Minnesota law enforcement officers or
protective agents licensed in Minnesota, sufficient to provide adequate
security for the maximum number of people to be assembled; at least one
security guard for every 100 people will be provided for the first 1,000 people
to assemble; for exhibitions of more than 1,000 people, additional security
guards will be provided at the rate of one for each 250 people or major
fraction thereof.
      (11)   Fire protection shall be provided by the sponsor, which may
include but not be limited to fire alarms, extinguishing devices, fire lanes,
and shall be sufficient to meet all applicable state laws and local regulations
which are in effect, or may be set forth by the political subdivision
concerned; and sufficient emergency personnel to efficiently operate the
required equipment will be provided by the sponsor.
      (12)   All reasonably necessary precautions to insure that the sound of
the exhibition will not carry unreasonably beyond the enclosed boundaries of
the location of the exhibition.
      (13)   Administrative control center with telephones where local
authority can contact the sponsors and law enforcement personnel inside the
exhibition area.
      (14)   A bond, filed with the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, either
in cash or underwritten by a surety company licensed to do business in
Minnesota, in the minimum amount of $50,000, which shall indemnify and hold
harmless this political subdivision or any of its agents, officer, servants,
and employees from any liability or causes of action which might arise by
reason of granting this license, payment of employees, or services rendered by
the granting this license, payment of employees, or services rendered by the
granting authority, and from any cost incurred in cleaning up any waste
material produced or left by the assembly, and to insure payment by the sponsor
of all accounts, debts, and bills incurred by the sponsor in this city.
(Ord. 148, passed 10-17-1972)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.19 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application for a license to hold an actual or anticipated exhibition
to an assembly of 1,000 persons shall be made in writing to the governing body
of this political subdivision at least 30 days in advance of the exhibition.
   (B)   The application shall contain a statement made upon oath or
affirmation that the statements contained therein are true and correct to the
best knowledge of the applicant, and shall be signed and sworn to or affirmed
by the individual making application in the case of a corporation, by all
partners in the case of a partnership, or by all officers of an unincorporated
association society or group, or, if there are no officers, by all members of
the association, society, or group.
   (C)   The application shall contain and disclose the following information.
      (1)   The name, date of birth, fingerprints, residence, and mailing
address of all persons required to sign the application by division (B) of this
section, and in the case of a corporation, a certified copy of the articles of
incorporation, together with the name, date of birth, residence, and mailing
address of each person holding 10% or more of the stock of the corporation;
      (2)   The address and legal description of all property upon which the
exhibition is to be held, together with the name, residence, and mailing
address of the record owner(s) of all property.
      (3)   Proof of ownership of all property upon which the exhibition is to
be held, or a statement made upon oath or affirmation by the record owner(s) of
all property, that the applicant has permission to use the property for an
assembly of 1,000 or more persons.
      (4)   The nature or purpose of the exhibition.
      (5)   The total number of days and/or hours during which the exhibition
is to last.
      (6)   The maximum number of persons which the applicant shall permit to
assemble at the exhibition at any time, not to exceed the maximum number which
can reasonably assemble at the location
of the exhibition, in consideration of the nature of the exhibition, or the
maximum number of persons allowed to sleep within the boundaries of the
location of the exhibition by the zoning regulations of the political
subdivision if the exhibition is to continue overnight.
      (7)   The maximum number of tickets to be sold, if any.
      (8)   The plans of the applicant to limit the maximum number of people
permitted to assemble.
      (9)   The plans for fencing the location of the exhibition and the gates
contained in the fence.
      (10)   The plans for supplying potable water including the source, amount
available, and location of outlets.
      (11)   The plans for providing toilet and lavatory facilities, including
the source, number, and location, type, and means of disposing of waste
deposited.
      (12)   The plans for holding, collection, and disposing of solid waste
material.
      (13)   The plans to provide for medical facilities, including the
location and construction of a medical structure, the names and addresses and
hours of availability of physicians and nurses, and provisions for emergency
ambulance service.
      (14)   The plans, if any, to illuminate the location of the assembly,
including the source and amount of power and the location of lights.
      (15)   The plans for parking vehicles, including size and location of
lots, points of highway access and interior roads including routes between
highway access and parking lots.
      (16)   The plans for telephones service including the source, number and
location of telephones.
      (17)   The plans for camping facilities, if any, including facilities
available and their location.
      (18)   The plans for security, including the number of guards, their
deployment, and their names, addresses, credentials and hours of availability.
      (19)   The plans for fire protection as may be required by § 110.18(B).
      (20)   The plans for sound control and sound amplification, if any,
including number, location, and power of amplifiers and speakers.
      (21)   The plans for food concessions and concessioners who will be
allowed to operate on the grounds, including the names and addresses of all
concessioners and their license or permit numbers.
      (22)   The plans for area traffic control for egress from and exit onto
public roads or highways.
   (D)   The application shall include the bond required in § 110.18(B)(14),
and the license fee.
(Ord. 148, passed 10-17-1972)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.20 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   The application for a license shall be processed within 20 days of receipt,
and shall be issued if all conditions are complied with.
(Ord. 148, passed 10-17-1972)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.21 LICENSE REVOCATION.
   The license may be revoked by the governing body of this political
subdivision at any time, if any of the conditions necessary for the issuing of
or contained in the license are not complied with, or if any condition
previously met ceases to be complied with.
(Ord. 148, passed 10-17-1972)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.22 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter may be enforced by injunction in any
court of competent jurisdiction.
   (B)   The holding of an exhibition in violation of any provision or
condition contained in this subchapter shall be deemed a public nuisance and
may be abated as such.
   (C)   Any person who violates § 110.17(A), or who violates any condition
upon which he or she is granted a license, will forfeit an appropriate amount
from the bond required in § 110.18(B)(14). No portion of the bond will be
released to the sponsors until all provisions of the license agreement have
been met.
   (D)   Any person, partnership, association, or corporation who conducts or
takes part in any itinerant show, carnival, circus, endurance contest, or
exhibition not licensed, as provided in this subchapter, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 148, passed 10-17-1972)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
111.01   Adoption of state law by reference
   
111.02   City may be more restrictive than state law
   
111.03   Definitions
   
111.04   Nudity on the premises of licensed establishments prohibited
   
111.05   Consumption in public places
Licensing
   
111.20   Number of licenses which may be issued
   
111.21   Term and expiration of licenses
   
111.22   Kinds of liquor licenses
   
111.23   License fees; pro rata
   
111.24   Council discretion to grant or deny a license
   
111.25   Application for license
   
111.26   Description of premises
   
111.27   Applications for renewal
   
111.28   Transfer of license
   
111.29   Investigation
   
111.30   Hearing and issuance
   
111.31   Restrictions on issuance
   
111.32   Conditions of license
   
111.33   Hours and days of sale
   
111.34   Minors on premises
   
111.35   Restrictions on purchase and consumption
   
111.36   Suspension and revocation
Municipal Liquor Stores
   
111.50   Application of this subchapter
   
111.51   Existing municipal stores continued
   
111.52   Location
   
111.53   Operation
   
111.54   Proof of financial responsibility
   
111.55   Issuance of other licenses
 
   
111.99   Penalties
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.01 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.
   The provisions of M.S. Chapter 340A, as they may be amended from time to
time, with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation,
restrictions on consumption, provisions relating to sales, hours of sale, and
all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and consumption
of intoxicating liquor and 3.2% malt liquor are hereby adopted by reference and
are made a part of this chapter as if set out in full. It is the intention of
the City Council that all future amendments to M.S. Chapter 340A as it may be
amended from time to time are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if
they had been in existence at the time this chapter is adopted.
§ 111.02 CITY MAY BE MORE RESTRICTIVE THAN STATE LAW.
   The Council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. § 340A.509, as it may be
amended from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in this chapter,
additional restrictions on the sale and possession of alcoholic beverages
within its limits beyond those contained in M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be
amended from time to time.
§ 111.03 DEFINITIONS.
   In addition to the definitions contained in M.S. § 340A.101, as it may be
amended from time to time, the following terms are defined for purposes of this
chapter:
   LIQUOR. As used in this chapter, without modification by the words
“intoxicating” or “3.2% malt,” includes both intoxicating liquor and 3.2% malt
liquor.
   RESTAURANT. An eating facility, other than a hotel, under the control of a
single proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the
premises, where full waitress/waiter table service is provided, where a
customer orders food from printed menus and where the main food course is
served and consumed while seated at a single location. To be a “restaurant” as
defined by this section, an establishment shall have a license from the state
as required by M.S. § 157.16, as it may be amended
from time to time, and meet the definition of either a “small establishment,”
“medium establishment” or “large establishment” as defined in M.S. § 157.16,
Subdivision 3d, as it may be amended from time to time. An establishment which
serves prepackaged food that receives heat treatment and is served in the
package or frozen pizza that is heated and served, shall not be considered to
be a restaurant for purposes of this chapter unless it meets the definitions of
“small establishment”, “medium establishment” or “large establishment.”
§ 111.04 NUDITY ON THE PREMISES OF LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The City Council finds that it is in the best interests of the public
health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city that nudity is
prohibited as provided in this section on the premises of any establishment
licensed under this chapter. This is to protect and assist the owners,
operators, and employees of the establishment, as well as patrons and the
public in general, from harm stemming from the physical immediacy and
combination of alcohol, nudity, and sex. The Council especially intends to
prevent any subliminal endorsement of sexual harassment or activities likely to
lead to the possibility of various criminal conduct, including prostitution,
sexual assault, and disorderly conduct. The Council also finds that the
prohibition of nudity on the premises of any establishment licensed under this
chapter, as set forth in this section, reflects the prevailing community
standards of the city.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person or
persons on the licensed premises when the person does not have his or her
buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a non- transparent material.
It is unlawful for any person to be on the licensed premises when the person
does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a
non-transparent material.
   (C)   A violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable as provided by
law, and is justification for revocation or suspension of any liquor, wine, or
3.2% malt liquor license or the imposition of a civil penalty under the
provisions of § 111.99(B).
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.05 CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall consume intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor in a public
park, on any public street, sidewalk, parking lot or alley, or in any public
place other than on the premises of an establishment licensed under this
chapter, in a municipal liquor dispensary if one exists in the city, or where
the consumption and display of liquor is lawfully permitted.
Penalty, see § 111.99
LICENSING
§ 111.20 NUMBER OF LICENSES WHICH MAY BE ISSUED.
   State law establishes the number of liquor licenses that a city may issue.
However, the number of licenses which may be granted under this chapter is
limited to the number of license which were issued as of the effective date of
this chapter, even if a larger number of licenses are authorized by law or
election. The Council in its sound discretion may provide by ordinance that a
larger number of licenses may be issued up to the number of licenses authorized
by M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time. If a larger
number of licenses in a particular category has been authorized by a referendum
held under the provisions of M.S. § 340A.413, Subdivision 3, as it may be
amended from time to time, but not all of them have been issued, the larger
number of licenses is no longer in effect until the Council by ordinance
determines that any or all of the licenses may be issued. The Council is not
required to issue the full number of licenses that it has available.
§ 111.21 TERM AND EXPIRATION OF LICENSES.
   Each license shall be issued for a maximum period of one year. All licenses,
except temporary licenses, shall expire on December 31 of each year unless
another date is provided by ordinance. All licenses shall expire on the same
date. Temporary licenses expire according to their terms. Consumption and
display permits issued by the Commissioner of Public Safety, and the
accompanying city consent to the permit, shall expire on March 31 of each year.
§ 111.22 KINDS OF LIQUOR LICENSES.
   The Council of a city that does not have a municipal liquor store is
authorized to issue the following licenses and permits, up to the number
specified in § 111.20.
   (A)   On-sale 3.2% malt liquor licenses, which may be issued only to
restaurants, hotels, clubs, bowling centers, and establishments used
exclusively for the sale of 3.2% malt liquor with the incidental sale of
tobacco and soft drinks.
   (B)   Off-sale 3.2% malt liquor license.
   (C)   Temporary 3.2% malt liquor licenses which may be issued only to a
club, charitable, religious, or nonprofit organization.
   (D)   Off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued only to
exclusive liquor stores or drug stores that have an off-sale license which was
first issued on or before May 1, 1994. The fee for an off-
sale intoxicating liquor license established by the Council under § 111.23
shall not exceed $100 or a greater amount which may be permitted by M.S. §
340A.408, Subdivision 3, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (E)   On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued to the
following establishments as defined by M.S. § 340A.101, as it may be amended
from time to time, and this chapter: hotels, restaurants, bowling centers,
clubs or congressionally chartered veterans organizations, and exclusive liquor
stores. Club licenses may be issued only with the approval of the Commissioner
of Public Safety. The fee for club licenses established by the Council under §
111.23 shall not exceed the amounts provided for in M.S. § 340A.408,
Subdivision 2b, as it may be amended from time to time. The Council may in its
sound discretion authorize a retail on-sale licensee to dispense intoxicating
liquor off the licensed premises at a community festival held within the city
under the provisions of M.S. § 340A.404, Subdivision 4b, as it may be amended
from time to time. The Council may in its sound discretion authorize a retail
on-sale licensee to dispense intoxicating liquor off the licensed premises at
any convention, banquet, conference, meeting, or social affair conducted on the
premises of a sports, convention, or cultural facility owned by the city, under
the provisions of M.S. § 340A.404, Subdivision 4a, as it may be amended from
time to time; however, the licensee is prohibited from dispensing intoxicating
liquor to any person attending or participating in an amateur athletic event
being held on the premises.
   (F)   Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, only after authorization
to do so by voter approval at a general or special election as provided by M.S.
§ 340A.504, Subdivision 3, as it may be amended from time to time. Sunday on-
sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued only to a restaurant as defined
in § 111.03, club, bowling center, or hotel which has a seating capacity of at
least 30 persons, which holds an on-sale intoxicating liquor license, and which
serves liquor only in conjunction with the service of food. The maximum fee for
this license, which shall be established by the Council under the provisions of
§ 111.23, shall not exceed $200, or the maximum amount provided by M.S. §
340A.504, Subdivision 3c, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (G)   Combination on-sale/off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses if the city
has a population less than 10,000.
   (H)   Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, with the approval of
the Commissioner of Public Safety, which may be issued only in connection with
a social event sponsored by a club, charitable, religious, or other nonprofit
corporation that has existed for at least three years. No license shall be for
longer than four consecutive days, and the city shall issue no more than 12
days worth of temporary licenses to any one organization in one calendar year.
   (I)   On-sale wine licenses, with the approval of the Commissioner of Public
Safety to: restaurants that have facilities for seating at least 25 guests at
one time and meet the criteria of M.S. § 340A.404, Subdivision 5, as it may be
amended from time to time, and which meet the definition of restaurant in §
111.03; and to licensed bed and breakfast facilities which meet the criteria in
M.S. § 340A.401, Subdivision 1, as it may be amended from time to time. The fee
for an on-sale wine license established by the Council under the provisions of
§ 111.23 shall not exceed one-half of the license fee charged for an on-sale
intoxicating liquor license. The holder of an on-sale wine license who also
holds an on-sale 3.2% malt liquor license is authorized to sell malt liquor
with a content over 3.2% (strong beer) without an additional license.
   (J)   One day consumption and display permits with the approval of the
Commissioner of Public Safety to a nonprofit organization in conjunction with a
social activity in the city sponsored by the organization.
   (K)   Approval of the issuance of a consumption and display permit by the
Commissioner of Public Safety. The maximum amount of the additional fee which
may be imposed by the Council on a person who has been issued a consumption and
display permit under the provisions of § 111.23 shall not exceed $300, or the
maximum amount permitted by M.S. § 340A.14, Subdivision 6, as it may be amended
from time to time. Consumption and display permits shall expire on March 31 of
each year.
§ 111.23 LICENSE FEES; PRO RATA.
   (A)   No license or other fee established by the city shall exceed any limit
established by M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, for a
liquor license.
   (B)   The Council may establish from time to time by resolution the fee for
any of the liquor licenses it is authorized to issue. The license fee may not
exceed the cost of issuing the license and other costs directly related to the
enforcement of the liquor laws and this chapter. No liquor license fee shall be
increased without providing mailed notice of a hearing on the proposed increase
to all affected licensees at least 30 days before the hearing.
   (C)   The fee for all licenses, except temporary licenses, granted after the
commencement of the license year shall be prorated on a quarterly basis.
   (D)   All license fees shall be paid in full at the time the application is
filed with the city. If the application is denied, the license fee shall be
returned to the applicant.
   (E)   A refund of a pro rata share of an annual license fee may occur only
if authorized by M.S. § 340A.408, Subdivision 5, as it may be amended from time
to time.
§ 111.24 COUNCIL DISCRETION TO GRANT OR DENY A LICENSE.
   The Council in its sound discretion may either grant or deny the application
for any license or for the transfer or renewal of any license. No applicant has
a right to a license under this chapter.
§ 111.25 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Form. Every application for a license issued under this chapter shall
be on a form provided by the city. Every application shall state the name of
the applicant, the applicant’s age, representations as to the applicant’s
character, with references as the Council may require, the type of license
applied for, the business in connection with which the proposed license will
operate and its location, a description of the premises, whether the applicant
is owner and operator of the business, how long the applicant has been in that
business at that place, and other information as the Council may require from
time to time. An application for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license shall
be in the form prescribed by the Commissioner of Public Safety and shall also
contain the information required in this section. The form shall be verified
and filed with the city. No person shall make a false statement in an
application.
   (B)   Financial responsibility. Prior to the issuance of any license under
this chapter, the applicant shall demonstrate proof of financial responsibility
as defined in M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time, with
regard to liability under M.S. § 340A.801, as it may be amended from time to
time. This proof will be filed with the city and the Commissioner of Public
Safety. Any liability insurance policy filed as proof of financial
responsibility under this section shall conform to M.S. § 340A.409, as it may
be amended from time to time. Operation of a business which is required to be
licensed by this chapter without having on file with the city at all times
effective proof of financial responsibility is a cause for revocation of the
license.
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.26 DESCRIPTION OF PREMISES.
   The application shall specifically describe the compact and contiguous
premises within which liquor may be dispensed and consumed. The description may
not include any parking lot or sidewalk.
§ 111.27 APPLICATIONS FOR RENEWAL.
   At least 90 days before a license issued under this chapter is to be
renewed, an application for renewal shall be filed with the city. The decision
whether or not to renew a license rests within the sound discretion of the
Council. No licensee has a right to have the license renewed.
§ 111.28 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   No license issued under this chapter may be transferred without the approval
of the Council. Any transfer of stock of a corporate licensee is deemed to be a
transfer of the license, and a transfer of stock without prior Council approval
is a ground for revocation of the license. An application to transfer a license
shall be treated the same as an application for a new license, and all of the
provisions of this code applying to applications for a license shall apply.
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.29 INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Preliminary background and financial investigation. On an initial
application for a license, on an application for transfer of a license and, in
the sound discretion of the Council that it is in the public interest to do so,
on an application for renewal of a license, the city shall conduct a
preliminary background and financial investigation of the applicant or it may
contract with the Commissioner of Public Safety for the investigation. The
applicant shall pay with the application an investigation fee of $500 which
shall be in addition to any license fee. If the cost of the preliminary
investigation is less than $500, the unused balance shall be returned to the
applicant. The results of the preliminary investigation shall be sent to the
Commissioner of Public Safety if the application is for an on-sale intoxicating
liquor license or an on-sale wine license.
   (B)   Comprehensive background and financial investigation. If the results
of a preliminary investigation warrant, in the sound discretion of the Council,
a comprehensive background and financial investigation, the Council may either
conduct the investigation itself or contract with the Commissioner of Public
Safety for the investigation. The investigation fee for this comprehensive
background and financial investigation to be paid by the applicant shall be
$500, less any amount paid for the initial investigation if the investigation
is to be conducted within the state, and $10,000, less any amount paid for the
initial investigation, if the investigation is required outside the state. The
unused balance of the fee shall be returned to the applicant whether or not the
application is denied. The fee shall be paid in advance of any investigation
and the amount actually expended on the investigation shall not be refundable
in the event the application is denied. The results of the comprehensive
investigation shall be sent to the Commissioner of Public Safety if the
application is for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license or an on-sale wine
license.
§ 111.30 HEARING AND ISSUANCE.
   The Council shall investigate all facts set out in the application and not
investigated in the preliminary or comprehensive background and financial
investigations. Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or
against the granting of the license. After the investigation and hearing, the
Council shall in its sound discretion grant or deny the application. No license
shall become effective until the proof of financial security has been approved
by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
§ 111.31 RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Each license shall be issued only to the applicant for the premises
described in the application.
   (B)   Not more than one license shall be directly or indirectly issued
within the city to any one person.
   (C)   No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any premises
on which taxes, assessments, utility charges, service charges, or other
financial claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid.
   (D)   No license shall be issued for any place or any business ineligible
for a license under state law.
   (E)   No license shall be issued to any person who is not a resident of the
state. If the applicant is a corporation, all of the shareholders shall be
residents of the state. The provisions of this division (E) shall not apply to
any license existing on the effective date of this chapter or to the renewal of
an existing license.
   (F)   No license shall be granted within 500 feet of any school. No license
shall be granted within 250 feet of any church. The distance is to be measured
from the closest side of the school or church to the closest side of the
structure on the premises within which liquor is to be sold. This section does
not preclude the licensee from renewing the license if a church moves closer to
the facility.
(Ord. 247, passed 5-2-2005)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.32 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   The failure of a licensee to meet any one of the conditions of the license
specified below shall result in a suspension of the license until the condition
is met.
   (A)   Within 90 days after employment, every person selling or serving
liquor in an establishment which has an “on-sale” license shall receive
training regarding the selling or serving of liquor to customers. The training
shall be provided by an organization approved by the Council. Proof of training
shall be provided by the licensee.
   (B)   Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of the place of business
and the conditions of sobriety and order in it. The act of any employee on the
licensed premises is deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the licensee
shall be liable to all penalties provided by this chapter and the law equally
with the employee.
   (C)   Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health officer, city
employee, or any other person designated by the Council to conduct compliance
checks and to otherwise enter, inspect, and search the premises of the licensee
during business hours and after business hours during the time when customers
remain on the premises without a warrant.
   (D)   No on-sale establishment shall display liquor to the public during
hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited.
   (E)   Compliance with financial responsibility requirements of state law and
of this chapter is a continuing condition of any license.
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.33 HOURS AND DAYS OF SALE.
   (A)   The hours of operation and days of sale shall be those set by M.S. §
340A.504, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   No person shall consume nor shall any on-sale licensee permit any
consumption of intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor in an on-sale licensed
premises more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.
   (C)   No on-sale licensee shall permit any glass, bottle, or other container
containing intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor to remain upon any table,
bar, stool, or other place where customers are served, more than 30 minutes
after the time when a sale can legally occur.
   (D)   No person, other than the licensee and any employee, shall remain on
the on-sale licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale
can legally occur.
   (E)   Any violation of any condition of this section may be grounds for
revocation or suspension of the license.
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.34 MINORS ON PREMISES.
   (A)   No person under the age of 18 years shall be employed in any rooms
constituting the place in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2% malt liquor are
sold at retail on sale, except that persons under the age of 18 may be employed
as musicians or to perform the duties of a bus person or dishwashing services
in places defined as a restaurant, hotel, motel or other multi-purpose building
serving food in rooms in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2% malt liquor are
sold at retail on sale.
   (B)   No person under the age of 21 years may enter a licensed establishment
except to work, consume meals on premises that qualify as a restaurant, or
attend social functions that are held in a portion of the premises where liquor
is not sold.
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.35 RESTRICTIONS ON PURCHASE AND CONSUMPTION.
   No person shall mix or prepare liquor for consumption in any public place of
business unless it has a license to sell on-sale, or a permit from the
Commissioner of Public Safety under the provisions of M.S. § 340A.414, as it
may be amended from time to time, which has been approved by the Council, and
no person shall consume liquor in any such place.
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.36 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Council shall either suspend for a period not to exceed 60 days or
revoke any liquor license upon finding that the licensee has failed to comply
with any applicable statute, regulation, or provision of this chapter relating
to liquor. Except in cases of lapse of proof of financial responsibility, no
suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been afforded
an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act,
M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.70, as it may be amended from time to time. The Council may
act as the hearing body under that act, or it may contract with the Office of
Hearing Examiners for a hearing officer.
   (B)   The following are the minimum periods of suspension or revocation
which shall be imposed by the Council for violations of the provisions of this
chapter or M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time or any
rules promulgated under that Chapter as they may be amended from time to time:
      (1)   For commission of a felony related to the licensed activity, sale
of alcoholic beverages while the license is under suspension, sale of
intoxicating liquor where the only license is for 3.2% malt liquor, or
violation of § 111.04, the license shall be revoked.
      (2)   The license shall be suspended by the Council after a finding under
division (A) that the licensee has failed to comply with any applicable
statute, rule, or provision of this chapter for at least the minimum periods as
follows:
         (a)   For the first violation within any three-year period, at least
one day suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be
imposed.
         (b)   For a second violation within any three-year period, at least
three consecutive days suspension in addition to any criminal or civil
penalties which may be imposed.
         (c)   For the third violation within any three-year period, at least
seven consecutive days suspension in addition to any criminal or civil
penalties which may be imposed.
         (d)   For a fourth violation within any three-year period, the license
shall be revoked.
      (3)   The council shall select the day or days during which the license
will be suspended.
   (C)   Lapse of required proof of financial responsibility shall effect an
immediate suspension of any license issued pursuant to this chapter or state
law without further action of the Council. Notice of cancellation or lapse of a
current liquor liability policy shall also constitute notice to the licensee of
the impending suspension of the license. The holder of a license who has
received notice of lapse of required insurance or of suspension or revocation
of a license may request a hearing thereon and, if a request is made in writing
to the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, a hearing before the Council shall be
granted within ten days. Any suspension under this division (B) shall continue
until the Council determines that the financial responsibility requirements of
state law and this chapter have again been met.
   (D)   The provisions of § 111.99 pertaining to administrative penalty may be
imposed in addition to or in lieu of any suspension or revocation under this
chapter.
Penalty, see § 111.99
MUNICIPAL LIQUOR STORES
§ 111.50 APPLICATION OF THIS SUBCHAPTER.
   This subchapter, consisting of §§ 111.50 through 111.55, applies only to a
city that has in existence on the effective date of this chapter a municipal
liquor store.
§ 111.51 EXISTING MUNICIPAL STORES CONTINUED.
   If the city has in existence on the effective date of this chapter a
municipal liquor store for the sale of intoxicating liquor, the store is
continued. Except as provided in § 111.55, no intoxicating liquor may be sold
at retail elsewhere in the city.
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.52 LOCATION. 
   The municipal liquor store shall be located at a suitable place in the city
as the Council determines by motion. However, no premises upon which taxes,
assessments, or other public charges are delinquent shall be leased for
municipal liquor store purposes. The Council shall have the right to establish
additional off-sale and on-sale stores at other locations as it may, from time
to time, by motion, determine.
§ 111.53 OPERATION.
   (A)   Manager. The municipal liquor store shall be in the immediate charge
of a Liquor Store Manager selected by the Council and paid compensation as is
fixed by the Council. The Manager shall not be a person who would be prohibited
by law or any provision of this chapter from being eligible for an intoxicating
liquor license. The Manager shall furnish a surety bond to the city,
conditioned upon the faithful discharge of the duties of the office, in a sum
as specified by the Council. The bond premium may be paid by the city or the
Manager, in the discretion of the Council. The Manager shall operate the
municipal liquor store under the Council’s direction and shall perform those
duties in connection with the store as may be established by the Council. The
Manager shall be responsible to the Council for the conduct of the store in
full compliance with this chapter and with the laws relating to the sale of
intoxicating liquor and 3.2% malt liquor.
   (B)   Other employees. The Council may also appoint additional employees as
may be required and shall fix their compensation. All employees, including the
Manager, shall hold their positions at the pleasure of the Council. No person
under the age of 18 shall be employed in the store. The Council may require the
employees to furnish surety bonds conditioned for the faithful discharge of
their duties in a sum as specified by the Council. The premium on the bond may
be paid by the city or the employees, as the Council determines.
   (C)   Municipal liquor store fund. All of the revenues received from the
operation of a municipal liquor store shall be deposited in a municipal liquor
store fund from which all ordinary operating expenses, including compensation
of the Manager and employees, shall be paid. Surpluses accumulating in the fund
may be transferred to the general fund of the city or to any other appropriate
fund of the city by resolution of the Council, and may be expended for any
municipal purpose. The handling of municipal liquor store receipts and
disbursements shall comply with the procedure prescribed by law and charter for
the receipts and disbursements of city funds generally.
   (D)   Financial statement. The Council shall provide within 90 days
following the end of the calendar year for publication a balance sheet using
generally accepted accounting procedures and a statement of operations of the
municipal liquor store for that year. The balance sheet and statement shall be
published in accordance with the provisions of M.S. § 471.6985, as it may be
amended from time to time.
   (E)   Hours of operation. The hours during which the sale of intoxicating
liquor may be sold shall be as provided in § 111.33. No person, other than the
Manager or a store employee, may remain in the municipal liquor store longer
than hour after the time when the sale of intoxicating liquor must cease.
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.54 PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   The city shall demonstrate proof of financial responsibility required by
licensees of retail intoxicating liquor establishments under the provisions of
M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 111.55 ISSUANCE OF OTHER LICENSES.
   (A)   On-sale licenses for the sale of intoxicating liquor. The Council may
issue in its sound discretion on-sale licenses to a club under M.S. § 340A.404,
Subdivision 1(4), as it may be amended
from time to time. If the voters have authorized their issuance at a special
election called for that purpose, the Council may issue on its sound discretion
on-sale liquor licenses to hotels and restaurants. The number of on-sale
licenses issued under this section is governed by M.S. § 340A.413, as it may be
amended from time to time, as limited by the provisions of this chapter. The
issuance of these licenses is governed by the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Off-sale licenses for the sale of intoxicating liquor. State law does
not authorize the issuance of off-sale licenses for the sale of intoxicating
liquor by cities which operate a municipal liquor dispensary.
   (C)   On- and off-sale 3.2% malt liquor licenses. The Council may issue 3.2%
malt liquor licenses in its sound discretion as provided in this chapter.
§ 111.99 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or M.S. Chapter
340A as it may be amended from time to time or any rules promulgated under that
chapter as they may be amended from time to time is guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction shall be punished as provided by law.
   (B)   The Council shall impose a civil penalty of up to $2,000 for each
violation of M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, and of
this chapter. Conviction of a violation in a court of law is not required in
order for the Council to impose the civil penalty. A hearing under the
Administrative Procedures Act, M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.70, as it may be amended
from time to time, is not required before the penalty is imposed, but the
Council shall hold a hearing on the proposed violation and the proposed penalty
and hear any person who wishes to speak. Non-payment of the penalty is grounds
for suspension or revocation of the license. The following is the minimum
schedule of presumptive civil penalties which must be imposed in addition to
any suspension unless the licenses is revoked:
      (1)   For the first violation within any three-year period, $500.
      (2)   For the second violation within any three-year period, $1,000.
      (3)   For the third and subsequent violations within any three-year
period, $2,000.
   (C)   The term “violation” as used in this section includes any and all
violations of the provisions of this chapter, or of M.S. Chapter 340A, as it
may be amended from time to time or any rules promulgated under that chapter as
they may be amended from time to time. The number of violations shall be
determined on the basis of the history of violations for the preceding three-
year period. Revocation shall occur within 60 days following a violation for
which revocation is imposed.
CHAPTER 112: (RESERVED)
CHAPTER 113: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   Exceptions to definitions
   
113.03   Licensing; exemptions
   
113.04   License ineligibility
   
113.05   License suspension and revocation
   
113.06   License transferability
   
113.07   Registration
   
113.08   Prohibited activities
   
113.09   Exclusion by placard
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms
shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this
chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLER. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-
business, street-to- street, or any other type of place-to-place, for the
purpose of offering for sale, displaying or exposing for sale, selling or
attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares,
products, merchandise or other personnel property that the person is carrying
or otherwise transporting. The term peddler shall mean the same as the term
hawker.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation,
partnership or association. As applied to groups, organizations, corporations,
partnerships and associations, the term shall include each member, officer,
partner, associate, agent or employee.
   REGULAR BUSINESS DAY. Any day during which the city hall is normally open
for the purpose of conducting public business. Holidays defined by state law
shall not be counted as regular business days.
   SOLICITOR. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-
business, street- to-street, or any other type of place-to-place, for the
purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares, products,
merchandise, other personal property or services of which he or she may be
carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog or by
other means, and for
which delivery or performance shall occur at a later time. The absence of
samples or catalogs shall not remove a person from the scope of this provision
if the actual purpose of the person’s activity is to obtain or attempt to
obtain orders as discussed above. The term shall mean the same as the term
“canvasser.”
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. A person who temporarily sets up business out of a
vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, other portable shelter, or empty store front
for the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling or attempting to
sell, and delivering, goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal
property and who does not remain or intend to remain in any one location for
more than 14 consecutive days.
§ 113.02 EXCEPTIONS TO DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of the requirements of this chapter, the terms
PEDDLER, SOLICITOR, and TRANSIENT MERCHANT shall not apply to any person
selling or attempting to sell at wholesale any goods, wares, products,
merchandise or other personal property to a retailer of the items being sold by
the wholesaler. The terms also shall not apply to any person who makes initial
contacts with other people for the purpose of establishing or trying to
establish a regular customer delivery route for the delivery of perishable food
and dairy products such as baked goods and milk, nor shall they apply to any
person making deliveries of perishable food and dairy products to the customers
on his or her established regular delivery route.
   (B)   In addition, persons conducting the type of sales commonly known as
garage sales, rummage sales, or estate sales, as well as those persons
participating in an organized multi-person bazaar or flea market, shall be
exempt from the definitions of PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, and TRANSIENT MERCHANTS,
as shall be anyone conducting an auction as a properly licensed auctioneer, or
any officer of the court conducting a court-ordered sale. Exemption from the
definitions for the scope of this chapter shall not excuse any person from
complying with any other applicable statutory provision or local ordinance.
§ 113.03 LICENSING; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   County license required. No person shall conduct business as a
peddler, solicitor or transient merchant within the city limits without first
having obtained the appropriate license from the county as required by M.S.
Chapter 329 as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   City license required. Except as otherwise provided for by this
chapter, no person shall conduct business as either a peddler or a transient
merchant without first having obtained a license from the city. Solicitors need
not be licensed, but are still required to register pursuant to § 113.07.
   (C)   Application. Application for a city license to conduct business as a
peddler or transient merchant shall be made at least 14 regular business days
before the applicant desires to begin conducting
business. Application for a license shall be made on a form approved by the
City Council and available from the office of the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer. All applications shall be signed by the applicant. All applications
shall include the following information.
      (1)   Applicant’s full legal name.
      (2)   All other names under which the applicant conducts business or to
which applicant officially answers.
      (3)   A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye color,
height, weight, distinguishing marks and features, and the like).
      (4)   Full address of applicant’s permanent residence.
      (5)   Telephone number of applicant’s permanent residence.
      (6)   Full legal name of any and all business operations owned, managed
or operated by applicant, or for which the applicant is an employee or agent.
      (7)   Full address of applicant’s regular place of business (if any).
      (8)   Any and all business related telephone numbers of the applicant.
      (9)   The type of business for which the applicant is applying for a
license.
      (10)   Whether the applicant is applying for an annual or daily license.
      (11)   The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct business,
and if the applicant is applying for a daily license, the number of days he or
she will be conducting business in the city (maximum 14 consecutive days).
      (12)   Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the applicant
can be reached while conducting business within the city, including the
location where a transient merchant intends to set up business.
      (13)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
within the last five years of any felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor for
violation of any state or federal statute or any local ordinance, other than
traffic offenses.
      (14)   A list of the three most recent locations where the applicant has
conducted business as a peddler or transient merchant.
      (15)   Proof of any requested county license.
      (16)   Written permission of the property owner or the property owner’s
agent for any property to be used by a transient merchant.
      (17)   A general description of the items to be sold or services to be
provided.
      (18)   All additional information deemed necessary by the City Council.
      (19)   The applicant’s driver’s license number or other acceptable form
of identification.
      (20)   The license plate number, registration information and vehicle
identification number for any vehicle to be used in conjunction with the
licensed business and a description of the vehicle.
   (D)   Fee. All applications for a license under this chapter shall be
accompanied by the fee established by city resolution, as it may be amended
from time to time.
   (E)   Procedure. Upon receipt of the completed application and payment of
the license fee, the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, within two regular
business days, must determine if the application is complete. An application is
determined to be complete only if all required information is provided. If the
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer determines that the application is
incomplete, the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer must inform the applicant of
the required necessary information that is missing. If the application is
complete, the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer must order any investigation,
including background checks, necessary to verify the information provided with
the application. Within ten regular business days of receiving a compete
application the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer must issue the license
unless there exist grounds for denying the license under § 113.04, in which
case the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer must deny the license. If the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer denies the license, the applicant must be
notified in writing of the decision, the reason for denial, and of the
applicant’s right to appeal the denial by requesting, within 20 days of
receiving notice of rejection, a public hearing before the City Council. The
City Council shall hear the appeal within 20 days of the date of the request.
The decision of the City Council following the public hearing can be appealed
by petitioning the Minnesota Court of Appeals for a Writ of Certiorari.
   (F)   Duration. An annual license granted under this chapter shall be valid
for one calendar year from the date of issue. All other licenses granted under
this chapter shall be valid only during the time period indicated on the
license.
   (G)   License exemptions.
      (1)   No license shall be required for any person to sell or attempt to
sell, or to take or attempt to take orders for, any product grown, produced,
cultivated, or raised on any farm.
      (2)   No license shall be required of any person going from house-to-
house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or other type of
place-to-place when the activity is for the purpose
of exercising that person’s State or Federal Constitutional rights such as the
freedom of speech, press, religion and the like, except that this exemption may
be lost if the person’s exercise of Constitutional rights is merely incidental
to a commercial activity.
      (3)   Professional fundraisers working on behalf of an otherwise exempt
person or group shall not be exempt from the licensing requirements of this
chapter.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.04 LICENSE INELIGIBILITY.
   The following shall be grounds for denying a license under this chapter.
   (A)   The failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of having
obtained any required county license.
   (B)   The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the
information requested by the city as a part of the application, or the failure
to sign the application, or the failure to pay the required fee at the time of
application.
   (C)   The conviction of the applicant within the past five years from the
date of application for any violation of any federal or state statute or
regulation, or of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects on the person’s
ability to conduct the business for which the license is being sought in an
honest and legal manner. Those violations shall include but not be limited to
burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, and
any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person.
   (D)   The revocation within the past five years of any license issued to the
applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or
transient merchant.
   (E)   The applicant is found to have a bad business reputation. Evidence of
a bad business reputation shall include, but not be limited to, the existence
of more than three complaints against the applicant with the Better Business
Bureau, the Attorney General’s Office, or other similar business or consumer
rights office or agency, within the preceding 12 months, or three complaints
filed against the applicant within the preceding five years.
§ 113.05 LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Generally. Any license issued under this section may be suspended or
revoked at the discretion of the City Council for violation of any of the
following:
      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statements on the application
form.
      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made during the course
of the licensed activity.
      (3)   Conviction of any offense for which granting of a license could
have been denied under § 113.04.
      (4)   Violation of any provision of this chapter.
   (B)   Multiple persons under one license. The suspension or revocation of
any license issued for the purpose of authorizing multiple persons to conduct
business as peddlers or transient merchants on behalf of the licensee shall
serve as a suspension or revocation of each authorized person’s authority to
conduct business as a peddler or transient merchant on behalf of the licensee
whose license is suspended or revoked.
   (C)   Notice. Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued under this
chapter, the city shall provide the license holder with written notice of the
alleged violations and inform the licensee of his or her right to a hearing on
the alleged violation. Notice shall be delivered in person or by mail to the
permanent residential address listed on the license application, or if no
residential address is listed, to the business address provided on the license
application.
   (D)   Public hearing. Upon receiving the notice provided in division (C) of
this section, the licensee shall have the right to request a public hearing. If
no request for a hearing is received by the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer
within ten regular business days following the service of the notice, the city
may proceed with the suspension or revocation. For the purpose of mailed
notices, service shall be considered complete as of the date the notice is
placed in the mail. If a public hearing is requested within the stated time
frame, a hearing shall be scheduled within 20 days from the date of the
request. Within three regular business days of the hearing, the City Council
shall notify the licensee of its decision.
   (E)   Emergency. If, in the discretion of the City Council, imminent harm to
the health or safety of the public may occur because of the actions of a
peddler or transient merchant licensed under this chapter, the City Council may
immediately suspend the person’s license and provide notice of the right to
hold a subsequent public hearing as prescribed in division (C) of this section.
   (F)   Appeals. Any person whose license is suspended or revoked under this
section shall have the right to appeal that decision in court.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.06 LICENSE TRANSFERABILITY.
   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred to any person
other than the person to whom the license was issued.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.07 REGISTRATION.
   All solicitors, and any person exempt from the licensing requirements of
this chapter under § 113.03, shall be required to register with the city.
Registration shall be made on the same form required for a license application,
but no fee shall be required. Immediately upon completion of the registration
form, the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall issue to the registrant a
Certificate of Registration as proof of the registration. Certificates of
Registration shall be non-transferable.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.08 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall conduct business in any of
the following manners.
   (A)   Calling attention to his or her business or items to be sold by means
of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out, or by any other
noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed structure.
   (B)   Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on
any street, alley, sidewalk or other public right-of-way.
   (C)   Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the health,
safety and welfare of any individual or the general public.
   (D)   Conducting business before 7 a.m. or after 9 p.m.
   (E)   Failing to provide proof of license or registration, and
identification, when requested; or using the license or registration of another
person.
   (F)   Making any false or misleading statements about the product or service
being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement. No peddler, solicitor
or transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the city solely
based on the city having issued a license or certificate of registration to
that person.
   (G)   Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave, or to
otherwise conduct business in a manner a reasonable person would find obscene,
threatening, intimidating or abusive.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.09 EXCLUSION BY PLACARD.
   No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant, unless invited to do so by the
property owner or tenant, shall enter the property of another for the purpose
of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or
transient merchant when the property is marked with a sign or placard at least
four inches long and four inches wide with print of at least 48 point in size
stating “No Peddlers, Solicitors or Transient Merchants,” or “Peddlers,
Solicitors, and Transient Merchants Prohibited,” or other comparable statement.
No person other than the property owner or tenant shall remove, deface or
otherwise tamper with any sign or placard under this section.
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 114: ADULT USES AND SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
   
114.01   Findings and purposes
   
114.02   Definitions
   
114.03   Permits
   
114.04   Sign restrictions
 
   
114.99   Penalty
§ 114.01 FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to control through permitting and
zoning regulations certain land uses that have a direct and detrimental effect
on the character of the city's residential and commercial districts.
   (B)   The City of Preston makes the following findings about the effect
adult uses and sexually oriented businesses have on the character of each
district. In making the findings, the city accepts the recommendations of staff
that have studied the experiences of other communities in the nation about such
businesses. The Minnesota Attorney General, the American Planning Association,
and the cities of St. Paul, Rochester, Indianapolis, Phoenix, Los Angeles,
Seattle and New York have studied the impacts of adult uses and sexually
oriented businesses on rural and urban areas. These studies have concluded that
adult uses and sexually oriented businesses have adverse impacts on the
surrounding neighborhoods. Based on these studies and findings, the City of
Preston concludes:
      (1)   Adult uses and sexually oriented businesses can contribute to an
increase in crime in the area where such businesses are located. This can be a
burden to city and county crime prevention programs and law enforcement
services.
      (2)   Adult uses and sexually oriented businesses can significantly
contribute to the deterioration of nearby neighborhoods and can increase
neighborhood blight. These businesses also can impair the character and quality
of the residential housing in the area where such businesses are located. This
situation can lessen the amount of desirable housing for residents.
      (3)   The concentration of adult uses and sexually oriented businesses in
one area can greatly affect the area where such businesses are concentrated and
on the quality of life. A cycle of decay can result from the influx and
concentration of adult uses and sexually oriented businesses. Others may
perceive the presence of such businesses as an indication that the area is
deteriorating. That is, other businesses move out of the vicinity and residents
flee from the area. Lower property values that can result from the
concentration of such businesses erode the city's tax base and contribute to
rural and urban blight.
      (4)   It is necessary to provide for the special and express regulation
of businesses, establishments or enterprises that operate as adult body
painting studios, adult bookstores, adult cabarets, adult car washes, adult
companionship establishments, adult hotels or motels, adult massage parlors or
health clubs, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult modeling studios, adult
motion picture arcades or theaters, adult novelty businesses, adult saunas, and
similar adult oriented services operating under different names to protect the
public health, safety and welfare, and to guard against the inception and
transmission of disease.
      (5)   The enterprises such as the types described in division (B)(4) of
this section and all other similar establishments whose services include
sessions offered to adults conducted in private by members of the same or
opposite sex, and employing personnel with no specialized training are
susceptible to operations contravening, subverting, or endangering the health
and safety of the city by being the site of acts of prostitution, illicit sex,
and occasions of violent crimes, and thus requiring close inspection,
permitting, and regulation.
      (6)   Control and regulation of establishments of these types, in view of
the abuses often perpetrated, require intensive efforts by police departments,
the sheriffs office, and other departments serving the community. It is
necessary for the city to provide services to all of the city without
concentrating the public services in one area. The concentrated use of city
services detracts from and reduces the level of service available to the rest
of the city. Thus, these types of establishments can diminish the ability of
the city to protect and promote the general health, welfare and safety of the
City of Preston.
      (7)   The city adopts the following land use and permitting regulations,
recognizing that it has an interest in the present and future character of the
city's zoning districts. These regulations are to lessen the detrimental and
adverse effects that adult uses and sexually oriented businesses have on
adjacent land uses and to protect and promote the health, safety and welfare of
the residents of the City of Preston.
   (C)   It is not the intent of the city to prohibit adult uses and sexually
oriented businesses or establishments from having an opportunity to locate in
the City of Preston. It also is not the intent of the city to regulate these
businesses on the basis of content, but only on the basis of likely adverse
secondary effects.
(Ord. 252, passed 9-6-2005)
§ 114.02 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words shall have the following meanings:
   ADULT USES. Adult body painting studios, adult book or magazine stores,
adult cabaret, adult car wash, adult hotels or motels, adult motion picture
theaters, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult massage parlors, adult
health/sport clubs, adult saunas/steam rooms/bath houses, adult companionship
establishments, adult rap/conversation parlors, adult novelty businesses, adult
motion picture arcades, adult modeling studios, and other premises,
enterprises, establishments, businesses, or places open to some or all members
of the public at or in which there is an emphasis on the presentation, display,
depiction or description of "specified sexual-activities" or "specified
anatomical areas" which the public could see. This definition does not apply to
the practice of medicine, surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic, physical therapy
or podiatry by state conditional use permit or registered persons. This
definition does not apply to public libraries. Businesses engaged in massage
that are operated by a certified massage therapist also do not apply.
Activities classified as obscene as defined by M.S. § 617.241 are not lawful
and are not included in the definition of adult uses.
   ADULT USES - ACCESSORY. The offering of goods, limited to those specified
below, on a limited scale that is incidental to the primary activity and goods
and/or services offered by the establishment. ADULT USE - ACCESSORY
establishments are limited to the sale of adult printed material, adult movies
and adult novelties.
   ADULT USES - PRINCIPAL. The offering of goods and/or services classified as
adult uses as a primary or sale activity of a business or establishment and
include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   ADULT BODY PAINTING STUDIO. An establishment or business that
provides the service of applying paint or other substance, whether transparent
or non-transparent, to or on the body of a patron when such body is wholly or
partially nude in terms of specified anatomical areas.
      (2)   ADULT BOOK OR MAGAZINE STORE. An establishment, building or
business engaging in the barter, rental, or sale of items or merchandise
consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audiotapes,
videotapes, computer or video disks, motion picture film, or any other similar
materials, if more than 20% of the useable floor area of the establishment,
building or business, or if at least 500 square feet, whichever is smaller, has
products or materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters
depicting, describing or related to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
      (3)   ADULT CABARET. An establishment, building or business that provides
dancing or other live entertainment if such dancing or other live entertainment
is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the performance,
presentation, display, depiction or description of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.
      (4)   ADULT CAR WASH. A wash facility for any type of motor vehicle that
allows employees, agents, independent contractors or persons to appear in a
state of partial or total nudity in terms of specified anatomical areas.
      (5)   ADULT COMPANIONSHIP ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment of business
which provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or
discussion between an employee of the establishment and a customer, if such
service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (6)   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY. A building or space in which an
admission is charged for entrance, or food or non-alcoholic beverages are sold
or intended for consumption, and in which may be observed a live presentation
of entertainment distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
      (7)   ADULT ESTABLISHMENT. 
         (a)   An establishment, building or business that offers its patrons
services, products or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, exposing, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
         (b)   Specifically included in the term, but without limitation, are
adult book or magazine stores, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion
picture theaters, adult massage parlors, adult health clubs, adult saunas,
adult companionship establishments, adult health clubs, adult cabarets, adult
car washes, adult novelty businesses, adult motion picture arcades, adult
modeling studios, adult hotel or motel, and adult body painting studios.
      (8)   ADULT HOTEL OR MOTEL. A hotel or motel which material is presented
that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
      (9)   ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR, HEALTH/SPORT CLUB. A massage parlor or
health/sport club that provide the services of massage, if such service is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      (10)   ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A business, building or
establishment with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting
visual media material if said material is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for
observation by patrons.
      (11)   ADULT MODELING STUDIO. An establishment or business whose major
business is the provision to customers of figure models who are so provided
with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such
customers who engage in specified sexual activities or display specified
anatomical areas while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn,
sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted by such customers.
      (12)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE. Any building or place to which the
public is allowed or invited in which coin or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors, computers, or other image-producing devices show images to one
person or a small group of people at once, and where the images so displayed
are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (13)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATERS. A business premises with a capacity
of 50 or more persons used for presenting visual media material if said
material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for
observation by patrons.
      (14)   ADULT NOVELTY BUSINESS. A business that has as a principal
activity the sale of materials or devices that stimulate human genitals or
devices designed for sexual simulation or which depict or which relate to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (15)   ADULT SAUNA/STEAM ROOM/BATHHOUSE. A business that excludes minors
because of age, or which provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for
bathing, pleasure, relaxation or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a
cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by the sauna/
steam room/bathhouse is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   COUNCIL. The Preston City Council.
   CITY. The City of Preston, Minnesota.
   LICENSED FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME, LICENSED GROUP FAMILY DAY CARE HOME, LICENSED
CHILD CARE CENTER. A facility holding a license from Fillmore County or
Minnesota  pursuant to M.S. Chapter 245A, and/or Minnesota Rules, Chapter 9502
or Chapter 9503, as amended.
   MINOR. Any natural person under the age of 18 years.
   NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic area with
less than fully opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with less
than fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below a point immediately
above the top of the areola; or the depiction or showing of the male genitals
in a discernibly turgid state.
   PUBLIC LIBRARY. Any library that provides free access to all residents of a
city or county without discrimination and is organized under the provisions of
M.S. Chapter 134.
   PUBLIC PARK. A park, reservation, open space, playground, beach or
recreation or community center owned, leased, or used, wholly or in part, by a
city, county, state, school district or federal government for recreational
purposes.
   PLACE OF WORSHIP. A building or space that is principally used as a place
where people of the same faith or religion regularly assemble for worship.
   SCHOOL. A building or space that is principally used as a place where ten or
more persons receive a full course of educational instruction.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult book or magazine store, adult body
painting studio, adult car wash, adult cabaret, adult hotel or motel, adult
companionship establishment, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion
picture theater, adult massage parlor, adult entertainment facility, adult
health or sports club, adult novelty business, adult modeling studio, or adult
sauna as defined herein. Activities classified as obscene as defined by M.S. §
617.241 are not lawful and are not included in the definition of adult uses.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Anatomical areas consist of:
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covering human genitals, pubic
region or pubic hair, buttock, anus, or female breast or breasts below a point
immediately above the top of the areola or any combination of the foregoing;
and
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Activities consisting of the following:
      (1)   Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal
intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation or
fondling of unclothed genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast,
flagellation or torture in a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory
functions in a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented
acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus,
fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, sodomy,
zooerasty;
      (2)   Human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal or
tumescence;
      (3)   Use or acts of human or animal ejaculation, sexual intercourse,
sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation;
      (4)   Fondling or touching of human genitals, pubic regions or pubic
hair, buttocks, or female breast or breasts;
      (5)   Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude,
clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, who are engaged in
activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other
physical restraint of any such person;
      (6)   Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually oriented
contact with an animal by a human being;
      (7)   Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal
irrigation; or
      (8)   Any combination of the above.
(Ord. 252, passed 9-6-2005)
§ 114.03 PERMITS.
   (A)   Permit required. No person, firm or corporation shall own or operate
an adult use principal business in the City of Preston without having first
secured a permit as provided herein.
   (B)   Application form. The city shall prepare an application form for an
adult use principal permit. This application shall include:
      (1)   The name, residence, phone number and birth date of the owner(s)
and applicant(s), if an individual; and, if a corporation, partnership, LLC, or
similar entity, the names, residences, phone numbers and birth dates of those
owner(s) holding more than 5% of the issued and outstanding stock of the
corporation or ownership interest in a partnership, LLC or similar entity.
      (2)   The name, address, phone number and birth date of the operator and
manager of such operation, if different from the owner(s) or applicant(s).
      (3)   The address and legal description of the building, establishment or
premises where the adult use or sexually oriented business is to be located.
      (4)   A statement detailing each gross misdemeanor or felony and/or the
operation of adult uses and related activities of which the owner(s) or
applicant(s) or, for a corporation, the owner(s) of more than 5% of the issued
and outstanding stock of the corporation, or ownership interest in a
partnership, LLC or similar entity, have been convicted, and whether the
applicant(s) or owner(s) has ever applied for or held a conditional use permit
to operate a similar type of business in other cities.
      (5)   A detailed description of the activities and types of business to
be conducted.
      (6)   The hours of operation.
      (7)   A detailed description of the provisions made to restrict access by
minors.
      (8)   A building plan of the premises detailing internal operations and
activities.
      (9)   A description or building plan that details all proposed interior
and exterior changes to an existing building or structure.
      (10)   All owners, operators, and employees must be fingerprinted and a
criminal background check completed.
   (C)   Permit fees.
      (1)   A fee as established by the Preston City Council shall be paid at
the time of the submittal of an application for an adult use or sexually
oriented business.
      (2)   Each application shall contain a provision on the application in
bold print stating that any withholding of information or the providing of
false or misleading information will be grounds for the denial or revocation of
a permit. Any changes in the information provided on the application or
provided during the investigation shall be reported in writing to the city by
the owner(s) or applicant(s) or permittee within ten days of change. If said
changes take place during the investigation, the data shall be provided to the
Zoning Administrator in writing, and the administrator shall report the changes
to the City Council. Failure to report said changes by the applicant(s) or
owner(s) or the permittee within ten days may result in a denial or revocation
of a permit in the sole discretion of the City Council.
      (3)   Applicant shall pay cost of criminal background check as part of
permit fee.
   (D)   Granting of a permit.
      (1)   The city staff and police shall have 45 days to conduct an
investigation of the information provided as part of the application process.
      (2)   The city shall only issue the permit to the owner(s) of the
business applying for the permit. The permit shall not be transferred to
another holder. The city shall only issue each permit for the premises or
location described in the application.
   (E)   Persons ineligible for a permit. The city shall not grant a permit to
nor may one be held by any person who:
      (1)   Is less than 21 years of age;
      (2)   Has been convicted of a felony or gross misdemeanor. A criminal
check will be completed.
      (3)   Is not the proprietor of the establishment for which the permit is
issued.
      (4)   Has not paid the permit fees or cost of the criminal background
check as required by this chapter.
      (5)   Is not a citizen of the United States.
      (6)   Has had an adult use or similar permit revoked under an ordinance
or statute similar to this.
      (7)   If a corporation, LLC or other entity, person holding ownership
interest may not possess any of the above disqualifying factors.
   (F)   Places ineligible for a permit.
      (1)   No permit shall be granted for adult uses and sexually oriented
business on any premises where a permittee has been convicted of a violation of
this chapter, or where any permit hereunder has been revoked for cause, until
one year has elapsed after such conviction or revocation.
      (2)   Except uses lawfully existing at the time of this chapter adoption,
no permit shall be granted for any adult use and sexually oriented business
that does not meet all city ordinance requirements and all provisions of state
and federal law.
   (G)   Non-conforming uses. Any adult use and sexually oriented business
existing on the effective date of the adoption of this chapter may be continued
subject to the following provisions:
      (1)   No such adult use and sexually oriented business shall be expanded
or enlarged except in conformity with the provision of this chapter;
      (2)   A nonconforming adult use and sexually oriented business shall be
required to apply for and receive an adult use and sexually oriented business
permit from the city.
   (H)   Conditions for granting a permit - generally.
      (1)   A permit shall be granted subject to the conditions in the
following subdivisions and all other provisions of this chapter and of any
applicable city, county, state and federal law.
      (2)   All permitted premises shall have the permit posted in a
conspicuous place.
      (3)   No mirror shall be allowed in or on the premises of an adult use
and sexually oriented business.
      (4)   Any designated inspection officer or law enforcement officer of the
city shall have the right to enter, inspect, and search the premises of a
permittee during business hours.
      (5)   Every permittee shall be responsible for the conduct of their place
of business and shall maintain conditions consistent with this chapter and the
city ordinances generally.
      (6)   No adult goods, materials or services shall be offered, sold,
transferred, conveyed, given, displayed or bartered to any minor.
   (I)   Conditions of a permit - adult use principal. The city permits adult
use principal/sexually oriented businesses only in the I-1 industrial zoning
district, subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   No adult use principal/sexually oriented business shall be located
closer than 1,000 feet from any other adult use principal/sexually oriented
business either within or beyond the municipal boundary or the City of Preston.
Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to boundaries,
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point of the actual
business premises of the adult use principal/sexually oriented business to the
nearest point of the actual business premises of any other adult use principal/
sexually oriented business.
      (2)   No adult use principal/sexually oriented business shall be located
closer than 1,000 feet from any place of worship, school, hospital, public
park, public recreational trail, licensed family day-care home, licensed group
family day-care home, public library, or licensed child care or day care center
either within or beyond the municipal boundary or the City of Preston.
Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to boundaries,
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point of the actual
business premises of the adult use principal/sexually oriented business to the
nearest property line of the premises or building used as a place of worship,
school, hospital, public park, public recreational trail, licensed family day-
care home, licensed group family day-care home, public library, or licensed
child care or day care center.
      (3)   No adult use principal/sexually oriented business shall be located
closer than 750 feet from any dwelling, any residential zoning district or any
residential planned unit development (PUD) either within or beyond the
municipal boundary or the City of Preston. Measurements shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to boundaries, intervening structures or objects,
from the nearest point of the actual business premises of the adult use and
sexually oriented business to the nearest residential lot line, boundary of the
residential zoning district or planned unit development (PUD).
      (4)   All adult uses and sexually oriented businesses must follow this
entire chapter.
      (5)   The city prohibits any building owner(s) or operator from having
more than one of the following uses, tenants or activities in the same building
or structure:
         Adult body painting studio;
         Adult book store;
         Adult cabaret;
         Adult car wash;
         Adult companionship establishment;
         Adult entertainment facility;
         Adult hotel or motel;
         Adult modeling studio;
         Adult sauna/steam room/bathhouse;
         Adult motion picture theater;
         Adult mini-motion picture theater;
         Adult massage parlor;
         Adult health/sports club;
         Adult novelty business;
         Any business or establishment in which there is an emphasis on the
presentation, display, depiction, or description of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas that the public can see.
      (6)   An adult use principal/sexually oriented business shall not sell or
dispense non- intoxicating or intoxicating liquors, nor shall it be located in
a building that contains a business that sells or dispenses non-intoxicating or
intoxicating liquors.
      (7)   No adult use principal/sexually oriented business shall engage in
any activity or conduct or permit any other person to engage in any activity or
conduct in or about the adult use establishment that is prohibited by any
ordinance of the City of Preston, the laws of the State of Minnesota or the
United States of America. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as
authorizing or permitting conduct that is prohibited or regulated by other
statutes, ordinances, including but not limited to statutes or ordinances
prohibiting the exhibition, sale or distribution of obscene material generally,
or the exhibition, sale or distribution of specified materials to minors.
      (8)   No adult use principal/sexually oriented businesses shall be
conducted in any manner that permits the perception or observation from any
property not approved as an adult use of any materials depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas by any
visual or auditory media, including display, decoration, sign, show window,
sound transmission or other means.
      (9)   All adult use principal/sexually oriented businesses shall
prominently display a sign at the entrance and located within two feet of the
door opening device of the adult use establishment or section of the
establishment devoted to adult books or materials which states: "This business
sells or displays material containing adult themes. Persons under 18 years of
age shall not enter".
      (10)   No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted on or in
the premises of an adult use or sexually oriented business establishment. No
person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted access to material
displayed, offered for sale, given, transferred, conveyed or rented by an adult
use or sexually oriented business.
      (11)   Adult use principal/sexually oriented businesses shall not be open
between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on the days of Monday through
Saturday. They must be closed on Sunday.
      (12)   Adult use principal/sexually oriented businesses shall have a
single public entrance on the front of the building. All patrons shall enter
and exit the premises through this entrance. An exception is made for emergency
and employee entrances/exits.
      (13)   Adult use principal/sexually oriented business shall provide one
parking spot for each 100 square feet of gross building area. The parking lot
shall be on the front of the building and the entire parking lot shall be
illuminated to a minimum of three foot/candles as measured at ground level.
   (J)   Conditions of registration - adult use accessory. Adult use accessory
businesses or establishments are required to register with the city and are
subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   The adult use accessory shall comprise no more than 10% of the
floor area, or up to 100 square feet, whichever is smaller, of the
establishment, space, structure or building in which it is located.
      (2)   Display areas for adult movie or video tape rentals or other
products shall be restricted from general view and shall be in the control of
the person responsible for the operation.
      (3)   Magazines and publications or other similar products classified or
qualified as adult uses shall not be accessible to minors and shall be covered
with a wrapper or other means to prevent display of any materials other than
the publication title.
      (4)   Adult use accessory shall be prohibited from both internal and
external advertising and signing of adult materials and products.
      (5)   Adult use accessory businesses shall operate only in B-2 and B-
3 business/commercial zoning districts.
   (K)   Revocation or suspension of a permit.
      (1)   The City Zoning Administrator may revoke or, suspend a permit upon
recommendation of the Preston Police Department that shows the permittee, its
owners, managers, employees or agents have engaged in any of the following
conduct:
         (a)   Fraud, deception or misrepresentation about securing the permit.
         (b)   Habitual drunkenness or intemperance in use of drugs including,
but not limited to, the use of drugs defined in M.S. § 618.01, barbiturates,
hallucinogenic drugs, amphetamines, Benzedrine, Dexedrine or other sedatives,
depressants, stimulants or tranquilizers.
         (c)   Failure to follow any requirements of the ordinances of the City
of Preston or statutes of the State of Minnesota about sanitary and safety
conditions, zoning requirements, building code requirements or ordinances, or
failure to follow the requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   The permittee may appeal such suspension, or revocation to the
Preston City Council. The City Council shall consider the appeal at a regularly
scheduled meeting on or after ten days from service of the notice of appeal to
the City Administrator. At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council may
order:
         (a)   That the revocation or suspension be affirmed;
         (b)   That the revocation, or suspension be lifted and that the permit
be returned to the permit holder;
         (c)   The City Council may impose, at their discretion, any additional
terms, conditions or stipulations for the suspension or issuance of the permit.
(Ord. 252, passed 9-6-2005) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.04 SIGN RESTRICTIONS.
   The following sign regulations shall apply to all adult use and sexually
oriented businesses in the city. These regulations are to protect children from
exposure to sexually oriented signs and materials and to preserve the value of
property near adult use and sexually oriented businesses. These regulations are
aside from all other provision of the City of Preston Zoning Ordinance.
   (A)   All signs shall be flat wall or freestanding signs. No signs shall be
located on the roof, or contain any flashing lights, moving elements, or
electronically or mechanically changing messages.
   (B)   No sign advertising an adult use or sexually oriented business shall
be over 16 square feet in any district.
   (C)   An adult use or sexually oriented business may have only one
electrically lit sign attached to the front of the place of business and none
on any other side.
   (D)   No merchandise, photos, or pictures of the products or entertainment
on the premises shall be displayed in window areas or any area where they can
be viewed from the sidewalk or public right-of- way adjoining the building or
structure in which the adult use or sexually oriented business is located.
   (E)   No signs shall be placed in any window. A two-foot square sign must be
placed on the door to state hours of operation and admittance to adults only.
(Ord. 252, passed 9-6-2005) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished not more than the maximum
penalty for a misdemeanor as prescribed by state law. Each day of violation is
an additional misdemeanor.
(Ord. 252, passed 9-6-2005)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
Chapter
   
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Issuance of dishonored checks
   
130.02   Destruction of property
   
130.03   Damage to cemeteries
   
130.04   Firecrackers and firearms
   
130.05   Curfew for minors
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 ISSUANCE OF DISHONORED CHECKS.
   (A)   No person shall issue in the city any check, draft, or order for the
payment of money or the delivery of property, knowing that he or she is not
entitled to draw upon the drawee therefor or to order the payment or delivery
thereof.
   (B)   No person shall issue in the city any check, draft, or order for the
payment of money or the delivery of property in violation of the provisions of
M.S. § 609.535, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   Minnesota Statutes § 609.535, as from time to time amended, shall be
and hereby is made a part of this section and incorporated herein by reference.
(Ord. 146, passed 8-7-1972)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.02 DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.
   Any person or persons who shall in any manner destroy, injure or mutilate
any property, real or personal, belonging to the city or under its control,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be
subject to the terms of § 130.99.
(Ord. 46, passed 2-15-1894)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.03 DAMAGE TO CEMETERIES.
   Any person who shall destroy, mutilate, injure or remove any tomb, monument,
gravestone, building or structure placed in any cemetery within the city, or
any fence, railing or other work for the
protection or ornament thereof, or who shall willfully destroy or injure any
tree, shrub, plant or flower therein, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and on conviction thereof shall be subject to the terms of § 130.99.
(Ord. 40, passed 4-12-1889)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.04 FIRECRACKERS AND FIREARMS.
   The shooting of any firearm, rocket or other projectile within the corporate
limits of the city is prohibited.
(Ord. 9, passed 4-8-1889)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.05 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
   (A)   Purpose. The curfew for minors established by this section is
maintained for four primary reasons.
      (1)   To protect the public from illegal acts of minors committed during
the curfew hours.
      (2)   To protect minors from improper influences that prevail during the
curfew hours, including involvement with gangs.
      (3)   To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs during the
curfew hours.
      (4)   To help parents control their minor children.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      EMERGENCY ERRAND. A task that if not completed promptly threatens the
health, safety, or comfort of the minor or a member of the minor’s household.
The term shall include, but shall not be limited to, seeking urgent medical
treatment, seeking urgent assistance from law enforcement or fire department
personnel, and seeking shelter from the elements or urgent assistance from a
utility company due to a natural or human-made calamity.
      OFFICIAL CITY TIME. The time of day as determined by reference to the
master clock used by the Police Department.
      PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT OR REFRESHMENT. Those places that
include, but are not limited to, movie theaters, pinball arcades, shopping
malls, nightclubs catering to minors, restaurants, and pool halls.
      PRIMARY CARE or PRIMARY CUSTODY. The person who is responsible for
providing food, clothing, shelter, and other basic necessities to the minor.
The person providing primary care or custody to the minor shall not be another
minor.
      SCHOOL ACTIVITY. An event which has been placed on a school calendar by
public or parochial school authorities as a school sanctioned event.
   (C)   Hours.
      (1)   Minors under the age of 16 years. No minor under the age of 16
years shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or
other public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor in or upon places of
amusement, entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any vacant lot, between
the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5 a.m. the following day, official city time.
      (2)   Minors ages 16 years to 18 years. No minor of the ages of 16 or 17
years shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or
other public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor in or upon places of
amusement, entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any vacant lot, between
the hours of 12 midnight and 5 a.m. the following day, official city time.
   (D)   Effect on control by adult responsible for minor. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to give a minor the right to stay out until the
curfew hours designated in this section if otherwise directed by a parent,
guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the
minor; nor shall this section be construed to diminish or impair the control of
the adult person having the primary care or custody of the minor.
   (E)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply in the
following situations.
      (1)   To a minor accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or other
adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor.
      (2)   To a minor who is upon an emergency errand at the direction of his
or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and
custody of the minor.
      (3)   To a minor who is in any of the places described in this section if
in connection with or as required by an employer engaged in a lawful business,
trade, profession, or occupation; or to a minor traveling directly to or from
the location of the business trade, profession, or occupation and the minor’s
residence. Minors who fall within the scope of this exception shall carry
written proof of employment and proof of the hours the employer requires the
minor’s presence at work.
      (4)   To a minor who is participating in or traveling directly to or from
an event which has been officially designated as a school activity by public or
parochial school authorities; or who is participating in or traveling directly
to or from an official activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city,
a civic organization, school, religious institution, or similar entity that
takes responsibility for the minor and with the permission of the minor’s
parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody of
the minor.
      (5)   To a minor who is passing through the city in the course of
interstate travel during the hours of curfew.
      (6)   To a minor who is attending or traveling directly to or from an
activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech,
freedom of assembly, or freedom of religion.
      (7)   To minors on the sidewalk abutting his or her residence or abutting
the residence of a next- door neighbor if the neighbor does not complain to the
city’s designated law enforcement provider about the minor’s presence.
      (8)   To a minor who is married or has been married, or is otherwise
legally emancipated.
   (F)   Duties of person legally responsible for minor. No parent, guardian,
or other adult having the primary care or custody of any minor shall permit any
violation of the requirements of this section by the minor.
   (G)   Duties of other persons. No person operating or in charge of any place
of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment shall permit any minor to enter or
remain in his or her place of business during the hours prohibited by this
section unless the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other
adult person having primary care or custody of the minor, or unless one of the
exceptions to this section apply.
   (H)   Defense. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that
the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the
city’s designated law enforcement provider that a minor was present on the
premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no
other penalty has been established shall be punished as provided in § 130.99.
   (B)   Curfew penalties.
      (1)   Minors. Any minor found to be in violation of § 130.05 may be
adjudicated delinquent and shall be subject to the dispositional alternatives
set forth in M.S. § 260.185, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   Adults. Any adult person found to be in violation of § 130.05 shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
Chapter
   
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
   
151.   DEVELOPMENT OF SLOPE AREAS
   
152.   MANUFACTURED HOMES
   
153.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
   
154.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
   
155.   ZONING
      
APPENDIX: HEIGHT, AREA AND YARD REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
   
150.01   State Plumbing Code adopted by reference
   
150.02   Structure exterior surfaces
§ 150.01 STATE PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   The Minnesota Plumbing Code, M.S. Chapter 4715, as it may be amended
from time to time, is adopted by reference and made a part of this section as
if fully set forth herein. Before publication of this section and at all times
thereafter, the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall have filed in his or
her office an official copy of the code for the use and examination of any
interested person or persons.
   (B)   The city shall have the right to refuse or prevent connection or use
of the city water or sewer systems to any person, firm or corporation who shall
fail to comply or adhere to the terms and provisions of this code.
(Ord. 135, passed 4-6-1970)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.02 STRUCTURE EXTERIOR SURFACES.
   (A)   The exterior surface of all structures within the city shall be
covered with an exterior-grade material. This may include painted/treated wood
or wood-type products, cement board siding products, woods that naturally
resist decay, steel or vinyl siding, brick, stone, stucco or other generally
accepted exterior grade materials.
   (B)   The roofs of all structures within the city shall be covered with a
permanent roofing material. This may include composition shingles, ribbed steel
sheets, steel shingles, rubber membrane roofing, clay or slate tile or other
generally accepted roofing material.
(Ord. 267, passed 3-7-2011) Penalty, see §
10.98
CHAPTER 151: DEVELOPMENT OF SLOPE AREAS
Section
   
151.01   Preamble
   
151.02   Permit required
   
151.03   Slopes in excess of 35%
   
151.04   Issuance of permits
   
151.05   Disturbance of landscape; drainage to city property
   
151.06   Enforcement
§ 151.01 PREAMBLE.
   It is the policy of the city to encourage the orderly development of slope
and hill areas within the city so as to prevent uncontrolled erosion, mud
slides and runoff of surface waters likely to damage adjacent lands and
properties, and to impose certain restrictions to prevent such consequences.
(Ord. 166, passed 9-25-1979)
§ 151.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No building structure, or improvements shall be permitted on any slope in
excess of 22% without a special Slope Construction permit from the city in
accordance with § 151.04.
(Ord. 166, passed 9-25-1979)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 151.03 SLOPES IN EXCESS OF 35%.
   Slopes greater than 35% shall not be disturbed in any manner, including but
not limited to the construction of any improvements or alterations thereon,
grading, landscaping or any other disturbance to the land or soil of any kind
or nature, without a special Slope Disturbance permit from the city in
accordance with § 151.04.
(Ord. 166, passed 9-25-1979)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 151.04 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   (A)   The permits required by §§ 151.02 and 151.03 shall not be issued
unless the applicant shall comply with conditions as are required by the City
Council after receiving the recommendations of the City Zoning Administrator
and the City Engineer. Permits shall be applied for by written application to
the Zoning Administrator, who shall forward the same to the City Council with
his or her recommendations, if any.
   (B)   After receiving the application and recommendations of the Zoning
Administrator, the City Council shall refer the application to the City
Engineer, who shall then make his or her recommendations known in writing to
the City Council. The Council shall have the power and authority to deny the
permit on any reasonable grounds, or to grant the same upon specific conditions
after consideration of the recommendations of the Zoning Administrator and the
City Engineer.
(Ord. 166, passed 9-25-1979)
§ 151.05 DISTURBANCE OF LANDSCAPE; DRAINAGE TO CITY PROPERTY.
   No person, firm or corporation shall disturb any land within the city
(including but not limited to landscaping, digging, or alteration of real
property) causing any movement of water, debris, mud or dirt resulting in any
damage to any instrumentalities or property, including but not limited to
streets, storm sewers, curbs and gutters, sanitary sewers or water lines, or
resulting in the necessity of any clean-up expenses by the city relating to
city property or instrumentalities.
(Ord. 166, passed 9-25-1979)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 151.06 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Injunctive relief. If, after investigation, the city should detect
that any person, firm or corporation has violated any of the terms of this
chapter, the city may commence an action for appropriate legal or equitable
relief including injunctive relief against the person or persons determined to
have violated this chapter.
   (B)   Costs of damage. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage caused
by the violation. Expenses and damages shall include costs for any cleaning
repair, or replacement work caused by the violation. Any refusal to pay the
assessed costs shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 166, passed 9-25-1979)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 152: MANUFACTURED HOMES
Section
   
152.01   Adoption of state statutes
   
152.02   Definitions
   
152.03   Manufactured homes to be located in manufactured home parks
   
152.04   Manufactured home park specifications
   
152.05   Anchorage and tie-down
   
152.06   Mechanical requirements
   
152.07   Manufactured home utilities
   
152.08   Register of occupants of manufactured home park
   
152.09   Certificate of compliance
   
152.10   Application of chapter
   
152.11   Variance
§ 152.01 ADOPTION OF STATE STATUTES.
   The provisions of M.S. Chapter 327, as amended by the laws of 1967, being §§
327.10 to 327.29 inclusive, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part
hereof. The sections of this chapter which follow are supplementary to the
state law, are not deemed in conflict with the state law or existing
ordinances, and provide additional requirements for the promotion of the public
health, welfare, safety and convenience.
(Ord. 140, passed 8-20-1971)
§ 152.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply,
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A manufactured home shall be as defined by M.S. § 327.31,
Subdivision 6 as it may be amended from time to time and shall be constructed
in compliance with the Manufactured Home Building Code established by M.S. §§
327.31 and 327.32, as it may be amended from time to time.
   MANUFACTURED HOME LOT. A parcel of land within a manufactured home park for
the placement of a single manufactured home and the exclusive use of its
occupants.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. Defined by M.S. § 327.14, Subdivision 3, as it may
be amended from time to time.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, public or private
association or corporation.
   TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular portable structure built on a chassis and
designed to be used for temporary occupancy for travel, recreational, or
vacation use; with the manufacturer’s permanent identification Travel Trailer
thereon; and when factory equipped for the road, being of any length provided
its gross weight does not exceed 4,500 pounds, or being any weight provided its
overall length does not exceed 28 feet.
(Ord. 140, passed 8-20-1971)
§ 152.03 MANUFACTURED HOMES TO BE LOCATED IN MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. 
   No owner or renter shall be permitted to use a manufactured home for a
permanent dwelling or place of abode in the city for an indefinite period of
time unless the home is located within a licensed manufactured home park, under
the provisions of M.S. § 327.15 and Minnesota Rules, parts 4630.0200 to
4630.2210, as they shall be amended from time to time. In the event a
manufactured home is parked within the city on the effective date of this
chapter in a location other than in a licensed manufactured home park, it shall
be lawful to continue parking at the same location, only so long as it is
occupied by the present inhabitants, otherwise parking shall be unlawful and a
violation of this chapter. No owner or occupant of a manufactured home which is
now located elsewhere than in a licensed manufactured home park shall replace
the manufactured home with any other manufactured home at that same location.
(Ord. 140, passed 8-20-1971; Am. Ord. 141, passed 9-13-1971)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 152.04 MANUFACTURED HOME PARK SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The manufactured home park shall be located on a well drained area,
and the premises shall be properly graded so as to prevent the accumulation of
storm or other waters. There shall be a green belt, 15 feet in width, of
plantings around the periphery of the manufactured home park that adjoins any
residential zones, to effectively screen the interior of the manufactured home
park.
   (B)   All roads and rights-of-way within a manufactured home park shall be
privately owned, maintained, traffic and speed regulated, lighted, laid out and
drained in accordance with safety and accepted engineering practices. All water
mains, hydrants, sanitary sewers, and storm sewers within a manufactured home
park shall be privately owned and maintained as prescribed by the City Public
Utilities Commission. The Commission may, when reasonable, allow a manufactured
home park owner to develop the park in stages as it is occupied. All electrical
wiring, telephone wires, and other utility wires, pipes or lines shall be
constructed and installed underground.
   (C)   The minimum area of a manufactured home lot shall be 4,000 square
feet. The parking of more than one manufactured home on any single manufactured
home lot shall not be permitted. A manufactured home with all its accessory
buildings shall cover not more than 25% of the area of the plot on which it is
situated. Each manufactured home lot shall have a manufactured home stand of a
hard paved surface or crushed rock in good repair, a minimum of ten feet in
width and of sufficient length and width to contain the wheels and tongue or
hitch support of the manufactured home.
   (D)   Travel trailers are not permitted within a manufactured home park.
   (E)   The occupant or occupants of a manufactured home shall pay the same
sewer rental charge as is payable from time to time by the resident or
residents of a dwelling house in the city.
   (F)   Manufactured homes and their additions shall be separated from each
other and from other buildings and structures by at least 15 feet, provided
that manufactured homes placed end to end may have a clearance of ten feet
where opposing rear walls are staggered.
   (G)   It shall be the responsibility of the manufactured home park owner to
see that good housekeeping and living conditions are maintained in the
manufactured home park at all times. Each manufactured home lot shall be
landscaped or maintained in grass. City ordinances governing mowing and weeds
apply. No unused building materials, debris, or rubbish shall be allowed to
accumulate. No outside storage of oil drums or trailer equipment shall be
permitted unless it is effectively screened or concealed.
   (H)   No building permit shall be issued for a park until a plot plan
building plans, utility plan, and drainage plan is filed with the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer r and approved by the Public Utility Commission
as conforming to this chapter, and until a permit fee of $50 shall have been
paid to the city.
   (I)   The owner of a manufactured home park shall permit access to any and
all premises or buildings in the manufactured home park by administrative
officers and enforcement officials at any time in performance of their duties.
The owner of a manufactured home shall permit entrance at any reasonable hour
to administrative officers and enforcement officials for purpose of inspection
or in performance of their duties.
   (J)   No building permit for a manufactured home park in the city shall be
issued by the city, nor shall any plan for a manufactured home park be approved
by this city, unless the manufactured home park plan provides for at least 12
manufactured home lots, and otherwise complies with the requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. 140, passed 8-20-1971; Am. Ord. 141, passed 9-13-1971)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 152.05 ANCHORAGE AND TIE-DOWN.
   Every parking space for manufactured homes shall be provided with devices
for anchoring the unit to prevent overturning or uplift. Where concrete
platforms are provided for the parking of the units,
anchorage may be by eyelets imbedded in the concrete with adequate anchor
plates or hooks or other suitable means. The anchorage shall be adequate to
withstand wind forces and uplift as required in Minnesota Rules Chapter 1350 as
they may be amended from time to time, based upon the size and weight of the
units. Every manufactured home shall be required to have the devices for
anchorage and tie-downs attached to the manufactured home.
(Ord. 140, passed 8-20-1971)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 152.06 MECHANICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Plumbing, heating, electrical, and air conditioning installations shall
comply with the accepted engineering practice standards for such installations
in manufactured homes listed in Minnesota Rules Chapter 1350, as they may be
amended from time to time.
(Ord. 140, passed 8-20-1971)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 152.07 MANUFACTURED HOME UTILITIES.
   (A)   Each manufactured home lot shall be provided with piped gas, and shall
have an approved manual shutoff valve installed upstream of the gas outlet. The
outlet shall be equipped with an approved cap to prevent accidental discharge
of gas when the outlet is not in use.
   (B)   The City Council shall be authorized to require or charge to the owner
of each manufactured home such electric meter deposits, utility charges,
minimum water charges, and sewer rental charges as from time to time may be
deemed reasonable and necessary by the City Council.
(Ord. 140, passed 8-20-1971)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 152.08 REGISTER OF OCCUPANTS OF MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. 
   The owner of each manufactured home park shall maintain a written register
at all times, stating the full name of each resident or occupant of the
manufactured home park, the date on which that resident commenced occupancy in
the park, the date on which each occupant shall have vacated their residence in
the park, and any and all other information as from time to time required by
order of the City Council. In addition, the owner of each manufactured home
park shall inform the City Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer at least once each
month of the names of the present residents in the park, the named of persons
vacating the park, and the names of persons who have taken residence in the
park within the 30 days next preceding notification to the City Administrator/
Clerk-Treasurer.
(Ord. 140, passed 8-20-1971)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 152.09 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.
   The owner of each manufactured home shall secure from the City Council a
certificate of compliance showing that the manufactured home complies with the
provisions of this chapter. A fee of $10 for the certificate of compliance
shall be paid to the city by the owner of the manufactured home, and shall be
paid within three days after the manufactured home is placed within a
manufactured home park. Manufactured homes that do not comply shall be removed
from the manufactured home park within 15 days of notification of
noncompliance.
(Ord. 140, passed 8-20-1971)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 152.10 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   This chapter shall not at the outset apply to existing trailer camps and
trailer coach parks. However, within ten years of the effective date of this
chapter, all trailer camps and trailer coach parks in existence on the
effective date of this chapter shall be brought into conformance with this
chapter in all respects.
(Ord. 140, passed 8-20-1971)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 152.11 VARIANCE.
   The City Council shall have the right to vary or modify the strict
application of any of the provisions and regulations contained in this chapter
in cases where the strict application thereof would create unnecessary or
unreasonable hardship to the owner of a manufactured home court or an owner of
property therein; provided nevertheless, that all of the following conditions
shall have been met for the variance.
   (A)   Uniqueness. The conditions upon which the application for a variance
is based are unique to the parcel of land for which the variance is sought, and
are not generally applicable to other property within the same zoning
classification.
   (B)   Injury to surrounding land. The granting of the variance will not be
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other land or improvements in
the neighborhood in which the parcel of land is located, nor be injurious to
any occupant of the manufactured home park.
   (C)   Conditions and restrictions. The City Council may impose conditions
and restrictions on the granting of a variance so as to insure compliance with
both the letter and the intent of this chapter and so as to insure the
protection of affected properties.
(Ord. 210, passed 9-10-1991)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 153: FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Statutory authorization
   
153.002   Findings of fact
   
153.003   Statement of purpose
   
153.004   Applicable area
   
153.005   Official Zoning Map
   
153.006   Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation
   
153.007   Interpretation
   
153.008   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
153.009   Disclaimer of liability
   
153.010   Definitions
   
153.011   Nonconforming uses
   
153.012   Amendments
Establishment of Zoning Districts
   
153.025   Districts
   
153.026   Compliance
FW Floodway District
   
153.040   Permitted uses
   
153.041   Conditional uses
FF Flood Fringe District
   
153.055   Permitted uses
   
153.056   Conditional uses
   
153.057   Standards for all Flood Fringe uses
Subdivisions
   
153.070   Review criteria
   
153.071   Removal of special flood hazard area designation
Public Utilities, Railroads, Roads, and Bridges
   
153.085   Public utilities
   
153.086   Public transportation facilities
   
153.087   On-site sewage treatment and water supply systems
Manufactured Homes and Travel Vehicles
   
153.100   Manufactured home parks
   
153.101   Placement of new manufactured homes
   
153.102   Travel vehicles; exemptions
Administration
   
153.115   Zoning Administrator
   
153.116   Permit requirements
   
153.117   Board of Adjustment
   
153.118   Conditional uses
   
153.119   Notifications for watercourse alterations
   
153.120   Violations; remedies
Cross-reference:
   Zoning, see
Chapter 155
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The legislature of the State of Minnesota has, in M.S. Chapters 103F and
394, as they may be amended from time to time, delegated the responsibility to
local government units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
The City of Preston did so by adopting the City of Preston Floodplain
Management Ordinance on February 26, 1990. The purpose of this chapter is to
update the provisions of the city’s floodplain ordinance to include the revised
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and maps.
(Ord. 197, passed 2-26-1990; Am. Ord. 216, passed 10-18-1994; Am. Ord. 284,
passed - -)
§ 153.002 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   Flood hazard areas. The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to
periodic inundation, which results in potential loss of life, loss of property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety, and general welfare.
   (B)   Methods used to analyze flood hazards. This chapter is based upon a
reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which is consistent with the
standards established by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
(Ord. 197, passed 2-26-1990; Am. Ord. 284, passed - -)
§ 153.003 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize those losses described in §
153.002 by provisions contained herein.
(Ord. 197, passed 2-26-1990; Am. Ord. 284, passed - -)
§ 153.004 APPLICABLE AREA.
   This chapter shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city
shown on the Official Zoning Map and/or the attachments thereto as being
located within the boundaries of the Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts.
(Ord. 197, passed 2-26-1990; Am. Ord. 284, passed - -)
§ 153.005 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   The revised Flood Insurance Study for the Fillmore County and Incorporated
Areas, prepared by the Federal Insurance Administration, the revised Official
Zoning Map together with all materials attached thereto, including the revised
Flood Insurance Rate Maps, listed below, with effective dates of August 15,
2019, shall be adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
These materials are on file at City Hall.
   (A)   27045C0255E;
   (B)   27045C0260E;
   (C)   27045C0261E;
   (D)   27045C0262E;
   (E)   27045C0264E; and
   (F)   27045C0270E.
(Ord. 197, passed 2-26-1990; Am. Ord. 216, passed 10-18-1994; Am. Ord. 284,
passed - -)
§ 153.006 REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION.
   The Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation shall be an elevation no lower
than one foot above the elevation of the regional flood, plus any increases in
flood elevation caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from
designation of a floodway.
(Ord. 197, passed 2-26-1990; Am. Ord. 284, passed - -)
§ 153.007 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the governing body, and shall not be deemed a limitation
or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes.
   (B)   The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be determined by scaling
distances on the Official Zoning Map. Where interpretation is needed as to the
exact location of the boundaries of the district as shown on the Official
Zoning Map, as for example where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual field conditions, and there is a formal appeal of
the decision of the Zoning Administrator, the Board of Adjustment shall make
the necessary interpretation. All decisions will be based on elevations on the
regional (100-year) flood profile and other available technical data. Persons
contesting the location of the district boundaries shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to present their cases to the Board and to submit technical
evidence.
(Ord. 197, passed 2-26-1990; Am. Ord. 284, passed - -)
§ 153.008 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall
prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby
repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
(Ord. 197, passed 2-26-1990; Am. Ord. 284, passed - -)
§ 153.009 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   This chapter does not imply that areas outside the floodplain districts or
land uses permitted within those districts will be free from flooding or
damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. 197, passed 2-26-1990; Am. Ord. 284, passed - -)
§ 153.010 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common
usage, and so as to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
   ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. A use or structure on the same lot with, and of
a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or
structure.
   BASEMENT. Any area of a structure, including crawlspaces, having its floor
or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of the
depth of excavation below ground level.
   CONDITIONAL USE. A specific type of structure or land use listed in the
official control that may be allowed, but only after an in-depth review
procedure and with appropriate conditions or restrictions as provided in the
official zoning controls or building codes, and upon a finding that the
following apply.
      (1)   Certain conditions as detailed in the zoning ordinance exist.
      (2)   The structure and/or land use conform to the comprehensive land use
plan (if one exists) and are compatible with the existing neighborhood.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading,
paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or
materials.
   EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT. A method of determining the location of
floodway boundaries so that floodplain lands on both sides of a stream are
capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.
   FLOOD. A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream, or in the
stage of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry
areas.
   FLOOD FREQUENCY. The frequency for which it is expected that a specific
flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
   FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway. FLOOD
FRINGE is synonymous with the term “floodway fringe,” used in the Flood
Insurance Study for the city.
   FLOODPLAIN. The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or
watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood.
   FLOODPROOFING. A combination of structural provisions, changes, or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the
reduction or elimination of flood damages.
   FLOODWAY. The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and
those portions of the adjoining floodplain which are reasonably required to
carry or store the regional flood discharge.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking
of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area,
is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided, that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-
elevation design requirements of 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 60.3.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include the term “recreational vehicle.”
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures, including additions and improvements, and
placement of manufactured homes, for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of this chapter.
   OBSTRUCTION. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence,
stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across, or projecting
into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory floodplain which may impede,
retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by
catching or collecting debris carried by the water.
   PRINCIPAL USE OR STRUCTURE. All uses or structures that are not accessory
uses or structures.
   REACH. A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a
stream or river influenced by a natural or man-made obstruction. In an urban
area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge crossings
would most typically constitute a REACH.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is 400
square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, is
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck, and
is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. For the
purposes of this chapter, the term RECREATIONAL VEHICLE is synonymous with the
term “travel trailer/travel vehicle.”
   REGIONAL FLOOD. A flood which is representative of large floods known to
have occurred generally in Minnesota, and reasonably characteristic of what can
be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year
recurrence interval. REGIONAL FLOOD is synonymous with the term “base flood”
used in the Flood Insurance Study.
   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. An elevation no lower than one foot
above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation
caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from designation of a
floodway.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. A term used for flood insurance purposes
synonymous with “One Hundred Year Floodplain.”
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the
ground or on- site utilities, including, but not limited to buildings,
factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, travel
trailers/vehicles not meeting the exemption criteria specified in §
153.102(A) and other similar items.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the
cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or
exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Within any consecutive 365-day period, any
reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair),
repair after damage, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the
“start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures that
have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
“historic structure.” For the purpose of this chapter, “historic structure” is
as defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 59.1.
   VARIANCE. A modification or variation of the provisions of this code, as
applied to a specific piece of property. A VARIANCE from the literal provisions
of this code may be granted only in instances where the strict enforcement of
these provisions would cause undue hardship because of circumstances unique to
the individual property under consideration. VARIANCES shall be granted only
when it is demonstrated that the granting of the variance will be in keeping
with the spirit and intent of this code. “Undue hardship” as used in connection
with the granting of a variance means the property in question cannot be put to
a reasonable use if used under conditions allowed by the official controls, the
plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to the property not
created by the landowner, and the variance, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the locality. Economic considerations alone shall not
constitute an undue hardship if reasonable use for the property exists under
the terms of the ordinance. Undue hardship also includes, but is not limited
to, inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems. VARIANCES
shall be granted for earth-sheltered construction as defined in M.S. § 216C.06,
Subdivision 2, as it may be amended from time to time, when in harmony with the
ordinance. A use that is not permitted under the code for property in the zone
where the affected person’s land is located shall not be permitted by the
granting of a variance. The temporary use of a one-family dwelling as a two-
family dwelling may be permitted by a variance. Conditions may be imposed in
the granting of variances to insure compliance and to protect adjacent
properties.
(Ord. 197, passed 2-26-1990; Am. Ord. 284, passed - -)
§ 153.011 NONCONFORMING USES.
   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before
the passage or amendment of this chapter, but which is not in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter, may be continued subject to the following
conditions.
   (A)   No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered in a way
which increases its nonconformity.
   (B)   Any alteration or addition to a nonconforming structure or
nonconforming use which would result in increasing the flood damage potential
of that structure shall be protected to the Regulatory Flood Protection
Elevation in accordance with any of the elevation on fill or floodproofing
techniques (such as FP-1 through FP-4 floodproofing classifications) allowable
in the State Building Code, except as further restricted in division (C).
   (C)   The cost of any structural alterations or additions to any
nonconforming structure over the life of the structure shall not exceed 50% of
the market value of the structure, unless the conditions of this section are
satisfied. The cost of all structural alterations and additions constructed
since the adoption of the community’s initial floodplain controls must be
calculated into today’s current cost, which will include all costs, such as
construction materials and a reasonable cost placed on all manpower or labor.
If the current cost of all previous and proposed alterations and additions
exceeds 50% of the current market value of the structure, then the structure
must meet the standards of §§
153.040 and
153.041 or
153.055 through
153.057 of this chapter for new structures, depending upon whether the
structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively.
   (D)   If any nonconforming use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months,
any future use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter. The
assessor shall notify the Zoning Administrator in writing of instances of
nonconforming uses which have been discontinued for a period of 12 months.
   (E)   If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means,
including floods, to an extent of 50% or more of its market value at the time
of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. The applicable provisions for establishing new or
new structures in §§
153.040 and
153.041 or
153.055 through
153.057 will apply, depending upon whether the use or structure is in the
Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively.
(Ord. 197, passed 2-26-1990; Am. Ord. 284, passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.012 AMENDMENTS.
   The floodplain designation on the Official Zoning Map shall not be removed
from floodplain areas unless it can be shown that the designation is in error
or that the area has been filled to or above the elevation of the regional
flood and is contiguous to lands outside the floodplain. Special exceptions to
this rule may be permitted by the Commissioner of Natural Resources, if he or
she determines that, through other measures, lands are adequately protected for
the intended use. All amendments to this chapter, including amendments to the
Official Zoning Map, must be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of
Natural Resources prior to adoption. Changes in the Official Zoning Map must
meet the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA) Technical Conditions and
Criteria, and must receive prior FEMA approval before adoption. The
Commissioner of Natural Resources must be given ten days’ written notice of all
hearings to consider an amendment to this chapter, and the notice shall include
a draft of the amendment or technical study under consideration.
(Ord. 197, passed 2-26-1990; Am. Ord. 284, passed - -)
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 153.025 DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Floodway District. The Floodway District shall include those areas
within zone AE areas designated as floodway on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps
adopted in §
153.005.
   (B)   Flood Fringe District. The Flood Fringe District shall include those
areas within zone AE areas on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps adopted in §
153.005, but are located outside of the floodway.
(Ord. 197, passed 2-26-1990; Am. Ord. 284, passed - -)
§ 153.026 COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   No new structure or land shall hereafter be used, and no structure
shall be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full
compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations
which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter.
   (B)   Within the Floodway and Flood Fringe Districts, all uses not listed as
permitted uses or conditional uses in §§
153.040,
153.041, and
153.055 through
153.057 shall be prohibited. In addition, a caution is provided here.
      (1)   New manufactured homes, replacement manufactured homes and certain
travel trailers and travel vehicles are subject to the general provisions of
this chapter, and specifically §§
153.100 through
153.102.
      (2)   Modifications, additions, structural alterations or repair after
damage to existing nonconforming structures and nonconforming uses of
structures or land are regulated by the general provisions of this chapter, and
specifically §
153.011.
      (3)   As-built elevations for elevated or floodproofed structures must be
certified by ground surveys, and floodproofing techniques must be designed and
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as specified in
the general provisions of this chapter and specifically as stated in §§
153.115 through
153.118.
   (C)   All construction within the Floodway and Flood Fringe Districts must
be:
      (1)   Designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
floatation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
      (2)   Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
      (3)   Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
      (4)   Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, ductwork,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
   (D)   Floodplain developments shall not adversely affect the hydraulic
capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any tributary watercourse
or drainage system.
(Ord. 197, passed 2-26-1990; Am. Ord. 284, passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
FW FLOODWAY DISTRICT
§ 153.040 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the FW
Floodway District.
      (1)   General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting;
      (2)   Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas, and airport
landing strips;
      (3)   Private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges,
archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks,
wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves,
target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, and single- or
multiple-purpose recreational trails; and
      (4)   Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas.
   (B)   Standards for Floodway permitted uses.
      (1)   The use shall have a low flood-damage potential.
      (2)   The use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district if
one exists.
      (3)   The use shall not obstruct flood flows or increase flood
elevations, and shall not involve structures, fill, obstructions, excavations
or storage of materials or equipment.
(Ord. 197, passed 2-26-1990; Am. Ord. 284, passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.041 CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   Conditional uses. The following shall be conditional uses in the FW
Floodway District.
      (1)   Structures accessory to the uses listed in §
153.040(A) above and the uses listed in this division (A);
      (2)   Extraction and storage of sand, gravel, and other materials;
      (3)   Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves, and water control
structures;
      (4)   Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines, and
pipelines;
      (5)   Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or material;
      (6)   Placement of fill;
      (7)   Travel trailers and travel vehicles either on individual lots of
record or in existing or new subdivisions or commercial or condominium-type
campgrounds, subject to the exemptions and provisions of §
153.102; and
      (8)   Structural works for flood control, such as levees, dikes and
floodwalls constructed to any height where the intent is to protect individual
structures and levees or dikes where the intent is to protect agricultural
crops for a frequency flood event equal to or less than the 100-year-frequency
flood event.
   (B)   Standards for Floodway conditional uses.
      (1)   All uses. No structure (temporary or permanent), fill (including
fill for roads and levees), deposit, obstruction, storage of materials or
equipment, or other uses may be allowed as a conditional use that will cause
any increase in the stage of the 100-year or regional flood or cause an
increase in flood damages in the reach or reaches affected.
      (2)   Conditional use procedures. All Floodway conditional uses shall be
subject to the procedures and standards contained in §
153.118 of this chapter.
      (3)   Underlying district. The conditional use shall be permissible in
the underlying zoning district if one exists.
      (4)   Fill.
         (a)   Fill, dredge spoil and all other similar materials deposited or
stored in the floodplain shall be protected from erosion by vegetative cover,
mulching, riprap or other acceptable method.
         (b)   Dredge spoil sites and sand and gravel operations shall not be
allowed in the floodway unless a long-term site development plan is submitted
which includes an erosion/sedimentation prevention element to the plan.
         (c)   As an alternative, and consistent with division (B)(4)(b) of
this section immediately above, dredge spoil disposal and sand and gravel
operations may allow temporary, on-site storage of fill or other materials
which would have caused an increase to the stage of the 100-year or regional
flood but only after the governing body has received an appropriate plan which
assures the removal of the materials from the floodway based upon the flood
warning time available. The conditional use permit must be title registered
with the property in the Office of the County Recorder.
      (5)   Accessory structures.
         (a)   Accessory structures shall not be designed for human habitation.
         (b)   Accessory structures, if permitted, shall be constructed and
placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow
of flood waters.
            1.   Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the
longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow.
            2.   So far as practicable, structures shall be placed
approximately on the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining structures.
         (c)   Accessory structures shall be elevated on fill or structurally
dry floodproofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 floodproofing
classifications in the State Building Code. As an alternative, an accessory
structure may be floodproofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 floodproofing classification
in the State Building Code, provided the accessory structure constitutes a
minimal investment, does not exceed 500 square feet in size, and for a detached
garage, the detached garage must be used solely for parking of vehicles and
limited storage. All floodproofed accessory structures must meet the following
additional standards, as appropriate.
            1.   The structure must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure, and shall be designed
to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
            2.   Any mechanical and utility equipment in a structure must be
elevated to or above the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation or properly
floodproofed.
      (6)   Storage of materials and equipment.
         (a)   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of
flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or
plant life is prohibited.
         (b)   Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if
readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood
warning, and in accordance with a plan approved by the governing body.
      (7)   Structural works. Structural works for flood control that will
change the course, current or cross-section of protected wetlands or public
waters shall be subject to the provisions of M.S. Chapter 105, as it may be
amended from time to time. Community-wide structural works for flood control
intended to remove areas from the regulatory floodplain shall not be allowed in
the floodway.
      (8)   Avoidance of increase in flood level. A levee, dike or floodwall
constructed in the floodway shall not cause an increase to the 100-year or
regional flood and the technical analysis must assume equal conveyance or
storage loss on both sides of a stream.
(Ord. 197, passed 2-26-1990; Am. Ord. 284, passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
FF FLOOD FRINGE DISTRICT
§ 153.055 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be those uses of land or
structures listed as permitted uses in the underlying zoning use district(s).
If no pre-existing, underlying zoning use districts exist, then any residential
or nonresidential structure or use of a structure or land shall be a permitted
use in the Flood Fringe, provided the use does not constitute a public
nuisance. All permitted uses shall comply with the standards for Flood Fringe
permitted uses listed in division (B) of this section, and the standards for
all Flood Fringe permitted and conditional uses listed in §
153.057.
   (B)   Standards for Flood Fringe permitted uses.
      (1)   All structures, including accessory structures, must be elevated on
fill so that the lowest floor, including basement floor, is at or above the
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. The finished fill elevation for
structures shall be no lower than one foot below the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation, and the fill shall extend at that elevation at least 15
feet beyond the outside limits of the structure erected thereon.
      (2)   As an alternative to elevation on fill, accessory structures that
constitute a minimal investment and that do not exceed square feet for the
outside dimension at ground level may be internally floodproofed in accordance
with §
153.041(B)(5).
      (3)   The cumulative placement of fill where, at any one time, in excess
of 1,000 cubic yards of fill is located on the parcel, shall be allowable only
as a conditional use, unless the fill is specifically intended to elevate a
structure in accordance with division (B)(1) of this section.
      (4)   The storage of any materials or equipment shall be elevated on fill
to the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation.
      (5)   The provisions of §
153.057 of this chapter shall apply.
(Ord. 197, passed 2-26-1990; Am. Ord. 284, passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.056 CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   Conditional uses. Any structure that is not elevated on fill or
floodproofed in accordance with §
153.055(B)(1) and (B)(2), or any use of land that does not comply with the
standards in §
153.055(B)(3) or (B)(4) shall only be allowable as a conditional use. An
application for a conditional use shall be subject to the standards and
criteria and evaluation procedures specified in division (B) of this section,
and in §§
153.057 and
153.118.
   (B)   Standards for Flood Fringe conditional uses.
      (1)   Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill may be
utilized to elevate a structure’s lowest floor above the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation. These alternative methods may include the use of stilts,
pilings, parallel walls, and the like, or above-grade enclosed areas, such as
crawl spaces or tuck-under garages. The base or floor of an enclosed area shall
be considered above- grade and not a structure’s basement or lowest floor if
the enclosed area is above grade on at least one side of the structure; is
designed to internally flood and is constructed with flood-resistant materials;
and is used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage. The
above noted alternative elevation methods are subject to the following
additional standards:
         (a)   Design and certification. The structure’s design and as-built
condition must be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
as being in compliance with the general design standards of the State Building
Code and, specifically, that all electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and
air conditioning equipment and other service facilities must be at or above the
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation, or be designed to prevent flood water
from entering or accumulating within these components during times of flooding.
         (b)   Specific standards for above-grade, enclosed areas. Above-grade,
fully enclosed areas, such as crawl spaces or tuck-under garages, must be
designed to internally flood, and the design plans must stipulate the
following.
            1.   The minimum area of openings in the walls where internal
flooding is to be used as a floodproofing technique. When openings are placed
in a structure’s walls to provide for entry of flood waters to equalize
pressures, the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
flood waters; and
            2.   That the enclosed area will be designed of flood-resistant
materials in accordance with the FP-3 or FP-4 classifications in the State
Building Code, and shall be used solely for building access, parking of
vehicles or storage.
      (2)   Basements, as defined in §
153.010, shall be subject to the following.
         (a)   Residential basement construction shall not be allowed below the
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation.
         (b)   Nonresidential basements may be allowed below the Regulatory
Flood Protection Elevation provided the basement is structurally dry
floodproofed in accordance with division (B)(3) of this section.
      (3)   All areas of nonresidential structures, including basements to be
placed below the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation, shall be floodproofed
in accordance with the structurally dry floodproofing classifications in the
State Building Code. Structurally dry floodproofing must meet the FP-1 or FP-
2 floodproofing classification in the State Building Code, and this shall
require making the structure watertight, with the walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water, and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of
buoyancy. Structures floodproofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 classification shall not
be permitted.
      (4)   When at any one time more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill or other
similar material is located on a parcel for such activities as on-site storage,
landscaping, sand and gravel operations, landfills, roads, dredge spoil,
disposal or construction of flood control works, an erosion/sedimentation
control plan must be submitted unless the community is enforcing a state-
approved shoreland management ordinance. In the absence of a state-approved
shoreland ordinance, the plan must clearly specify methods to be used to
stabilize the fill on-site for a flood event at a minimum of the 100-year or
regional flood event. The plan must be prepared and certified by a registered
professional engineer or other qualified individual acceptable to the governing
body. The plan may incorporate alternative procedures for removal of the
material from the floodplain if adequate flood warning time exists.
      (5)   (a)   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of
flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or
plant life is prohibited.
         (b)   Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if
readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning
and in accordance with a plan approved by the governing body.
      (6)   The provisions of §
153.057 shall also apply.
(Ord. 197, passed 2-26-1990; Am. Ord. 284, passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.057 STANDARDS FOR ALL FLOOD FRINGE USES.
   (A)   New principal structures. All new principal structures must have
vehicular access at or above an elevation not more than two feet below the
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. If a variance to this requirement is
granted, the Board of Adjustment must specify limitations on the period of use
or occupancy of the structure for times of flooding, and only after determining
that adequate flood warning time and local flood emergency response procedures
exist.
   (B)   Commercial uses. Accessory land uses, such as yards, railroad tracks,
and parking lots may be at elevations lower than the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation. However, a permit for such facilities to be used by the
employees or the general public shall not be granted in the absence of a flood
warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area would be
inundated to a depth greater than two feet or be subject to flood velocities
greater than four feet per second upon occurrence of the regional flood.
   (C)   Manufacturing and industrial uses. Measures shall be taken to minimize
interference with normal plant operations, especially along streams having
protracted flood durations. Certain accessory land uses such as yards and
parking lots may be at lower elevations, subject to requirements set out in
division (B) of this section. In considering permit applications, due
consideration shall be given to needs of an industry whose business requires
that it be located in floodplain areas.
   (D)   Fill. Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be
properly protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable
method. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria
for removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures
properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA’s
requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection
standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should
be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of
special hazard area designation will be requested.
   (E)   Floodplain developments. Floodplain developments shall not adversely
affect the hydraulic capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any
tributary watercourse or drainage system.
   (F)   Travel vehicles. Standards for travel trailers and travel vehicles are
contained in §
153.102.
   (G)   Manufactured homes. All manufactured homes must be securely anchored
to an adequately anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse
and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is in addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements
for resisting wind forces.
(Ord. 197, passed 2-26-1990; Am. Ord. 284, passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
SUBDIVISIONS
§ 153.070 REVIEW CRITERIA.
   No land shall be subdivided which is unsuitable for the reason of flooding,
inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment facilities. All lots
within the floodplain districts shall contain a building site at or above the
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. All subdivisions shall have water and
sewage treatment facilities that comply with the provisions of this chapter,
and have road access both to the subdivision and to the individual building
sites, no lower than two feet below the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation.
For all subdivisions in the floodplain, the floodway and flood fringe
boundaries, the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation and the required
elevation of all access roads shall be clearly labeled on all required
subdivision drawings and platting documents.
(Ord. 197, passed 2-26-1990; Am. Ord. 284, passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Subdivision design standards in floodplains, see §
154.045
§ 153.071 REMOVAL OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA DESIGNATION.
   The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for
removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures
properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA’s
requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection
standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should
be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of
special flood hazard area designation will be requested.
(Ord. 197, passed 2-26-1990; Am. Ord. 284, passed - -)
PUBLIC UTILITIES, RAILROADS, ROADS, AND BRIDGES
§ 153.085 PUBLIC UTILITIES.
   All public utilities and facilities such as gas, electrical, sewer, and
water supply systems to be located in the floodplain shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the State Building Code or elevated to above the Regulatory
Flood Protection Elevation.
(Ord. 197, passed 2-26-1990; Am. Ord. 284, passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.086 PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES.
   Railroad tracks, roads, and bridges to be located within the floodplain
shall comply with §§
153.040,
153.041, and
153.055 through
153.057. Elevation to the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation shall be
provided where failure or interruption of these transportation facilities would
result in danger to the public health or safety or where the facilities are
essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or auxiliary roads or
railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where failure or interruption
of transportation services would not endanger the public health or safety.
(Ord. 197, passed 2-26-1990; Am. Ord. 284, passed - -)
§ 153.087 ON-SITE SEWAGE TREATMENT AND WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS.
   Where public utilities are not provided on-site water supply systems must be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
systems; and new or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems
and discharges from the systems into flood waters, and they shall not be
subject to impairment or contamination during times of flooding. Any sewage
treatment system designed in accordance with the state’s current statewide
standards for on-site sewage treatment systems shall be determined to be in
compliance with this section.
(Ord. 197, passed 2-26-1990; Am. Ord. 284, passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAVEL VEHICLES
§ 153.100 MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS.
   New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing manufactured home
parks shall be subject to the provisions placed on subdivisions by §§
153.070 and
153.071.
(Ord. 197, passed 2-26-1990; Am. Ord. 284, passed - -)
§ 153.101 PLACEMENT OF NEW MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   (A)   The placement of new or replacement manufactured homes in existing
manufactured home parks or on individual lots of record that are located in
floodplain districts will be treated as a new structure, and may be placed only
if elevated in compliance with §§
153.055 through
153.057. If vehicular road access for pre-existing manufactured home parks is
not provided in accordance with §
153.057(A), then replacement manufactured homes will not be allowed until the
property owner(s) develops a flood warning emergency plan acceptable to the
governing body.
   (B)   All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in
addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind
forces.
(Ord. 197, passed 2-26-1990; Am. Ord. 284, passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.102 TRAVEL VEHICLES; EXEMPTIONS.
   Travel trailers and travel vehicles that do not meet the exemption criteria
specified in division (A) below shall be subject to the provisions of this
chapter and as specifically spelled out in divisions (C) and (D) below.
   (A)   Exemption. Travel trailers and travel vehicles are exempt from the
provisions of this chapter if they are placed in any of the areas listed in
division (B) below, and further, they meet the following criteria.
      (1)   Have current licenses required for highway use;
      (2)   Are highway ready, meaning on wheels or the internal jacking
system, are attached to the site only by quick disconnect-type utilities
commonly used in campgrounds and trailer parks, and the travel trailer/travel
vehicle has no permanent structural-type additions attached to it; and
      (3)   The travel trailer or travel vehicle and associated use must be
permissible in any pre-existing, underlying zoning use district.
   (B)   Areas exempted for placement of travel/recreational vehicles.
      (1)   Individual lots or parcels of record;
      (2)   Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds; and
      (3)   Existing condominium-type associations.
   (C)   Loss of exemption. Travel trailers and travel vehicles exempted in
division (A)(2) of this section lose this exemption when development occurs on
the parcel exceeding $500 for a structural addition to the travel trailer/
travel vehicle or an accessory structure such as a garage or storage building.
The travel trailer/travel vehicle, and all additions and accessory structures
will then be treated as a new structure, and shall be subject to the elevation/
floodproofing requirements and the use of land restrictions specified in §§
153.040,
153.041, and
153.055 through
153.057.
   (D)   New developments. New commercial travel trailer or travel vehicle
parks or campgrounds, and new residential-type subdivisions and condominium
associations, and the expansion of any existing similar use exceeding five
units or dwelling sites, shall be subject to the following.
      (1)   Any new or replacement travel trailer or travel vehicle will be
allowed in the Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts, provided the trailer or
vehicle and its contents are placed on fill above the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation, and proper elevated road access to the site exists in
accordance with §
153.057(A). Any fill placed in a floodway for the purpose of elevating a travel
trailer shall be subject to the requirements of §§
153.040 and
153.041.
      (2)   All new or replacement travel trailers or travel vehicles not
meeting the criteria of division (D)(1) above may, as an alternative, be
allowed as a conditional use if in accordance with the following provisions and
the provisions of §
153.118. The applicant must submit an emergency plan for the safe evacuation of
all vehicles and people during the 100-year flood. The plan shall be prepared
by a registered engineer or other qualified individual, and shall demonstrate
that adequate time and personnel exist to carry out the evacuation. All
attendant sewage and water facilities for new or replacement travel trailers or
other recreational vehicles must be protected or constructed so as to not be
impaired or contaminated during times of flooding, in accordance with §
153.087.
(Ord. 197, passed 2-26-1990; Am. Ord. 284, passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
ADMINISTRATION
§ 153.115 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   A Zoning Administrator designated by the governing body shall administer and
enforce this chapter. If the Zoning Administrator finds a violation of the
provisions of this chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the person
responsible for the violation in accordance with the procedures stated in §
153.120.
(Ord. 197, passed 2-26-1990; Am. Ord. 284, passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.116 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Permit required. A permit issued by the Zoning Administrator in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter shall be secured prior to the
erection, addition, or alteration of any building, structure, or portion
thereof; prior to the use or change of use of a building, structure or land;
prior to the change or extension of a nonconforming use; and prior to the
placement of fill, excavation of materials, or the storage of materials or
equipment within the floodplain.
   (B)   Application for permit. Application for a permit shall be made in
duplicate to the Zoning Administrator on forms furnished by the Zoning
Administrator, and where applicable shall include plans in duplicate drawn to
scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the lot;
existing or proposed structures, fill, or storage of materials; and the
location of the foregoing in relation to the stream channel.
   (C)   State and federal permits. Prior to granting a permit or processing an
application for a conditional use permit or variance, the Zoning Administrator
shall determine that the applicant has obtained all necessary state and federal
permits.
   (D)   Certificate of zoning compliance for a new, altered, or nonconforming
use. It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit the use or occupancy of any
building or premises or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed,
converted, altered, or enlarged in its use or structure, until a certificate of
zoning compliance shall have been issued by the Zoning Administrator, stating
that the use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this
chapter.
   (E)   Construction and use to be as provided on applications, plans,
permits, variances and certificates of zoning compliance. Permits, conditional
use permits, or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of
approved plans and applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and
construction set forth in the approved plans and applications, and no other
use, arrangement, or construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction at
variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter, as
provided by §
153.120.
   (F)   Certification. The applicant shall be required to submit certification
by a registered professional engineer, registered architect, or registered land
surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Floodproofing measures shall be
certified by a registered professional engineer or registered architect.
   (G)   Record of first floor elevation. The Zoning Administrator shall
maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of
all new structures and alterations or additions to existing structures in the
floodplain. The Zoning Administrator shall also maintain a record of the
elevation to which structures and alterations or additions to structures are
floodproofed.
(Ord. 197, passed 2-26-1990; Am. Ord. 284, passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.117 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   Rules. The Planning Commission shall act as the Board of Adjustment
and shall adopt rules for the conduct of business and may exercise all of the
powers conferred on such boards by state law.
   (B)   Administrative review. The Board shall hear and decide appeals where
it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
   (C)   Variances. The Board may authorize upon appeal in specific cases such
relief or variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to
the public interest, and only in the case of unusual hardship, as defined in
the definition of variance in §
153.010. The Board of Adjustment shall clearly identify in writing the specific
conditions that existed consistent with the criteria specified in the
respective enabling legislation which justified the granting of the variance.
No variance shall have the effect of allowing in any district uses prohibited
in that district, permit a lower degree of flood protection than the Regulatory
Flood Protection Elevation for the particular area, or permit standards lower
than those required by state law.
   (D)   Hearings. Upon filing with the Board of Adjustment of an appeal from a
decision of the Zoning Administrator, or an application for a variance, the
Board shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing and give due notice to the
parties in interest as specified by law. The Board shall submit by mail to the
Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the application for proposed
variances sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will receive at
least ten days’ notice of the hearing.
   (E)   Decisions. The Board shall arrive at a decision on an appeal or
variance within 45 days. In passing upon an appeal, the Board may, so long as
the action is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or
affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination of the Zoning Administrator or other public official. It shall
make its decision in writing, setting forth the findings of fact and the
reasons for its decisions. In granting a variance, the Board may prescribe
appropriate conditions and safeguards such as those specified in §
153.118(F), which are in conformity with the purposes of this chapter.
Violations of the conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms
under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter punishable under the terms of §
10.99, in accordance with the terms of §
153.120. A copy of all decisions granting variances shall be forwarded by mail
to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten days of the action.
   (F)   Appeals. Appeals from any decision of the Board may be made under §
155.281, and as specified in this community’s official controls and in
Minnesota Statutes.
   (G)   Flood insurance notice and record keeping. The Zoning Administrator
shall notify the applicant for a variance that the issuance of a variance to
construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of
insurance coverage, and that construction below the 100-year or regional flood
level increases risks to life and property. Notification shall be maintained
with a record of all variance actions. A community shall maintain a record of
all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report
variances issued in its annual or biennial report submitted to the
Administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program.
(Ord. 197, passed 2-26-1990; Am. Ord. 284, passed - -)
§ 153.118 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The City Council shall hear and decide applications for conditional uses
permissible under this chapter. Applications shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator.
   (A)   Hearings. Upon filing with the Zoning Administrator an application for
a conditional use permit, the Zoning Administrator shall submit by mail to the
Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the application for the proposed
conditional use, sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will receive
at least ten days’ notice of the hearing.
   (B)   Decisions. In granting a conditional use permit, the City Council
shall prescribe the appropriate conditions and safeguards, in addition to those
specified in division (F) of this section, which are in conformity with the
purposes of this chapter. Violations of the conditions and safeguards, when
made a part of the terms under which the conditional use permit is granted,
shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. A copy of all decisions granting
conditional use permits shall be forwarded by mail to the Commissioner of
Natural Resources within ten days of the action.
   (C)   Procedures to be followed by the City Council in passing on
conditional use permit applications within all floodplain districts.
      (1)   Require the applicant to furnish such of the following information
and additional information as deemed necessary to the City Council for
determining the suitability of the particular site for the proposed use.
         (a)   Plans in triplicate drawn to scale showing the nature location,
dimensions, and elevation of the lot, existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, floodproofing measures, and the relationship of the above
to the location of the stream channel; and
         (b)   Specifications for building construction and materials,
floodproofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement, storage of
materials, water supply and sanitary facilities.
      (2)   Transmit one copy of the information described in division (C)(1)
(a) to a designated engineer or other expert person or agency for technical
assistance, where necessary, in evaluating the proposed project in relation to
flood heights and velocities, the seriousness of flood damage to the use, the
adequacy of the plans for protection, and other technical matters.
      (3)   Based upon the technical evaluation of the designated engineer or
expert, the City Council shall determine the specific flood hazard at the site
and evaluate the suitability of the proposed use in relation to the flood
hazard.
   (D)   Factors upon which the decision of the City Council shall be based. In
passing upon conditional use applications, the City Council shall consider all
relevant factors specified in other sections of this chapter, including the
following.
      (1)   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments;
      (2)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others, or they may block bridges, culverts or
other hydraulic structures;
      (3)   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of
these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions;
      (4)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of any damage on the individual owner;
      (5)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (6)   The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location;
      (7)   The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding
for the proposed use;
      (8)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and
development anticipated in the foreseeable future;
      (9)   The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and
floodplain management program for the area;
      (10)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
      (11)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and
      (12)   Any other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this
chapter.
   (E)   Time for acting on application. The City Council shall act on an
application in the manner described above. The City Council shall render a
written decision.
   (F)   Conditions attached to conditional use permits. Upon consideration of
the factors listed above and the purpose of this chapter, the City Council
shall attach conditions to the granting of conditional use permits as it deems
necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter. Conditions may include, but
are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Modification of waste treatment and water supply;
      (2)   Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and operation;
      (3)   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed
restrictions;
      (4)   Requirements for construction of channel modifications,
compensatory storage, dikes, levees, and other protective measures; and
      (5)   Floodproofing measures, in accordance with the State Building Code
and this chapter. The applicant shall submit a plan or document certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures
are consistent with the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation and associated
flood factors for the particular area.
(Ord. 197, passed 2-26-1990; Am. Ord. 284, passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.119 NOTIFICATIONS FOR WATERCOURSE ALTERATIONS.
   Before authorizing any alteration or relocation of a river or stream, the
Zoning Administrator must notify adjacent communities. If the applicant has
applied for a permit to work in public waters pursuant to M.S. § 103G.245, as
it may be amended from time to time, this will suffice as adequate notice. A
copy of the notification must also be submitted to the Chicago Regional Office
of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
(Ord. 284, passed - -)
§ 153.120 VIOLATIONS; REMEDIES.
   (A)   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variances, or conditional uses) shall
constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by law.
   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. Actions may
include but are not limited to the following.
      (1)   In responding to a suspected ordinance violation, the Zoning
Administrator and local government may utilize the full array of enforcement
actions available to it, including but not limited to prosecution and fines,
injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders for corrective measures or a
request to the National Flood Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance
availability to the guilty party. The community must act in good faith to
enforce these official controls and to correct violations to the extent
possible, so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood
Insurance Program.
      (2)   When a violation is either discovered by or brought to the
attention of the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Administrator shall
immediately investigate the situation and document the nature and extent of the
violation of the official control. As soon as is reasonably possible, this
information will be submitted to the appropriate Department of Natural
Resources and Federal Emergency Management Agency regional office along with
the community’s plan of action to correct the violation to the degree possible.
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator shall notify the suspected party of the
requirements of this chapter and all other official controls and the nature and
extent of the suspected violation of these controls. If the structure and/or
use is under construction or development, the Zoning Administrator may order
the construction or development immediately halted until a proper permit or
approval is granted by the community. If the construction or development is
already completed, then the Zoning Administrator may either issue an order
identifying the corrective actions that must be made within a specified time
period to bring the use or structure into compliance with the official
controls, or notify the responsible party to apply for an after-the-fact
permit/development approval within a specified period of time not to exceed 30
days.
      (4)   If the responsible party does not appropriately respond to the
Zoning Administrator within the specified period of time, each additional day
that lapses shall constitute an additional violation of this chapter, and shall
be prosecuted accordingly. The Zoning Administrator shall also, upon the lapse
of the specified response period, notify the landowner to restore the land to
the condition which existed prior to the violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 197, passed 2-26-1990; Am. Ord. 284, passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 154: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
154.001   Title
   
154.002   Purpose
   
154.003   Application
   
154.004   Amendments
   
154.005   Definitions
Plat Procedures
   
154.015   Policy
   
154.016   Pre-application meeting
   
154.017   Preliminary plat
   
154.018   Final plat
Data Required for Plats
   
154.030   Preliminary plat
   
154.031   Data for final plat
Subdivision Design Standards
   
154.045   General requirements
   
154.046   Streets
   
154.047   Blocks
   
154.048   Lots
   
154.049   Tree removal; conservation of vegetation
   
154.050   Erosion and sediment control
   
154.051   Drainage
   
154.052   Easements
   
154.053   Steep slopes
   
154.054   Sanitation
   
154.055   Utilities
Improvements
   
154.065   Required improvements
   
154.066   Payment for local improvements
   
154.067   Signed agreement required
   
154.068   Development contract
Modifications; Exceptions; Variances
   
154.080   Variance
   
154.081   Applicability
   
154.082   Easements
Land Division
   
154.095   General
   
154.096   Small subdivisions
Surveys; Permits
   
154.110   Surveys
   
154.111   Building permits
Violations
   
154.125   Violations
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the Preston
Subdivision Ordinance.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
§ 154.002 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is adopted for the following purposes.
   (A)   Encouraging well planned, efficient, and attractive subdivisions by
establishing adequate standards for design and construction.
   (B)   Providing for the health and safety of residents by requiring the
necessary services, such as properly designed streets and adequate sewage and
water service.
   (C)   Placing the cost of improvements against those benefitting from their
construction.
   (D)   Securing the rights of the public with respect to public lands and
waters.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
§ 154.003 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Limited to land within city limits. The rules and regulations
governing plats and subdivision of land contained herein shall apply to all
land within the city limits. Except in the case of resubdivision, this chapter
shall not apply to any lot or lots forming a part of a subdivision recorded in
the office of the County Recorder prior to the effective date of this chapter.
Where this chapter conflicts with any other city or state ordinances, the most
strict provisions of those ordinances shall prevail.
   (B)   Subdivision platting procedure required. Developers of any parcels
shall be required to conform to the platting procedures described herein it
they meet any of the following provisions.
      (1)   The resultant parcel is less than five acres in area and less than
300 feet in width.
      (2)   The resultant parcel requires a new street or road.
   (C)   Unplatted subdivisions. The platting of a subdivision is optional only
when all the following conditions are met.
      (1)   The resultant parcel is at least five acres in area and at least
300 feet in width.
      (2)   No new roads are required to serve the resultant parcel.
      (3)   Five or fewer parcels are being created as a result of the proposed
subdivision.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
§ 154.004 AMENDMENTS.
   The procedures for amending this chapter shall be identical to those
followed for amending the Zoning Ordinance, as defined in §§ 154.015 through
154.018. Public hearings shall be held consistent with the provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance, with any amendments approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
§ 154.005 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply,
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ATTORNEY. The City Attorney.
   BLOCK. The enclosed area within the perimeter of roads, property lines or
boundaries of the subdivision.
   BOULEVARD. The portion of the street right-of-way between the curb line and
the property line.
   BUTT LOT. A lot at the end of a block and located between two corner lots.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN OR POLICIES. A compilation of goal policy statements,
standards, programs, and maps for guiding the physical, social and economic
development, both public and private, of the city and its environs, as defined
in the Minnesota City Planning Act, and including any unit or part of the plan
separately adopted and any amendment to the plan or part thereof.
   CONTOUR MAP. A map on which irregularities of land surface are shown by
lines connecting points of equal elevations. Contour interval is the vertical
height between contour lines.
   CORNER LOT. A lot bordered on at least two sides by streets.
   DEVELOPMENT. The act of building structures and/or installing site
improvements.
   DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS. Lots which have a front line abutting on one street
and a back or rear line abutting on another street.
   DRAINAGE COURSE. A watercourse or indenture for the drainage of surface
water.
   EASEMENT. A grant by an owner of land for a specific use by persons other
than the owner.
   ENGINEER. The registered engineer employed by the city unless otherwise
stated.
   FINAL PLAT. The final map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider’s plan
of subdivision is presented to the Council for approval and which, if approved,
will be submitted to the County Recorder.
   KEY MAP. A map drawn to comparatively small scale, which clearly shows the
area proposed to be platted and the areas surrounding it.
   LOT. A parcel or portion of land in a subdivision or plat of land, separated
from other parcels or portions by description as on a subdivision or record of
survey map, for the purpose of sale or lease or separate use thereof.
   METES AND BOUNDS. A method of property description in which lot boundaries
are described by their direction and distance from an easily identifiable
point.
   MINIMUM SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS. The guides, principles and
specifications for the preparation of subdivision plans, indicating, among
other things, the minimum and maximum dimensions of the various elements set
forth in the plan.
   NATURAL WATERWAY. A natural passageway in the surface of the earth so
situated and having such a topographical nature that surface water flows
through it from other areas before reaching a final ponding area.
   OWNER. An individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership,
corporation, trust, or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary
interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain
proceedings to subdivide the same under these regulations.
   PEDESTRIAN WAY. A public right-of-way across or within a block, to be used
by pedestrians.
   PLAT. A map or drawing which graphically delineates the boundary of land
parcels for the purpose of identification and record of title. The plat is a
recorded legal document and must conform to all state laws.
   PRELIMINARY PLAT. The preliminary map, drawing or chart indicating the
proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning Commission
and Council for their consideration.
   PRIVATE STREET. A street serving as vehicular access to two or more parcels
of land which is not dedicated to the public but is owned by one or more
private parties.
   PROTECTIVE COVENANTS. Contracts entered into between private parties, and
constituting a restriction on the use of all private property within a
subdivision for the benefit of the property owners, and to provide mutual
protection against undesirable aspects of development which would tend to
impair stability of land values.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The land covered by a public road or other land dedicated for
public use or for certain private use such as land over which a power line
passes.
   SKETCH PLAN. A drawing showing the proposed subdivision or property. This
plan is not necessarily drawn to scale and exact accuracy is not a requirement.
   STREET WIDTH. The shortest distance between the lines delineating the right-
of-way of a street.
   STREETS AND ALLEYS.
      (1)   ALLEY. A minor way which is used primarily for secondary vehicular
service access to the back or the side of properties abutting on a street.
      (2)   COLLECTOR STREET. A street which draws traffic from local streets
and conveys it to arterial streets.
      (3)   CUL-DE-SAC. A minor street with only one outlet and having a turn-
around.
      (4)   FRONTAGE ROAD. A minor street which is parallel and adjacent to a
thoroughfare and which provides access to abutting properties and protection
from through traffic.
      (5)   LOCAL STREET. A street designed to provide vehicular and pedestrian
access to the abutting properties and to serve the local needs of a
neighborhood.
      (6)   STREET. A public right-of-way which affords primary means of access
to abutting property, and shall also include avenue, highway, road or way.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person commencing proceedings under this chapter to effect a
subdivision of land.
   SUBDIVISION. The dividing of any parcel of land into two or more parcels.
   SURVEYOR. A registered surveyor.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
PLAT PROCEDURES
§ 154.015 POLICY.
   Before dividing any tract of land into two or more lots or parcels within
the city, the procedures in this subchapter should be followed.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
§ 154.016 PRE-APPLICATION MEETING.
   Prior to the preparation of a preliminary plat, the subdividers or owners
may meet with the Zoning Administrator and other appropriate officials in order
to be made fully aware of all applicable city code provisions, regulations and
plans in the area to be subdivided. At this time or at subsequent informal
meetings, the subdivider may submit a general sketch plan of the proposed
subdivision and preliminary proposals for the provision of water supply and
waste disposal. The sketch plan can be presented in simple form, but should
show that consideration has been given to the relationship of the proposed
subdivision to existing city facilities that would serve it, to neighboring
subdivisions and developments, and to the topography of the site.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
§ 154.017 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   After the pre-application meeting, the subdividers or owners shall
file with the Zoning Administrator five copies of a preliminary plat and a cash
fee as established by the City Council. This fee will be used for the expenses
of the city in connection with the review of the plat.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall provide copies of the Preliminary Plat
to the Planning Commission for its review and report.
   (C)   Within 45 days after the plat was filed and after reports and
certifications have been received as requested, the Planning Commission shall
hold a public hearing on the preliminary plat, after notice of the time and
place thereof has been published once in the official newspaper, at least ten
days before the day of the hearing. Within 15 days of the date of the public
hearing, the Planning Commission shall make its report to the Council.
   (D)   The Planning Commission and the Zoning Administrator may forward to
the Council a favorable, conditional or unfavorable report, and the report
shall contain a statement of findings and recommendations.
   (E)   The Council shall act to approve or disapprove within 120 days of
initial application to the Planning Commission. If the Council disapproves the
preliminary plat, the grounds for any disapproval shall be set forth in the
minutes of the Council meeting and reported to the owners or subdividers.
   (F)   The approval of a preliminary plat is an acceptance of the general
layout as submitted, and indicates to the subdivider that he or she may proceed
toward final plat in accordance with the terms of approval and provisions of
this chapter.
   (G)   During the intervening time between approval of the preliminary plat
and the signing of the final plat, the subdivider must submit acceptable
engineering plans for all required improvements.
   (H)   In the case of all subdivisions, the Planning Commission shall
recommend denial of, and the Council shall deny approval of a preliminary or
final plat if it makes any of the following findings.
      (1)   That the proposed subdivision is in conflict with adopted
applicable general and specific plans of the city.
      (2)   That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is in
conflict with any adopted component of the Comprehensive Plan of the city.
      (3)   That the physical characteristics of this site, including but not
limited to topography, vegetation, susceptibility to erosion and siltation,
susceptibility to flooding, water storage, drainage and retention, are such
that the site is not suitable for the type of development or use contemplated.
      (4)   That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density
of development.
      (5)   That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are
likely to cause substantial environmental damage.
      (6)   That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is
likely to cause serious public health problems.
      (7)   That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will
conflict with easements of record or with easements established by judgment of
a court.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.018 FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   The owners or subdividers shall file five copies of the final plat
with the Zoning Administrator. If this is not done within 180 days of approval
of the preliminary plat, the preliminary plat will be considered void. The
owners or subdividers shall also submit to the Zoning Administrator, at the
time of filing the final plat, an up-to-date certified abstract of title or
registered property report.
   (B)   The final plat shall have incorporated all changes recommended by the
Zoning Administrator and other agents of the city, but in all other respects it
shall conform to the preliminary plat as approved.
   (C)   The Zoning Administrator shall provide copies of the final plat to the
Planning Commission, City Engineer, and other agents of the city as appropriate
for review and report. The report of these agencies and persons shall be
submitted to the Council within 30 days of the date of submission of the plat.
The Council shall act on the final plat within 30 days of submission of the
plat.
   (D)   Upon approval of the final plat by the Council, the subdivider shall
record the final plat with the County Recorder, as provided for by that office,
within 120 days after the approval. Otherwise the approval of the final plat
shall be considered void. The subdivider shall, within 30 days of recording,
furnish the city with three black-line prints and a reproducible copy of the
final plat, showing evidence of the recording.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
Penalty, see § 10.99
DATA REQUIRED FOR PLATS
§ 154.030 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   Identification and description. 
      (1)   Proposed name of subdivision, which shall not duplicate or be
similar to pronunciation or spelling to the name of any plat heretofore
recorded in the county.
      (2)   Location by section, township, range, and by legal description.
      (3)   Name of city.
      (4)   Names and addresses of the record owner, and any agent having
control of the land, subdivider, land surveyor, engineer, and designer of the
plan.
   (5)   Graphic scale not less than 1 inch to 100 feet.
      (6)   North arrow.
      (7)   Key map including area within one-mile radius of plat.
      (8)   Date of preparation.
   (B)   Existing conditions.
      (1)   Boundary line of proposed subdivision, clearly indicated and to a
close degree of accuracy.
      (2)   Existing zoning classifications for land within and abutting the
subdivision.
      (3)   A general statement on the approximate acreage and dimensions of
the lots.
      (4)   Location, right of way width, and names of existing or platted
streets, or other public ways, parks, and other public land, permanent
buildings and structures, easements, and section and corporate lines within the
plan and to a distance 150 feet beyond shall also be indicated.
      (5)   Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided land, within
150 feet, identified by name, including all contiguous land owned or controlled
by the subdivider.
      (6)   Topographic data, including contours at vertical intervals of ten
feet, watercourses, marshes, rock outcrops, power transmission poles and lines,
and other significant features shall also be shown, USGS datum shall be used
for all topographic mapping where feasible. The city may require topography
data at two or five-foot intervals if conditions warrant it.
      (7)   An accurate soil survey may be required of the subdivision,
prepared by a qualified person. Soil percolation tests may also be required if
conditions warrant it.
   (C)   Subdivision design features.
      (1)   Layout of proposed streets showing the right-of-way widths,
centerline gradients, typical cross-sections, and proposed names of streets.
The name of any street heretofore used in the city shall not be used unless the
proposed street is a logical extension of an already named street, in which
event the same name shall be used.
      (2)   Locations and widths of proposed alleys and pedestrian ways.
      (3)   Layout, numbers and preliminary dimensions of lots and blocks.
      (4)   Minimum front and side street building setback lines.
      (5)   When lots are located on a curve, the width of the lot at the
building setback line.
      (6)   Areas, other than streets, alleys, pedestrian ways and utility
easements, intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use, including the
size of the area or areas in acres.
      (7)   Placement of all public utilities, including sewer, water,
electrical, and telephone, and the location and width of all utility easements.
   (D)   Other information.
      (1)   Statement of the proposed use of lots stating type of residential
buildings with number of proposed dwelling units and type of business or
industry, so as to reveal the effect of the development on traffic, fire
hazards, and congestion of population.
      (2)   Provision for surface water disposal, drainage, and flood control.
      (3)   If any zoning changes are contemplated, the proposed zoning plan
for the areas.
      (4)   Where the subdivider owns property adjacent to that which is being
proposed for the subdivision, the Planning Commission shall require that the
subdivider submit a sketch plan of the remainder of the property, so as to show
the possible relationships between the proposed subdivision and the future
subdivision. In any event, all subdivisions shall be shown to relate well
within existing or potential adjacent subdivisions.
      (5)   Potential resubdivisions and use of excessively deep or wide (over
200 feet) lots shall be indicated in a satisfactory manner.
      (6)   A plan for soil erosion and sediment control both during
construction and after development has been completed. The plan shall include
gradients of waterways, design of erosion control measures, and landscaping of
the erosion and sediment control system.
      (7)   A vegetation preservation and protection plan that shows those
trees proposed to be removed, those to remain, the types and location of trees
and other vegetation that are to be planted.
      (8)   Any other information as may be requested by the Zoning
Administrator or Planning Commission.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.031 DATA FOR FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   The plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor who is registered in the
State of Minnesota and shall comply with the provisions of state statutes and
of this chapter.
   (B)   The subdivider or owner shall provide a map showing location and size
of existing sewers, water mains, culverts or other underground facilities
within the plat and to a distance of 150 feet beyond. Such data as grades,
invert elevations, and locations of catch basins, manholes, hydrants and street
pavement width and type shall also be shown.
   (C)   The subdivider or owner shall prepare a map showing all existing and
proposed private restrictions.
   (D)   Title opinion by a practicing attorney-at-law, based upon an
examination of an abstract of the records of the County Recorder or the
Registrar of Titles for the lands included within the plat, and showing the
title to be in the name of the owner or subdivider. The date of examination of
the records shall be within 30 days prior to the date the final plat is filed
with the County Auditor. The owner or subdivider shown in the title opinion
shall be the owner of record of the platted lands on the date of recording of
the plat with the County Recorder.
   (E)   Execution of all owners of any interest in the land and any holders of
a mortgage therein of the certificate required by Minnesota Statutes, and which
certificate shall include an accurate legal description of any area to be
dedicated for public use, and shall include a dedication to the city of
sufficient easements to accommodate utility services in a form as shall be
approved by the City Attorney.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
Penalty, see § 10.99
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS.
§ 154.045 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Requirements of city. The Planning Commission, in its review of the
preliminary plat, will take into consideration the requirements of the city and
the best use of the land being subdivided.
   (B)   Conformance to Comprehensive Plan. If a Comprehensive Plan or official
map has been adopted by the city, the subdivision shall conform to it.
   (C)   Relationship to existing and planned subdivisions. The arrangement,
character, extent, width and location of all streets shall be considered in
their relation to existing and planned streets, to reasonable circulation of
traffic, to topographic conditions, to runoff of storm water, to public
convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses
of the land to be served by the streets. Wherever possible and necessary, the
arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall provide for the continuation
of existing streets in adjoining areas. Where adjoining unsubdivided areas may
be subdivided, the arrangement of streets in a new subdivision shall make
provision for the proper projection of the street into adjoining areas by
carrying the new streets to the boundaries of the new subdivision at
appropriate locations.
   (D)   Limitations in floodplains.
      (1)   Lots within floodplain. No land shall be subdivided which is
unsuitable for the reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply or
sewage treatment facilities. All lots within the floodplain districts shall
contain a building site at or above the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation.
All subdivisions shall have water and sewage treatment facilities that comply
with the provisions of this chapter, and shall have road access both to the
subdivision and to the individual building sites no longer than two feet below
the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. For all subdivisions in the
floodplain, the Floodway and Flood Fringe boundaries, the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation and the required elevation of all access roads shall be
clearly labeled on all required subdivision drawings and platting documents.
      (2)   Removal of special flood hazard area designation. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing the
special flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly elevated
on fill above the 100-year elevation. FEMA’s requirements incorporate specific
fill compaction and side slope protection standards for multi-structures or
multi-lot developments. These standards should be investigated prior to the
initiation of site preparation if a change of special flood hazard area
designation will be requested.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.046 STREETS.
   (A)   Street design standards. Streets shall conform to the following street
design standards.
 
                                Collector              Frontage Road or
                Arterial        Street    Local Street Service Access   Alley*
                                                       Street
Rights-of-way   As specified by 66 feet   60 feet      40 feet          20 feet
                City Engineer
Surface width   As specified by
or face-to-face City Engineer   44 feet   36 feet      26 feet          16 feet
curb
Minimum
horizontal      500 feet        300 feet  100 feet     100 feet         50 feet
curve radii
Minimum tangent 200 feet        100 feet  50 feet      50 feet          50 feet
between curves
Minimum Grade   0.4%            0.4%      0.4%         0.4%             0.4%
Maximum grade   6%              8%        10%**        10%**            10%**
 
Notes:
   *Not recommended
   **Special topography conditions (100 feet or less in length): 12%
   (B)   Street intersections. Insofar as practical, streets shall intersect at
right angles. In no case shall the angle formed by the intersection of two
streets be less than 75°. Intersections having more than four corners shall be
prohibited. Adequate land for future intersection and interchange construction
needs shall be dedicated.
   (C)   Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 100 feet
shall be avoided for local streets.
   (D)   Local streets. Minor streets shall be laid out so that their use by
through traffic is discouraged.
   (E)   Culs-de-sac. The maximum length of a street terminating in a cul-de-
sac shall be 500 feet, measured from the centerline of the street of origin to
the end of the cul-de-sac right-of-way.
   (F)   Access to arterial streets. In the case where a proposed plat is
adjacent to a limited access highway (arterial), there shall be no direct
vehicular or pedestrian access from individual lots to highways. As a general
requirement, access arterials shall be at intervals of not less than ¼ mile and
through existing and established cross roads where possible.
   (G)   Half streets. Half streets shall be prohibited, except where it will
be practical to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining
property is subdivided, in which case the dedication of a half street may be
permitted. The probable length of time elapsing before dedication of the
remainder shall be considered in this decision.
   (H)   Hardship to owners of adjoining property. The street arrangements
shall not be such as to cause hardship to owners of adjoining property in
platting their own land and providing convenient access to it.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.047 BLOCKS.
   The length, width and acreage of blocks shall be sufficient to provide for
convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street design. Blocks may
be longer than 1,300 feet or shorter than 300 feet only if the Zoning
Administrator and city staff agree that exceptions are warranted. Exceptions
may be warranted in order to foster design originality provided that the
exceptions do not violate sound planning principles. Pedestrian ways may be
required on blocks longer than 900 feet, or in other areas dedicated to the
city to provide access to schools, parks and other destinations. Pedestrian
ways shall be at least ten feet wide, and shall be located so as to minimize
intersections with streets.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.048 LOTS.
   (A)   Size. The lot dimensions shall conform with the minimum lot areas
specified in Chapter 155, Zoning.
   (B)   Side lot lines. Side lines of lots shall be substantially at right
angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines.
   (C)   Drainage. Lots shall be graded so as to provide drainage away from
building locations.
   (D)   Natural features. In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall be
shown for all natural features, such as tree growth, wetlands, steep slopes,
watercourses, historic spots, or similar conditions, and plans adjusted to
preserve those which will add attractiveness, safety and stability to the
proposed development.
   (E)   Lot remnants. All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after
subdividing of a larger tract must be added to adjacent lots rather than
allowed to remain as unusable parcels.
   (F)   Double frontage lots. Double frontage lots (lots with frontage on two
parallel streets) or reverse frontage shall not be permitted except where lots
back on an arterial or collector street. Such lots shall have an additional
depth of at least ten feet in order to allow for screen planting along the back
lot line.
   (G)   Large lots. On large lots (one acre or more) septic tanks and drain
fields shall be located in such a way as to allow future subdivision of the
land.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.049 TREE REMOVAL; CONSERVATION OF VEGETATION. 
   All subdivisions shall be planned, designed, constructed and maintained so
that the following apply.
   (A)   Existing healthy trees and native vegetation on the site are preserved
to the maximum extent feasible, and are protected by adequate means during
construction.
   (B)   Existing native vegetation is not disturbed, injured or removed prior
to site development, except to the extent necessary to perform preliminary and
final surveys.
   (C)   Following construction, vegetation suitable to the site shall be
planted. Trees with root structures that are less likely to interfere with
utility lines, break up sidewalks, and cause other nuisance damage are
desirable.
   (D)   Existing trees shall be preserved within any right-of-way when the
trees are suitably located, healthy, and when approved grading allows.
   (E)   No brush, dead trees, or uprooted stumps shall remain after
development.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.050 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL.
   The following guidelines shall be applied in the subdivision and
construction of land areas.
   (A)   The development shall conform to the natural limitations presented by
topography and soil so as to create the least potential for soil erosion.
   (B)   Erosion and siltation control measures shall be coordinated with the
different stages of development. Appropriate control measure shall be installed
prior to development when necessary to control erosion.
   (C)   Land shall be developed in increments of workable size such that
adequate erosion and siltation controls can be provided as construction
progresses. The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any one
period of time.
   (D)   When soil is exposed, the exposure shall be for the shortest feasible
period of time.
   (E)   Where the topsoil is removed, sufficient arable soil shall be set
aside for respreading over the developed area. The soil shall be restored to a
depth of four inches, and shall be of a quality at least equal to the soil
quality prior to development.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.051 DRAINAGE.
   The natural drainage system shall be used as far as is feasible for the
storage and flow of runoff. The following requirements shall also apply.
   (A)   Storm water drainage shall not be discharged without the application
of best management practices to insure proper water quality.
   (B)   No existing ditch, stream, drain or drainage canal shall be deepened,
widened, filled, or rerouted without written permission from the Council.
   (C)   Where artificial channels must be constructed to augment the natural
drainage system, the channels as well as the natural drainage ways may be
planned as part of a recreation trail system.
   (D)   The drainage system shall be constructed and operational as quickly as
possible during construction.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.052 EASEMENTS.
   All easements shall be dedicated by appropriate language on the plat as
required by Minnesota Statutes.
   (A)   Provided for utilities. Easements at least 12 feet wide, centered on
rear and other lot lines, shall be provided for utilities where necessary. They
shall have continuity of alignment from block to block.
   (B)   Drainage. Easements shall be provided along each side of the
centerline of any watercourse or drainage channel, whether or not shown in the
Comprehensive Plan, to a width sufficient to provide proper maintenance and
protection, and to provide for storm water runoff from a ten-year storm of one-
hour duration. Where necessary, drainage easements corresponding with lot line
shall be provided. Easements for drainage purposes shall not be less than 20
feet in width and shall be designed so as not to cause problems for adjacent
property owners.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.053 STEEP SLOPES.
   Subdivision design shall be consistent with limitations presented by steep
slopes. Subdivisions shall be designed so that no construction or grading will
be conducted on slopes steeper than 18% in grade.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.054 SANITATION.
   (A)   Where lots cannot be connected with a public sewerage system,
provisions must be made for sanitary sewerage facilities, consisting of
individual disposal systems for each lot. This does not mean that the
installation of individual disposal devices shall be at the expense of the
subdivider.
   (B)   Any subdivision or lot not provided with off-site sewer facilities may
be subject to soil and percolation tests being made to determine whether or not
the lot size proposed will meet minimum standards of health and sanitation, if
requested by the Planning Commission due to limitations of soils as shown on
existing soils maps. The lot area and topography must be such that it will
accommodate an adequate disposal system or systems to serve the residents for
the estimated unsewered years as determined by the governing body. Tests shall
be made at the expense of the subdivider and a sketch map shall be submitted to
identify the specific locations where tests were made.
   (C)   All proposed sewage disposal systems shall comply with the regulations
and recommended standards of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (WPC-40),
and with the provisions of §§ 51.55 through 51.62, relating to private sewage
disposal systems; should there be a conflict as between the state regulations
or standards and the provisions of this code, the more stringent provision
shall apply.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.055 UTILITIES.
   When practicable and feasible, all utilities shall be placed underground.
All underground work shall be completed prior to street surfacing. All utility
lines for telephone and electrical service shall be placed in rear line
easements when carried on overhead poles.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
Penalty, see § 10.99
IMPROVEMENTS
§ 154.065 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
   Prior to the approval of a final plat, the subdivider shall have agreed in
the manner set forth in this section to install in conformity with construction
plans approved by the City Engineer and in conformity with all applicable
standards and ordinances, the following improvements on the site.
   (A)   Monuments. Monuments of a permanent character, as required by
Minnesota Statutes, shall be placed at each corner or angle on the outside
boundary of the subdivision; and pipes or steel rods shall be placed at each
corner of each lot.
   (B)   Streets. The right-of-way of each street and alley dedicated in the
plat shall be graded. All streets and alleys shall have an adequate sub-base
and shall be improved with an all-weather permanent surface of five-ton
capacity. Except in areas where lot widths exceed 100 feet or topography or
tree cover dictates otherwise, grading shall provide for easy installation of
sidewalks at some future date.
   (C)   Concrete curb and gutter. Concrete curb and gutter may be required for
all paved streets.
   (D)   Sidewalks. Sidewalks may be required along both sides of all streets
in areas where residential density equals or exceeds three dwelling units per
net acre of residentially used land or in commercial areas.
   (E)   Water supply. Where the city water supply is available, the subdivider
shall be required to provide a connection to the city system. Where a city
connection is determined to be feasible, service connections shall be stubbed
into each platted lot.
   (F)   Drainage. A system that will adequately take care of the surface water
runoff within the subdivision shall be installed where necessary in conjunction
with the grading of streets. Cross drains shall be provided to accommodate all
natural water flow, and shall be of sufficient length to permit full- width
roadways and required side slopes. Drainage ditches shall be sodded to prevent
erosion. When feasible, curb and gutter drainage shall be handled by storm
sewers.
   (G)   Public utilities. All utility lines for telephone and electrical
service shall be placed in rear line easements when carried on overhead poles.
   (H)   Parks and parkland. On all subdivisions consisting of five or more
lots and five or more acres, the property owner shall be required to provide
for parks. Subject to the approval of the Park Board, developers shall dedicate
5% of the total land mass to parks, or shall make a cash donation of $150 per
lot for parks.
   (I)   Miscellaneous facilities. Tree planting, street name signs, traffic
control signs, oversized utility trunk lines, pedestrian ways, street lights,
and other improvements may be required.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.066 PAYMENT FOR LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS.
   The payment for and financial arrangements relating to local improvements
involving subdivisions or portions thereof shall be governed by the provisions
of §§ 33.25 through 33.30, Economic Development Incentive Loan Program.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
§ 154.067 SIGNED AGREEMENT REQUIRED.
   No final plat shall be recorded in the absence of a signed agreement,
negotiated between the city and the developer, documenting the improvements to
be provided by the developer and the city, and the methods to be used to
finance the overall project, consistent with the provisions of §§ 33.25 through
33.30, Economic Development Incentive Loan Program.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.068 DEVELOPMENT CONTRACT.
   Prior to installation of any required improvements, and prior to approval of
the final plat, the subdivider shall petition the city for the necessary
improvements subject to the Uniform Special Assessment Code as coded in
Minnesota Statutes, and the subdivider shall enter into a development contract
in writing with the city regarding the construction of the improvements in
accordance with the plans and specifications and usual contract conditions, all
approved by the city. The time for completion of work and the several parts
thereof shall be determined by the city upon recommendation of the Engineer
after consultation with the subdivider, and shall be reasonable in relation to
the work to be done, the season of the year, and proper correlation with
construction activity in the subdivision.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
Penalty, see § 10.99
MODIFICATIONS; EXCEPTIONS; VARIANCES.
§ 154.080 VARIANCE.
   The city may grant a variance upon receiving a report from the Planning
Commission in any particular case where the subdivider can show, by reason of
exceptional topography or any other physical conditions, that strict compliance
with these regulations would cause exceptional and practical difficulties,
provided relief may be granted without detriment to the public welfare, and
without impairing the intent and purpose of these regulations. The Planning
Commission may recommend variations from the requirements of this chapter in
particular which, in its opinion, do not affect the Comprehensive Plan or the
intent of this chapter. Any modifications thus recommended shall be entered in
the minutes of the Planning Commission in setting forth the reasons which
justify the modifications. The Council may approve variances from these
requirements in specific cases which in its opinion meet the above requirements
and do not adversely affect the purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994; Am. Ord. 313, passed 5-19-2025)
§ 154.081 APPLICABILITY.
   Nothing herein shall be so construed as to direct or imply that these
regulations apply only to residential subdivisions. Every subdivisions, be it
commercial, industrial, public land use, or otherwise, shall be a subdivision,
regardless of the proposed land use, if falling within the definition of a
subdivision as defined herein.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
§ 154.082 EASEMENTS.
   All easements required for public purposes shall be provided at locations
approved by the Council. Easements may be for utilities, drainage, flood plan
protection, walking trails, and the like. However, all easements other than
utility and drainage easements must be conveyed and recorded at the County
Recorder prior to plat approval. No plat shall be approved that may for any
reason be detrimental to local, county or regional utility plan. Oversizing of
utilities to provide future service for more intense development of the land,
or to provide future service to other areas may be required.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
Penalty, see § 10.99
LAND DIVISION
§ 154.095 GENERAL.
   In any case where the division of a parcel of land into two or more lots or
parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development does
not come within the definition of subdivision as defined by this chapter, a
description of the land division shall be filed with the City Administrator/
Clerk-Treasurer, who shall submit copies of the division to the County
Engineer. No building permit shall be issued until the description has been
received by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.096 SMALL SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the
way of carrying out the strict letter of the provisions of these regulations,
the Council, following consideration of the Planning Commission, shall have the
power to vary the requirements established in harmony with the general purpose
and intent thereof, so that the public health, safety, and general welfare may
be secured and substantial justice done.
   (B)   In particular, for subdivisions of five or fewer lots, certain
requirements of these regulations may be waived if the Council, following
consideration by the Planning Commission, so determines, and following
compliance with procedures as follows.
      (1)   Simple lot split. When one parcel or lot of record is divided to
result in two lots of parcels, the platting procedures as set forth in the
subdivision regulations may be waived if approved by the Council. Transfer of
title or the process of subdividing may, at the discretion of the Council, be
satisfied by one of the following methods.
         (a)   The filing of a final plat.
         (b)   Certificate of survey.
         (c)   Registered land survey (for registered land).
         (d)   Recording of title.
      (2)   Creation of three to five lots. When any parcel of land is divided
in from three to not more than five lots, submission requirements such as soil
tests and topography information shall be as required by the Council. Transfer
of title, or the process of subdivision, may be by filing of a final plat or
registered land survey. Additional information may, however, be required by the
Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator following review of the preliminary
plat. The Council may require the filing of a final plat in lieu of a
registered land survey.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
Penalty, see § 10.99
SURVEYS; PERMITS
§ 154.110 SURVEYS.
   Land parcels may be conveyed by metes and bounds property description,
however, no building permit may be issued for any parcel that has not been
surveyed unless it is for lots of five acres or more.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
§ 154.111 BUILDING PERMITS.
   No building permits will be issued for the construction of any building or
structure on any lot in the subdivision as defined herein which has been
approved for platting until all requirements of this chapter have been fully
complied with.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
VIOLATIONS
§ 154.125 VIOLATIONS.
   Every person who violates a section, subdivision, or provision of this
chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful,
or fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful,
and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor, including
costs of prosecution, except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.
In addition, a violator of this chapter shall be subject to civil remedies by
the city, including but not limited to injunctive remedies.
(Ord. 217, passed 11-28-1994)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 155: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
155.001   Short title
   
155.002   Scope
   
155.003   Building permits
   
155.004   Interpretation
   
155.005   Rules of construction
   
155.006   Definitions
   
155.007   Amendment; procedure
Zoning Districts and Map
   
155.020   Establishment of districts
   
155.021   Zoning Map
   
155.022   District boundary lines
   
155.023   Annexations
   
155.024   Shoreland designation
R-1 Agriculture/Residential District
   
155.035   Purpose
   
155.036   Permitted principal uses
   
155.037   Permitted accessory uses
   
155.038   Permitted conditional uses
R-2 One- and Two-Family Residential District
   
155.050   Purpose
   
155.051   Permitted principal uses
   
155.052   Permitted accessory uses
   
155.053   Permitted conditional uses
R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District
   
155.065   Purpose
   
155.066   Permitted principal uses
   
155.067   Permitted accessory uses
   
155.068   Permitted conditional uses
Manufactured Home Parks
   
155.080   Purpose
   
155.081   Restrictions
   
155.082   Permitted principal uses
   
155.083   Permitted accessory uses
   
155.084   Permitted conditional uses
   
155.085   Required lot dimensions
   
155.086   Lot coverage and setback requirements
   
155.087   Internal park development requirements
   
155.088   Streets
   
155.089   Storage
   
155.090   Length of occupancy
   
155.091   General regulations
B-1 Recreation/Business District
   
155.105   Purpose
   
155.106   Permitted uses
   
155.107   Permitted accessory uses
   
155.108   Conditional uses
   
155.109   Special district provisions
   
155.110   General regulations
B-2 Highway Commercial District
   
155.120   Purpose
   
155.121   Permitted principal uses
   
155.122   Permitted accessory uses
   
155.123   Conditional uses
   
155.124    General regulations
B-3 General Business District
   
155.135   Purpose
   
155.136   Permitted principal uses
   
155.137   Permitted accessory uses
   
155.138   Permitted conditional uses
I-1 General Industrial District
   
155.150   Purpose
   
155.151   Permitted principal uses
   
155.152   Permitted accessory uses
   
155.153   Permitted conditional uses
IOR Institutional Office Residence
   
155.155   Purpose
   
155.156   Permitted principal uses
   
155.157   Permitted accessory uses
   
155.158   Permitted conditional uses
PUD Planned Unit Development
   
155.165   Purpose
   
155.166   Restrictions
   
155.167   Permitted uses
   
155.168   Area, setback, height and coverage regulations
   
155.169   Design, construction and maintenance regulations
   
155.170   Applications, review and administrative procedures
General Regulations
   
155.180   Scope of regulations
   
155.181   More than one principal structure
   
155.182   Accessory buildings
   
155.183   Height regulations
   
155.184   Yard regulations
   
155.185   Vison clearance
   
155.186   Street closures
   
155.187   Areas under water
   
155.188   Essential services
   
155.189   Access to structures
   
155.190   Sign regulations
   
155.191   Extraction of materials and minerals
   
155.192   Requirements for vehicular circulation
   
155.193   Screening, landscaping, lighting, storage and outdoor displays
   
155.194   Performance standards
   
155.195   Shoreland standards
   
155.196   Bed and breakfast
   
155.197   Home occupations
   
155.198   Solar energy systems
Parking and Loading Regulations
   
155.205   Scope of regulations
   
155.206   Minimum size regulations
   
155.207   Yards
   
155.208   Buffer and fences; planting screens
   
155.209   Access
   
155.210   Location of parking and combined facilities
   
155.211   Construction and maintenance
   
155.212   Lighting
   
155.213   Required site plan
   
155.214   Required on-site parking spaces
   
155.215   Parking lots in residential districts
   
155.216   Parking lots and driveways abutting residential districts
   
155.217   Off-street loading design and maintenance
Nonconforming Uses
   
155.230   Interpretation
   
155.231   Nonconforming lots of record
   
155.232   Prior approval
   
155.233   Repairs and maintenance
   
155.234   Discontinuance
   
155.235   Closing of junk and salvage yards
   
155.236   Certificate of nonconforming use
   
155.237   Nonconforming signs
Conditional Use Permits; Procedures
   
155.250   Application
   
155.251   Public hearing; notification
   
155.252   Findings
   
155.253   Fees
   
155.254   Conditions and safeguards
   
155.255   Violations
Building and Use Permits
   
155.265   Permit required
   
155.266   Application; fees
   
155.267   (Reserved)
   
155.268   Privately-owned swimming pools
   
155.269   Schedule of fees, charges and expenses
   
155.270   Complaints regarding violations
Administration and Enforcement
   
155.280   Zoning Administrator
   
155.281   Planning Commission
   
155.282   Appeal for variance
   
155.283   Public hearing; notification
   
155.284   Actions on appeal
   
155.285   Violations
   
Appendix: Height, area and yard regulations
Cross-reference:
   Floodplain Management, see
Chapter 153
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as “The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Preston,
Minnesota,” and is referred to herein as “this Ordinance,” or “this chapter.”
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
§ 155.002 SCOPE.
   From and after the effective date of this chapter, the use of all land and
every building and the erection or structural alteration of any building or
portion of a building in the city shall be in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter. Any structure or use lawfully existing at the passage of this
chapter, but not in conformity with the regulations of the appropriate zoning
district, may be continued, subject to the regulations of section §§ 155.230
through 155.237 of this chapter, Nonconforming Uses.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
§ 155.003 BUILDING PERMITS.
   A building permit shall be required in all zoning districts, for activities
that include new construction, additions, roofing, siding and structural
remodeling. Any building permit issued for residential construction shall be
valid for 18 months from the date of issue, unless otherwise noted, for
completion of the project for which the certificate was issued. Any zoning
certificate issued for commercial/industrial construction shall be valid for a
period of 24 months from the date of issue, unless otherwise noted, for
completion of the project for which the certificate was issued.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995; Am. Ord. 246, passed 11-1-2004; Am. Ord. 268,
passed 6-6-2011)
§ 155.004 INTERPRETATION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted as the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals,
convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of this
chapter impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance
or regulations, this chapter shall apply. Where the provisions of any statute,
other ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions than this chapter,
those restrictions shall apply.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
§ 155.005 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, words used in the present tense shall
include the future, words in the singular shall include the plural, and the
plural shall include the singular.
   (B)   The word “person” shall include a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company, or corporation as well as an individual.
   (C)   The word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary.
   (D)   The word “may” is permissive.
   (E)   The word “lot” shall include the word “plot,” “piece” and “parcel.”
   (F)   The word “used for” shall include the phrases “arranged for,”
“designed for,” “intended for,” “maintained for” and “occupied for.”
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
§ 155.006 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply,
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGRICULTURE. The art or science of cultivating the soil and activities
incidental thereto; the growing of soil crops in the customary manner on open
tracts of land; the accessory raising of livestock and poultry; farming. The
term shall include incidental retail selling by the producer of products raised
on the premises, provided that space necessary for parking of vehicles of
customers shall be furnished outside the public right-of-way.
   ALLEY. A public or private right-of-way less than 30 feet in width, which
affords secondary means of access to abutting property.
   ALTERATION. As applied to a building or structure, a change or rearrangement
in the structural parts or in the exit facilities, or an enlargement, whether
by extending on a side or by increasing in height, or the moving from one
location or position to another.
   APARTMENT. A room or suite of rooms designed for, intended for, or used as a
residence for one family or individual and equipped with cooking facilities.
   APARTMENT BUILDING. Three or more apartments grouped in one building.
   AUTOMOBILE OR TRAILER SALES AREA. An open area, other than a street, used
for the display, sale or rental of new or used motor vehicles or trailers in
operable condition and where no repair work is done.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR. General repair, rebuilding or recondition of
engines, motor vehicles, or trailers; collision services including body, frame,
or fender straightening or repair; overall painting or paint shop and vehicle
steam cleaning.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR. Incidental body or fender work, or other minor
repairs, painting and upholstering, replacement of parts and motor service to
passenger cars and trucks not exceeding 1½ tons capacity, but not including any
operation named under Automobile Repair, Major, or any other similar use,
thereto.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION or FILLING STATION. A place where gasoline,
kerosene or any other motor fuel or lubricating oil or grease for operating
motor vehicles is offered for sale and delivered directly into motor vehicles,
including greasing and oiling but excluding Automobile Repair, Major and
Automobile or Trailer Sales Area.
   BASEMENT. A story having part but not more than one-half its height below
the average level of the adjoining finished grade. A basement is counted as a
story for the purpose of height regulations, if subdivided and used for
business or dwelling purposes. See also CELLAR, as defined in this section.
   BILLBOARD. See SIGNS, ADVERTISING, as defined in this section.
   BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets, or a combination of streets and
public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines, waterways, or
boundary lines of the corporate limits of the city.
   BOARD. The Zoning Board of Adjustment.
   BOARDING HOUSE. A building other than a hotel or motel, where for
compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals, or lodging and
meals, are provided for three or more persons, but not exceeding ten persons.
   BUFFER. Open spaces, landscaped areas, fences, walls, berms or any
combination thereof, used to physically separate or screen one use or property
from another so as to visually shield or block noise, lights, or other
nuisances.
   BUFFER FENCE. Any partition, structure, wall or gate erected as a divider,
barrier or enclosure to serve as a buffer.
   BUILDABLE AREA. The area of a lot remaining after the minimum yard or
setback requirements of this chapter have been met.
   BUILDING. Any structure for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons,
animals, chattel, or property of any kind; and when separated by party walls
without openings, each portion of the building so separated shall be deemed a
separate building.
      (1)   BUILDING, ACCESSORY. A subordinate building or structure on the
same lot, or part of the main building, exclusively occupied by or devoted to a
use incidental to the main use.
      (2)   BUILDING, DETACHED. A building surrounded by open space, the open
space being on the same zoning lot as the building.
      (3)   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building which is conducted, or which is
intended to be conducted, as the main or principal use of the lot on which it
is located.
   BUILDING CERTIFICATE. A document issued by the Zoning Administrator
authorizing buildings, structures, or uses consistent with the terms of this
chapter and for the purpose of carrying out and enforcement its provisions.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the average contact ground level
at the front wall of the building to the highest point of the coping of a flat
roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level
between eaves and ridge for gable, hip or gambrel roofs.
   BUILDING LINE. An imaginary line separating Buildable Lot Area and required
Yards.
   BUILDING LINE SETBACK. The distance between the building line and the street
line in a district, lot, tract or parcel of land.
   BUS STATION. Any premises for the storage or parking of motor-driven buses
and the loading and unloading of passengers.
   CELLAR. A story having more than one-half of its height below the curb level
or below the highest level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be
counted as a story for the purpose of height measurement nor shall it be used
for dwelling unit purposes. Also see BASEMENT as defined in this section.
   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A certificate, issued to the intended occupant of
a structure, prior to occupancy, which indicates that the structure complies
with all federal, state and local codes for such structures.
   CLINIC. A place used for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing,
infirm and injured persons, and those who are in need of medical or surgical
attention, but who are not provided with board or room, nor kept overnight on
the premises.
   CLUB. A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members, paying
regular dues, and are organized for some common purpose, but not including a
group organized solely or primarily to render a service customarily carried on
as a commercial enterprise.
   COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the City of Preston, Minnesota.
   CONVALESCENT OR REST HOME. A home designed and licensed to provide care for
aged or infirm persons requiring or receiving personal care or custodial care
complying with the standards established by the State Board of Health.
   CORNER LOT. See LOT, CORNER, as defined in this section.
   COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Preston, Minnesota.
   COURT. An unoccupied open space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a
building, which is bounded on two or more sides by the walls of the building.
      (1)   COURT, INNER. A court enclosed on not less than three sides by
exterior walls and lot lines on which walls are allowable.
      (2)   COURT, OUTER. A court enclosed on not more than three sides by
exterior walls and lot lines on which walls are allowable, with one side or end
open to a street, driveway, alley or yard.
   CURB LEVEL. The level of the established curb in front of the building
measured at the center of the front. Where a building faces on more than one
street, the curb levels shall be the average of the levels of the curbs at the
center of the front of each street.
   DWELLING. A building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for
residential occupancy with a continuous frost-free footing, including one-
family, two-family, and multiple-family units, but not including hotels,
motels, boarding or lodging houses. An attached garage shall occupy no more
than 45% of the dwelling structure footprint.
      (1)   DWELLING, ATTACHED (GROUP, ROW, TOWNHOUSE OR ZERO LOT LINE
DEVELOPMENT). A dwelling joined to other dwellings by a party wall or walls.
      (2)   DWELLING, DETACHED. A dwelling entirely surrounded by open space,
the open space being on the same zoning lot as the dwelling.
      (3)   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A dwelling containing three or more
dwelling units, designed with more than one dwelling unit connecting to a
common corridor or entranceway, originally constructed for that purpose; and
not including converted dwellings or attached row dwellings (party- wall-type)
as defined in this section.
      (4)   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached dwelling containing
accommodations for and occupied by one family only.
      (5)   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A dwelling designed exclusively for occupancy
by two families living independently of each other.
   DWELLING UNIT. A DWELLING UNIT consists of one or more rooms which are
arranged, designed, or used as living quarters for one family only. Individual
bathrooms and complete kitchen facilities, permanently installed, shall always
be included for each dwelling unit.
   EASEMENT. A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property
owner to and for the use by the public, or corporation, or another individual
entity.
   EASEMENT, DRAINAGE. An easement required for the installation of storm water
sewers or surface drainage channels, or the preservation or maintenance of a
natural stream or watercourse.
   EASEMENT, UTILITY. An easement required for the installation of overhead or
underground utilities, including sanitary sewer, water, electric, gas and audio
or visual communication lines.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICES. The erection, construction, alteration   or maintenance
by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies, of underground
or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution
systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including
poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipe, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes,
police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment and
accessories in connection therewith; reasonably necessary for the furnishing of
adequate service by such public utilities or governmental agencies or for the
public health or safety or general welfare, but not including buildings.
   FAMILY. Any number of individuals related by blood, marriage, adoption or
foster care or a group of not more than five persons not so related living
together on the premises as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit.
   FARM, CROP. An area of more than one acre which is used for the growing of
the usual farm crop such as vegetables, fruit trees, and grain, and for the
packing or storage of the products produced on the premises, but not including
the raising of farm animals or laboratory animals such as mice, rats, rabbits,
and the like.
   FLOOR AREA. The floor area of a building, is the sum of the gross horizontal
areas of the several floors of the building, measured from the exterior faces
of the exterior walls.
   FLOOR AREA, LIVABLE. Shall be the same as Floor Area defined above,
excluding all areas occupied by cellars, garages, porches, attics, stairways
and storage, utility and heating rooms.
   FLOOR AREA RATIO or F.A.R. The FLOOR AREA RATIO of the building or buildings
on any zoning lot is the floor area of the building or buildings on that zoning
lot divided by the area of the zoning lot, or, in the case of planned
developments, by the net site area. The FLOOR AREA RATIO
requirements, as set forth under each zoning district, shall determine the
maximum floor area allowable for the building or buildings (total floor area of
both principal and accessory buildings) in direct ratio to the gross area of
the zoning lot.
   FRONTAGE. All the property fronting on one side of a street between the
nearest intersecting streets, or between a street and a right-of-way, waterway,
or other similar barrier.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building designed or used for the storage of
automobiles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is
accessory.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. Any premises used for the storage or care of motor-driven
vehicles except private garages, or premises where any vehicles are equipped
for operation, are repaired, or are kept for remuneration, for hire or for
sale.
   GARAGE, TRUCK. A building which is used or intended to be used for the
storage of motor trucks, truck trailers, tractors, and commercial vehicles
exceeding 1½ tons capacity.
   HIGH-RISE BUILDING. Any structure designed for a specific use that exceeds
the fourth floor of elevation.
   HIGH WATER MARK. A mark delineating the highest water level which has been
maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the
landscape. The normal HIGH WATER MARK is commonly that point where the natural
vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial.
   HOME OCCUPATION. As defined in §
155.197.
   HOTEL. A building occupied as a temporary abiding place of individuals who
are lodged with or without meals, in which there are more than five sleeping
rooms, and wherein no provisions are made for cooking in any individual room or
apartment.
   JUNK YARD. Land or buildings where waste, discarded or salvaged materials
are bought, sold, stored, exchanged, cleaned, packed, disassembled or handled,
including, but not limited to scrap metal, rags, paper, hides, rubber products,
glass products, lumber products and products resulting from the wrecking of
automobiles or other machinery.
   KENNEL. Any structure or premises on which five or more domestic animals
over four months of age are kept.
   LOADING SPACE. An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building
or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials, and
which abuts upon a street, alley or other appropriate means of access.
   LODGING HOUSE. A building where lodging is provided for compensation, to
three or more persons in contradistinction to hotels open to transients.
   LOT. Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory
buildings, together with such open spaces as are required under this chapter,
and having its principal frontage upon a street or officially approved place.
      (1)   LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their
intersection, or upon two parts of the same street, the streets or parts of the
same street forming an interior angle of less than 135°. The point of
intersection of the street lines is the corner.
      (2)   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot having frontage on two non-intersecting
streets, as distinguished from a corner lot.
      (3)   LOT, FRONTAGE. See LOT LINE, FRONT, as defined in this section.
      (4)   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot.
   LOT AREA. The land area within the lot lines.
   LOT AREA PER FAMILY. The lot area required by this chapter to be provided
for each family in a dwelling.
   LOT COVERAGE. The total allowable amount of lot area, expressed as a
percentage, which may be covered by a principal use and its accessory
structures.
   LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the mean front road and the
mean rear lot line. The greater frontage of a corner lot is its depth, and its
lesser frontage is its width.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. The boundary of a lot abutting a street. On a corner lot,
the shortest street lot.
   LOT LINE, REAR. The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot
line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A SIDE LOT
LINE separating a lot from a street is called a side street lot line. A SIDE
LOT LINE separating a lot from another lot or lots is called an INTERIOR SIDE
LOT LINE.
   LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the map of which has
been recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds, or a lot described by
metes and bounds, the deed to which has been recorded in the office of the
Register of Deeds at the time this chapter was passed.
   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at
right angles to the depth at the established front building line.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. Any park, manufactured park, manufactured court,
manufactured camp, court, campsite, lot, parcel or tract of land designed,
maintained, or intended for the purpose of supplying a long-term location or
accommodations for any manufactured home, and upon which any manufactured home,
coach, or manufactured home coaches are parked, and shall include all buildings
used or intended for use as a part of the equipment thereof, whether or not a
change is made for the use of the manufactured home park and its facilities.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS shall not include automobile or manufactured home sales
lots on which unoccupied manufactured homes are parked for the purpose of
inspection, display, and sale.
   MANUFACTURED HOME LOT. A parcel of land rented or sold for the exclusive use
of the occupants of a single manufactured home.
   MANUFACTURED HOME STAND. That part of an individual lot which has been
reserved for the placement of the manufactured home appurtenant structures, or
additions.
   METES AND BOUNDS. A method of property description by means of their
direction and distance from an easily identifiable point.
   MODULAR HOME. A non-manufactured housing unit that is basically fabricated
at a central factory and transported to a building site where final
installations are made, permanently affixing the module to the site.
   NONCONFORMING BUILDING. A building or portion thereof lawfully existing at
the time of adoption of this chapter, which was designed, erected, or
structurally altered for a use that does not conform to the use regulations of
the district in which it is now located.
   NONCONFORMING LOT. A lot which does not comply with the minimum lot area or
frontage requirements of the district in which it is located.
   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. A structure which does not comply with the bulk,
yard, setback or height regulations of the district in which it is located.
   NONCONFORMING USE. A use lawfully in existence on the effective date of this
chapter and not conforming to the regulations for the district in which it is
situated, except that such a use is not nonconforming if it would be authorized
under a conditional use permit where located.
   NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND. Any use of a lot which does not conform to the
applicable use regulations of the district in which it is located.
   NONCONFORMING USE OF STRUCTURES. A use of a structure which does not conform
to the applicable use regulations of the district in which it is located.
   OBSTRUCTION. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projection, excavation, channel rectification, bridge conduit, culvert,
building, wire, fence, rock gravel, refuse, till, structure or matter in,
along, across, or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory flood
hazard area, which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of
water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by water,
or that is placed where the flow of water might carry the same downstream to
the damage of life or property.
   PARKING SPACE. A land area of not less than 200 square feet, exclusive of
driveways and aisles, of shape and dimensions and so prepared as to be usable
for the parking of a motor vehicle, and so located as to be readily accessible
to a public street or alley. Truck loading and unloading space shall not be in
this area.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint stock association or body politic; includes any trustee,
receiver, assignee, or other similar representative thereof.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A tract of land developed as a unit rather than as
individual development, wherein two or more buildings may be located in
relationship to each other rather than to lot lines or zoning district
boundaries.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the City of Preston,
Minnesota.
   PLANTING BUFFER SCREEN. Landscapes areas, hedges, bushes, shrubs and other
vegetation or combination thereof which serves as a buffer, screening one use
or property from another so as to visually shield or block noise, lights or
other nuisances.
   PREMISES. A lot or plot with the required front, side and rear yards for a
dwelling or other uses as allowed under this chapter.
   PRIVATE OPEN SPACE. Any land owned by private persons or homes association,
wherein the land is dedicated for a use similar to a public open space, but for
use by the private persons or association.
   PUBLIC OPEN SPACE. Any publicly-owned open area, including but not limited
to parks, playgrounds, school sites, parkways, and streets.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department, or
board fully authorized to furnish and furnishing under municipal regulation to
the public electricity, gas, steam, communication services, telegraph services,
transportation, or water.
   PUBLIC WATERS. A body of water capable of substantial beneficial public use.
This shall be construed to mean, for the purposes of these regulations, any
body of water which has the potential to support any type of recreational,
pursuit or water supply purpose. A body of water created by a private user
where there was no previous shoreline for a designated private use authorized
by the Commissioner of Natural Resources shall be exempt.
   RAILROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities
for track operation, but not including depots, loading platforms, station,
train sheds, warehouses, car shops, car yards, locomotive shops, or water
towers.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE CAMP. Any area used on a daily, nightly or weekly basis
for the accommodation of three or more occupied tents, expandable camp
trailers, travel trailers and converted buses or trucks; whether privately or
publicly-owned; and whether use of the accommodations is granted free of charge
or for compensation.
   REST HOME or NURSING HOME. A private home for the care of children or the
aged or infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders. Such a
home does not contain equipment for surgical care or for treatment of disease
or injury.
   ROAD. A public right-of way affording primary access by pedestrian and
vehicles to abutting properties, whether designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane place or
however otherwise designated.
   ROOMING HOUSE. See LODGING HOUSE, as defined in this section.
   SETBACK LINE. The allowable building line as defined by the yard regulations
of this chapter.
   SIGN. A name, identification, description, display, illustration or device
which is affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon a building,
structure or land in view of the general public, and which directs attention to
a product, place, activity, person, institution or business. Warning signs or
public identification signs such as street signs shall be exempt from these
regulations when under two square feet in size.
      (1)   SIGN, ADVERTISING. A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service, activity or entertainment not necessarily conducted, sold
or offered upon the premises where the sign is located.
      (2)   SIGN, AREA. See SIGN, SURFACE AREA, as defined in this section.
      (3)   SIGN, BUSINESS. A sign which directs attention to a business or
profession or a commodity, service, or entertainment sold or offered upon the
premises where such a sign is located.
      (4)   SIGN, DISPLAY. An advertising device.
      (5)   SIGN, FLASHING. Any illuminated sign on which the illumination is
not kept stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times where the
sign is in use.
      (6)   SIGN, ILLUMINATED. Any sign which has characters, letters, figures,
designs or outlines illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as a part
of the sign.
      (7)   SIGN, MARQUEE. Any sign affixed to any hood, marquee or canopy over
the entrance to a building.
      (8)   SIGN, NAMEPLATE. Any sign which states the name or address or both
of the business or occupant of the lot where the sign is placed.
      (9)   SIGN, ROTATING. A sign which revolves or rotates on its axis by
mechanical means.
      (10)   SIGN, SURFACE AREA. The entire area within a single continuous
perimeter, enclosing the extreme limits of the actual sign surface, not
including any structural elements outside the limits of the sign and not
forming an integral part of the display. Only one side of a double-face or V-
type structure shall be used in computing total surface area.
   STANDARD, PERFORMANCE. A criterion established in the interest of protecting
the public health and safety for the control of noise, odor, smoke, noxious
gases and other objectionable or dangerous elements generated by an inherent in
or incidental to land use.
   STORY. That portion of the building included between the surface of the next
floor above it, or, if there is no floor above it, the space between the floor
and the ceiling next above it.
   STORY, HALF. A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection
of roof decking and wall face not more than three feet above the top floor
level, and in which space not more than two-thirds of the floor area is
finished off for use. A half-story containing independent apartment or living
quarters shall be counted as a full story.
   STREET. A public or private right-of-way 40 feet or more in width, approved
or accepted by the public authority or user, which provides a primary means of
public access to abutting property. The term STREET shall include avenue,
drive, circle, road, parkway, boulevard, highway, thoroughfare or any other
similar term.
   STREET LINE. The right-of-way line of a street.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in the supporting members of a building,
such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders, or any substantial changes
in the roof and exterior walls.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent
location on the ground. When a structure is divided into separate parts by an
unpierced wall, each part shall be deemed a separate structure.
   SUBDIVISION. A described tract of land which is to be or has been divided
into two or more lots or parcels, any of which resultant parcels is less than
five acres in area and 300 feet in width, for the purpose of transfer of
ownership or building development, or if a new street is involved, any division
of a parcel land. The term includes resubdivision, and, where it is appropriate
to the context, relates either to the process of subdivision or to the land
subdivided.
   TRAILER. A vehicle with or without motor power used or adaptable for
temporary living, sleeping, business, or storage purposes, having no foundation
other than wheels, blocks, skids, jacks, horses, or skirting, which does not
meet building code requirements and has been or reasonably may be equipped with
wheels or other devices for transporting from place to place. The term TRAILER
shall include “camp car,” “travel trailer,” “camping trailer” and “house car.”
A permanent foundation shall not change its character unless the entire
structure is erected in accordance with the Building Code.
   TOWNHOUSE. A multiple-family dwelling which maintains private ingress and
egress, attached to its own foundation, contains independent dwellings by a
common wall.
   UNIT, LODGING, ROOMING, DORMITORY. A room rented as sleeping and living
quarters, but without cooking facilities, and with or without an individual
bathroom. In a suite of rooms without cooking facilities, each room which
provides sleeping accommodations shall be counted as one lodging room or
rooming unit for the purposes of this chapter.
   USE. The purpose for which land or premises or a building thereon is
designated, arranged or intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or
maintained.
      (1)   USE, ACCESSORY. A use subordinate to the main use on the same lot
and used for purposes customarily incidental to those of the main use.
      (2)   USE, CONDITIONAL. A use which, because of unique characteristics,
cannot be classified as a permitted use in any particular district. After due
consideration, in each case, of the impact of the use upon neighboring land,
and of the public desirability for the particular use at the particular
location, a conditional use permit may or may not be granted. If granted, the
Zoning Board of Adjustment may attach conditions and guarantees upon the zoning
permit deemed necessary is for the protection of the public interest.
      (3)   USE, PERMITTED. A use which conforms with the purposes,
requirements, regulations and performance standards of a particular district.
      (4)   USE, PRINCIPAL PERMITTED. A use which is permitted outright in a
district for which a building permit may be issued by the Zoning Administrator
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   VARIANCE. A modification or variation of the provisions of this code, as
applied to a specific piece of property. A VARIANCE from the literal provisions
of this code may be granted only in instances where the strict enforcement of
these provisions would cause undue hardship because of circumstances unique to
the individual property under consideration. VARIANCES shall be granted only
when it is demonstrated that the granting of the variance will be in keeping
with the spirit and intent of this code. “Undue hardship” as used in connection
with the granting of a variance means the property in question cannot be put to
a reasonable use if used under conditions allowed by the official controls, the
plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to the property not
created by the landowner, and the variance, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the locality. Economic considerations alone shall not
constitute an undue hardship if reasonable use for the property exists under
the terms of the ordinance. Undue hardship also includes, but is not limited
to, inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems. VARIANCES
shall be granted for earth sheltered construction as defined in M.S. § 216C.06,
Subdivision 2, as it may be amended from time to time, when in harmony with the
ordinance. A use that is not permitted under the code for property in the zone
where the affected person’s land is located shall not be permitted by the
granting of a variance. The temporary use of a one-family dwelling as a two-
family dwelling may be permitted by a variance. Conditions may be imposed in
the granting of variances to insure compliance and to protect adjacent
properties.
   YARD. An open space on the same zoning lot with a building or structure,
which yard is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky,
except as otherwise permitted in §§
155.180 through
155.195, General Regulations.
      (1)   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the front of the lot between
the side yard lines and lying between the front street line of the lot and the
nearest line of the building.
      (2)   YARD, REAR. An open space occupied except for accessory buildings
on the same lot with a building between the rear lines of the building and the
rear line of the lot, for the full width of the lot.
      (3)   YARD, SIDE. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a
building, between the building and the side line of the lot, and extending from
the front lot line to the rear yard.
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The designated Zoning Administrator of the city or his
or her authorized representative.
   ZONING DISTRICT. An area or areas within the limits of the community for
which the regulations and requirements governing use are uniform.
   ZONING LOT. A plot of ground, made up of one or more parcels of land, which
is or may be occupied by a use, building, or buildings, including the open
spaces required by this chapter.
   ZONING MAP. The map or maps incorporated into this chapter as a part hereof,
designating the zoning districts.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995; Am. Ord. 246, passed 11-1-2004; Am. Ord. 251,
passed 12-19-2005; Am. Ord. 282, passed 6-17-2019; Am. Ord. 291, passed 5-17-
2021)
§ 155.007 AMENDMENT; PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Powers. The Council may, on its own motion, or on request of the
Planning Commission, or on petition or appeal of the affected property owners,
do the following.
      (1)   Transfer land, or a portion thereof, from the district in which it
is situated onto another district, by amendment to this chapter.
      (2)   Change any of the regulations of this chapter as to the use of land
in any district, or as to the restrictions upon buildings or structures herein,
by amendment to this chapter
   (B)   Procedure. 
      (1)   An applicant shall file a completed application form together with
required exhibits with the Zoning Administrator, and shall pay a filing fee as
established by the Council.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the application, and within
ten business days after receiving the application shall notify the applicant in
writing if the application is not complete, and shall inform the applicant of
what additional information is required.
      (3)   When the Zoning Administrator determines the application to be
complete, the Zoning Administrator shall set the date for a public hearing and
shall have notices of the hearing published in the legal newspaper and shall
notify all property owners within the affected zone, and within 350 feet of the
outer boundaries of the property in question at least once, not less than ten
days and not more than 30 days prior to the hearing; however, failure of any
property owner to receive notification shall not invalidate the proceedings.
The Council may waive the mailed notice requirements for a city-wide amendment
to this chapter initiated by the Planning Commission or City Council. Notice of
the hearings shall be posted at the City Hall and in one other place at least
ten days prior to the public hearing. This notice shall describe the particular
amendment, date, time and place of hearing. The current City Assessor’s current
tax records shall be deemed sufficient for the location or certification of
ownership of the adjacent properties.
      (4)   The city shall take action to approve or deny the application
within 60 days of receiving a completed application. If the city cannot take
action to approve or deny the application within 60 days of receiving the
completed application, the city may extend the time line for taking action
before the end of the initial 60-day period by providing written notice of the
extension and its anticipated length, which may not exceed 60 days, unless
approved by the applicant in writing. Amendments to the zoning code must be
adopted by a 2/3 vote of all of the members of the City Council, as provided by
M.S. § 462.357, Subdivision 2, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (5)   The Planning Commission shall hold the public hearing, and may
table the application for further investigation it necessary, or the Commission
shall recommend to the Council one of three actions: approval, conditional
approval or denial.
      (6)   The Council shall act upon the application within 30 days after
receiving the recommendation of the Planning Commission.
      (7)   No application of a property owner for an amendment to the text of
this chapter or the zoning map shall be considered by the Planning Commission
within the one-year period following a denial of the request, except the
Planning Commission may permit a new application, if in the opinion of the
Planning Commission, new evidence or a change of circumstances warrant it.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
§ 155.020 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the city is divided into the following
districts.
   (A)   Floodplain District. Floodplain District (overlay District).
   (B)   Residential Districts.
      (1)   R-1 Agriculture/Residential District
      (2)   R-2 One and Two-Family Residential District
      (3)   R-3 Multiple Residential District
      (4)   R-4 Manufactured Home Park District
   (C)   Commercial Districts.
      (1)   C-1 Recreation Commercial District
      (2)   C-2 Highway Commercial District
      (3)   C-3 General Business District
   (D)   Industrial District. I-1 General Industrial District.
   (E)   Planned Unit Development.
      (1)   PUD Planned Unit District, General
      (2)   PUD-R Planned Unit District, Residential
      (3)   PUD-B Planned Unit District, Business
      (4)   PUD-I Planned Unit District, Industrial
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
§ 155.021 ZONING MAP.
   (A)   The boundaries of the districts established by this chapter are
delineated on the Zoning Map; the map and all notions, references and data
shown thereon are hereby adopted and made part of this    chapter and will be
on permanent file and for public inspection in the office of the Zoning
Administrator.
   (B)   If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are
made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Zoning
Map, the changes shall be made on the Map within 30 days after official
publication of the amendment.
   (C)   No changes of any nature shall be made in the Official Zoning Map or
matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this
chapter. Any unauthorized change of any kind by any person shall be considered
a violation of this chapter and punishable as provided by the terms of § 10.99.
   (D)   The Official Zoning Map on record in the Office of the Zoning
Administrator shall be the final authority as the current zoning status of land
and water areas, buildings and other structures in the city.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
§ 155.022 DISTRICT BOUNDARY LINES.
   Wherever any uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any use district as
shown on the Zoning Map incorporated herein, the following rules shall apply.
   (A)   Where district boundary lines are indicated as following streets,
highways, alleys, railroads, or similar rights-of-way, they shall be construed
as following the centerlines thereof.
   (B)   Where district boundary lines are indicated as approximately following
lot lines or section lines, the lines shall be construed to be the boundaries.
   (C)   Where district boundary lines are indicated as parallel to or
extensions of features indicated above in this section, it shall be so
construed.
   (D)   Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall
be determined by the scale of the map.
   (E)   Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances
not covered by this section, the Board of Adjustment shall interpret the
district boundaries.
   (F)   Where a platted lot held one ownership of record and at the effective
date of this chapter is divided by a district boundary line, the entire lot
shall be construed to be within the least restrictive district.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
§ 155.023 ANNEXATIONS.
   All territory hereafter annexed to the city which is not shown on the
Official Zoning Map as part of this chapter, shall automatically, upon
annexation, be classified within the R-1 Agriculture/ Residential District, and
shall be subject to all regulations, notations, references and conditions
applicable to that zone until such time that a determination may be made as to
the proper district classification and on amendment to this chapter made to
that effect.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
§ 155.024 SHORELAND DESIGNATION.
   (A)   Shoreland regulations shall apply to all lands located within 300 feet
of all rivers and streams, except where the waters involved are bounded by
natural topographic divides which extend landward from the waters for lesser
distances. The following river and stream have been classified as Natural
Environment Streams by the State Commissioner of Natural Resources, and the
Fillmore County Board of Commissioners.
      (1)   Camp Creek: Section 5 - Township 102 W - Range 10 N.
      (2)   Root River, South Branch: Sections 5 - 6, Townships 102 W - Range
11 N Section 1 - Township 102 W - Range 11 Z
   (B)   Shoreland development standards are set forth in § 155.195 of this
chapter.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
R-1 AGRICULTURE/RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 155.035 PURPOSE.
   This district is established to preserve the present agricultural lands and
maintain other lands in a natural state, and permit low density residential
development where the development is in accordance with the land use plan and
where municipal utilities are economically available.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
§ 155.036 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
   (A)   Within an R-1 District, unless otherwise provided by this chapter, no
building or land shall be used except for the following.
      (1)   One-family detached dwellings and manufactured homes which are not
less than 20 feet in width regardless of construction type.
      (2)   Agriculture, farming and truck gardening provided that no
agricultural building or accessory feedlot shall be located within 100 feet of
any lot line abutting residential property.
      (3)   Churches, libraries, museums, schools, public buildings, memorial
structures, water supply facilities and cemeteries, provided that no building
shall be located within 50 feet of any lot line of an abutting lot within any
R-2 Residential District.
      (4)   Uses permitted in §§ 153.004 through 153.010.
      (5)   Townhouses, cluster housing and patio homes, and the like, as
provided in §§ 155.165 through 155.170, Planned Unit Development.
      (6)   Railroad rights-of-way, but not including switching, storage,
freight yards, shops or industrial sidings.
      (7)   Nurseries and greenhouses for growing plants.
   (B)   Height, area, yard regulations shall be as permitted and regulated in
the Appendix: Height, Area, Yard Regulations.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.037 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following shall be permitted accessory uses in the R-1 District.
   (A)   Private garages and carports.
   (B)   Private recreation facilities such as tennis courts and swimming,
pools provided that the pool is completely enclosed within a chain link or
similar fence at least five feet in height, for the use and convenience of the
residents.
   (C)   Tool houses and sheds or similar storage buildings for domestic
supplies.
   (D)   Boarding or rental of rooms to not more than two persons.
   (E)   Signs as permitted and regulated in § 155.190 of this chapter.
   (F)   Home occupations as defined in § 155.006.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.038 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses are permitted if granted a conditional use permit as
provided in §§
155.250 through
155.254.
   (A)   Municipal administration buildings, police and fire stations,
libraries, museums, art galleries, post offices, and other municipal service
buildings except those customarily considered industrial in use, providing that
no building shall be located within 50 feet of any lot in a residential
district.
   (B)   Water supply buildings, reservoirs, wells, elevated tanks and similar
essential public utility and service structures.
   (C)   Golf clubhouse, country club, public swimming pool, private swimming
pool serving more than one family, provided that no principal structure shall
be located within 50 feet of any lot in a residential district.
   (D)   Offices of professional persons as a home occupation.
   (E)   Two-family residences.
   (F)   Mineral, stone or gravel extraction as permitted and regulated in §
155.191.
   (G)   Riding stables and academies.
   (H)   Temporary equipment placement and operations as regulated in §§
155.180 through
155.217.
   (I)   Uses similar to those listed in §
155.036(A) which would be in accord with the purpose of the R-I District.
   (J)   Manufactured home parks.
   (K)   Bed and breakfast as defined in §
155.196.
   (L)   Home occupations as defined in §
155.197.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995; Am. Ord. 250, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 251,
passed 12-19-2005)
Penalty, see § 10.99
R-2 ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 155.050 PURPOSE.
   The R-2 District is intended for low density residential development in
those areas where such development fits the land use plan and policies, where
municipal utilities are available and in areas which are partially or wholly
developed residentially. It is further intended that establishment of this
district will accommodate residential development on scattered existing vacant
lots, as well as redevelopment in some instances, within previously developed
residential areas, using standards previously established.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
§ 155.051 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
   (A)   Within an R-2 District, unless otherwise provided by this chapter, no
building or land shall be used except for the following.
      (1)   One-family detached dwellings and manufactured homes which are not
less than 20 feet in width regardless of construction type.
      (2)   Two-family attached dwellings which are not less than 20 feet in
width, regardless of construction type.
      (3)   Churches, libraries, museums, schools, public buildings, memorial
structures, water supply facilities and cemeteries, provided that no building
shall be located within 50 feet of any lot line of an abutting lot within an R-
2 Residential District.
      (4)   Townhouses, cluster housing, patio homes, and the like, as provided
in §§
155.165 through
155.170, Planned Unit Development.
      (5)   Nurseries and greenhouses for growing plants.
   (B)   Height, yard and area regulations shall be as permitted in the
Appendix: Height, Area, Yard Regulations.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.052 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following shall be permitted accessory uses in the R-2 District.
   (A)   Private garages, carports, one of each designation subject to yard and
setback requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Off-street parking and loading-unloading facilities as regulated by §§
155.205 through
155.217.
   (C)   Signs as regulated by §
155.190.
   (D)   Buildings and land uses customarily incidental to the uses permitted
in this subchapter. Any accessory use shall be located on the same lot with the
principal use.
   (E)   Accessory uses as permitted and regulated in §
155.037.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.053 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES.
   Within an R-2 District, buildings or land may be used for one or more of the
following uses if granted a conditional use permit.
   (A)   Any use permitted in §
155.038.
   (B)   Hospitals, convalescent and nursing homes, health clinics.
   (C)   Bed and breakfast as defined in §
155.196.
   (D)   Home occupation as defined in §
155.197.
   (E)   Boarding and lodging houses.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995; Am. Ord. 250, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 251,
passed 12-19-2005; Am. Ord. 299, passed 1-16-2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
R-3 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 155.065 PURPOSE.
   The R-3 District is intended for apartments, row houses, townhouses,
dormitories, and other buildings of three or more dwelling units in those areas
where such development fits the land use plan, where properly related to other
land uses and thoroughfares, and where adequate municipal utilities are
available.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
§ 155.066 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
   (A)   Within an R-3 District, unless otherwise provided by this chapter, no
building or land shall be used except for the following.
      (1)   One-family detached dwellings and manufactured homes which are not
less than 20 feet in width, regardless of construction type.
      (2)   Two-family attached dwellings which are not less than 20 feet in
width, regardless of construction type.
      (3)   Churches, libraries, museums, schools, public buildings, memorial
structures, water supply facilities and cemeteries, provided that no building
shall be located within 50 feet of any lot line of an abutting lot within and
R-2 Residential District.
      (4)   Townhouses, cluster housing, patio homes, and the like, as provided
in §§
155.165 through
155.170, Planned Unit Development.
      (5)   Nurseries and greenhouses for growing plants.
      (6)   Multiple-family dwellings, apartment buildings, townhouses, group
or row houses.
      (7)   Boarding or lodging houses.
      (8)   Hospitals, convalescent and nursing homes.
      (9)   Institutions of a religious, educational, charitable or
philanthropic nature.
      (10)   Private clubs or lodges, except those whose chief activity is a
service customarily carried on as a business.
      (11)   Fitness and health services.
   (B)   Height, yard, area and lot width requirements shall be as provided in
the
Appendix: Height, Area, Yard Regulations.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995; Am. Ord. 246, passed 11-1-2004)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.067 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following shall be permitted accessory uses in the R-3 Residential
District.
   (A)   Uses as permitted in §
155.052, permitted accessory uses in the R-2 Residential District.
   (B)   Any permitted accessory use shall be located on the same lot with the
principal use and conform to the minimum provisions thereof.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.068 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES.
   Within an R-3 District, buildings or land may be used for one or more of the
following uses, if granted a conditional use permit as provided in §§
155.250 through
155.254.
   (A)   Any use in §
155.053.
   (B)   Multiple dwellings housing more than 12 dwelling units.
   (C)   Manufactured home parks.
   (D)   Bed and breakfast as defined in §
155.196.
   (E)   Home occupations as defined in §
155.197.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995; Am. Ord. 250, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 251,
passed 12-19-2005)
Penalty, see § 10.99
MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
§ 155.080 PURPOSE.
   These resolutions are established to provide for the development of
manufactured home parks, as defined in §
155.006, as well as establish requirements governing the location and density
of the development in those districts in which they are a permitted conditional
use.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
§ 155.081 RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Sections
155.082 through
155.091 shall not be applicable to facilities or manufactured home parks
existing before 11-6-95, but shall apply to all manufactured home park
developments constructed after that date as well as expansion of manufactured
home parks existing before that date.
   (B)   All improvements of the land, including buildings and all
appurtenances thereto, shall conform to all applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations (including deed restrictions and convenants running with the land).
The minimum standards established herein shall not be construed as lowering the
standards established by the local laws, ordinances or regulations. Whenever
local standards contain more stringent provisions than any of the minimum
standards contained herein, the more stringent standards shall govern.
   (C)   No manufactured home shall be admitted to any park unless it can be
demonstrated that it meets the requirements of the Manufactured Home Building
Code, M.S. §§ 327.31 to 327.36 and Minnesota Rules Chapter 4630, as that law
and those rules may be amended from time to time, and all state, county, and
city codes governing installation of plumbing, heating and electrical systems.
Manufactured homes shall also meet the requirements of the Housing Code and
Subdivision Regulations of the city insofar as the regulations apply to
manufactured homes.
   (D)   All manufactured home parks shall be licensed by the State Department
of Health as required by M.S. § 327.15, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.082 PERMITTED PRINCIPLE USES.
   Within a Manufactured Home Park, unless otherwise provided by this chapter,
no building or land shall be used except for the following.
   (A)   Manufactured homes as defined in §
155.006.
   (B)   Manufactured home parks as defined in §
155.006.
   (C)   Public open space.
   (D)   Railroad rights-of-way, but not including switching, storage, freight
yards or industrial sidings.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.083 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following shall be permitted accessory uses in a Manufactured Home Park.
   (A)   Uses incidental or accessory to the operation of a manufactured home
park, provided the uses are only for the benefit and convenience of the
occupants of the manufactured home park and approved by the Planning
Commission. The uses shall not occupy more than 10% of the area of the park.
   (B)   Privately-owned recreation facilities, such as swimming pools or
tennis courts for the use of residents and guests.
   (C)   Private garages.
   (D)   Tool houses and sheds or similar buildings for the storage of domestic
supplies.
   (E)   Signs.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.084 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   Public and private schools having a regular course of study accredited
by the State Department of Education.
   (B)   Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues, convents, seminaries,
monasteries and nunneries.
   (C)   Cemeteries.
   (D)   Publicly-owned buildings or structures, utility buildings, telephone
exchanges, transformer stations and substations, but not including yards
(storage) or similar facilities.
   (E)   The development of structures that enable the tiering of manufactured
home units to a height not exceeding 35 feet or the sum of the combined height
of three manufactured home units. Developments of this nature shall not
increase the maximum density of units per acre beyond 25% greater than
otherwise established herein.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.085 REQUIRED LOT DIMENSIONS.
   (A)   A minimum area of five acres shall be required for a manufactured home
park, and shall not be less 150 feet in width.
   (B)   There shall be a maximum density of six manufactured home units per
gross acre in a manufactured home park.
   (C)   A minimum of 500 square feet per manufactured unit shall be provided
for definite play areas and open space within the manufactured home park. Areas
of open space or play area shall not be included within the required buffer
area around the park, nor shall they include any area of less than ¼- acre in
size.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.086 LOT COVERAGE AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All buildings, including accessory buildings shall not cover more than
25% of the manufactured home park area.
   (B)   There shall be a minimum setback of 50 feet between the property line
of any manufactured home park and any use within the park. This area shall act
as a buffer zone and shall be landscaped according to a landscape plan to be
submitted for review by the Planning Commission. No fence shall be allowed
within the setback area.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.087 INTERNAL PARK DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The entire manufactured home park shall be landscaped (excluding hard
surface areas) and there shall be two shade trees placed and maintained near
each unit.
      (1)   The minimum requirements for plantings shall be broadleaf trees,
not less than 2½ inches in diameter.
      (2)   Coniferous plants shall be not less than five feet in height.
   (B)   All utilities supplied by the manufactured home park to the
manufactured home units shall be placed underground. This shall include
sanitary sewer, municipal water, electricity and telephone cables. All fuel
(gas or oil) supplied by the manufactured home park shall also be located
underground.
   (C)   The manufactured home stands shall be at an elevation, distance and
position relative to the street or driveway, so that the placement and removal
of the manufactured home with a tractor, tow truck or other customary moving
equipment is practical. The manufactured home stands shall have a longitudinal
grade of not less than 4% in traverse crown or grade, to provide adequate
surface drainage. The stand shall be compacted and surfaced with a material
which will prevent the growth of vegetation, while supporting the maximum
anticipated load during all seasons. Stands shall be of sufficient size to
accommodate the entire length and width of the manufactured home unit.
   (D)   Minimum distance between units shall be not less than 30 feet, or the
sum of the height of the two units, whichever is greater; the point of
measuring being a straight line between the closest point of the units being
measured.
   (E)   The number of spaces completed and ready for occupancy before the
first occupancy is permitted shall be 24.
   (F)   The minimum setback required for all manufactured home units shall be
20 feet, measured from the right-of-way line to the front edge of the pad for
the manufactured home unit.
   (G)   Buildings for the use of the residents of the manufactured home park
during severe weather or a national emergency shall be required in manufactured
home parks. The buildings shall have a minimum net floor area of 35 square feet
per manufactured home unit, or ten square feet per resident, whichever is
greater. The building may be used for accessory uses designated in this
subchapter.
   (H)   Sidewalks of not less than 36 inches in width shall be constructed of
portland cement adjacent to both sides of the street and street curbing, unless
the design of the manufactured home court is such as to better and more safely
facilitate pedestrian traffic in other areas of the manufactured home court, in
which case alternate routes shall meet this requirement.
   (I)   For the provision for collection and disposal of surface and
subsurface water to protect the structures and manufactured home stands, and to
provide safe and convenient use of streets, lot areas and other improvements,
all drainage structures shall be in strict accordance with Chapter 154,
Subdivision Regulations.
   (J)   A manufactured home site or stand shall be used for parking not more
than one manufactured home unit.
   (K)   The condition of soil, groundwater level, drainage, rock formations
and topography shall be such as not to create hazards to the property or to the
health and safety of the occupants. The manufactured home stand and unit in the
expanded position shall not cover more than 25% of the manufactured home lot,
including all pertinent enclosed structures.
   (L)   Each manufactured home unit stand or unit shall be provided with an
off-street paved parking space large enough to accommodate a minimum of two
cars. The paved area shall have a minimum dimension of 400 square feet, and
shall be located behind the property line on dedicated streets.
   (M)   Where off-street parking is provided, the cul-de-sac shall be a
minimum of 60 feet in diameter.
   (N)   Each manufactured home shall be completely enclosed with skirting as
prescribed by the Planning Commission.
   (O)   No public address systems shall be permitted.
   (P)   The park manager shall keep a register of all manufactured home owners
in the park, including name of owner and date of arrival and departure. The
park shall keep the register available for
inspection at all times by law enforcement officers, public health officials
and other officials whose duty necessitates acquisition of the information
contained in the register. The register record for each occupant registered
shall not be destroyed for a period of three years following the date of
departure of the registrant from the park.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.088 STREETS.
   (A)   Streets shall be at least 26 feet in width without on-street parking.
When on-street parking is allowed, the minimum width shall be not less than 30
feet. One-way streets shall be a minimum of 15 feet wide.
   (B)   Streets shall be constructed to conform to the standards of the city.
   (C)   Access to manufactured home parks shall be so designed as to permit
minimum ingress and egress points so as to better facilitate traffic movement
and to better control undesirable traffic into the park by the park operator.
   (D)   Street access shall not be permitted into or upon minor, single-family
residential area streets.
   (E)   Streets shall be graded to their full width to provide proper grades
for pavement, curbs and sidewalks and to provide adequate surface drainage to
the storm sewer system. The improvements shall extend continuously from
existing improved streets to provide access to each stand and to provide
connections to existing or future streets at the boundaries of the manufactured
home park.
   (F)   Streets and parking areas shall be surfaced for all-weather travel as
designated by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.089 STORAGE.
   Enclosed storage lockers, when provided, shall be located either adjacent to
the manufactured home or any other place in the manufactured home park as to be
convenient to the unit for which it is provided. Storage of large items such as
boats, boat trailers, snowmobiles, and the like, shall not be accomplished at
the site of the manufactured home unit, but rather shall be provided in a
separate screened area of the park.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.090 LENGTH OF OCCUPANCY.
   No space shall be rented for any residential use of a manufactured home in
any park, except for periods of 30 days or more.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.091 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   Additional requirements for signs, parking and other regulations in the
Manufactured Home Parks are set forth in §§ 155.180 through 155.217.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
B-1 RECREATION/BUSINESS DISTRICT
§ 155.105 PURPOSE.
   The intent of the B-1 Recreation/Business District is to provide suitable
locations for, and to encourage the development of, commercial recreation
facilities in those areas of the city which benefit the recreational needs of
both residents and tourists, will avoid land use conflicts with residential
areas, and restrict incompatible commercial and industrial uses.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
§ 155.106 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   The following uses shall be permitted in the B-1 Recreation/Business
District:
      (1)   Resort facilities to include lodges, guesthouses, cabins, motels,
auto courts, and the like.
      (2)   Taverns, where the main function is serving a resort or recreation
development.
      (3)   Restaurants.
      (4)   Golf courses, nine or 18-hole standard length, and clubhouses.
      (5)   Indoor theaters.
      (6)   Auditoriums, coliseums, or convention halls for public
entertainment and use.
      (7)   Sporting goods and establishments, outfitters and suppliers; bait
shops.
      (8)   Ski areas and lodges.
      (9)   Nature trails, snowmobile trails, ski trails and similar
facilities.
   (B)   Height, yard, area and lot width and depth regulations shall be as
provided in the Appendix: Height, Area, Yard Regulations.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.107 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following shall be permitted accessory uses in the B-1 Recreation/
Business District.
   (A)   Swimming pools, saunas, outdoor recreational equipment and structures.
   (B)   Storage garages, rental goods establishments.
   (C)   Accessory uses customarily incident to the uses listed in §
155.106 and in this section.
   (D)   Signs as regulated by §
155.190.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.108 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted, subject to the issuance of a
conditional use permit as provided in §§
155.250 through
155.254.
   (A)   Single-family detached dwellings for personnel directly connected with
the operating of resort or recreation facilities only, as regulated in the R-
2 District.
   (B)   Recreational trailer parks and commercial camping facilities for short
duration uses, subject to all requirements of this section and the Minnesota
Department of Public Health, and, in particular, Regulation 10987.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.109 SPECIAL DISTRICT PROVISIONS.
   The following provisions shall apply in the B-1 District.
   (A)   New structures. Any principal structure hereafter erected,
constructed, altered, moved or substantially renovated in any manner, which
includes in its function the providing of services, entertainment or lodging
for residents or tourists, shall be equipped with indoor toilet and running
water (hot and cold) facilities, and adequate heating system based on floor
area and occupancy criteria, and facilities for maintaining access routes where
operated on a year-round basis. No use shall be permitted unless it is provided
with municipal sewer and water services.
   (B)   Recreational vehicle campground provisions. An applicant for a
recreational vehicle camping area conditional use permit shall submit a general
development plan for the proposed park including the following.
      (1)   The proposed site end existing development.
      (2)   Proposed size, location and arrangement of buildings.
      (3)   Parking areas and stall arrangements.
      (4)   Entrance and exit drives.
      (5)   Proposed sewer and water system.
      (6)   Recreation areas.
   (C)   Submission of plans. No recreational vehicle camp shall be
constructed, nor shall any system of plumbing, sewage system, water supply or
swimming pool for the vehicle camp be installed or altered until four plans
drawn to scale have been submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission
and the State Board of Health.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.110 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   Additional regulations applicable in the B-1 Recreation/Business District
are set forth in §§
155.180 through
155.217.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
B-2 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
§ 155.120 PURPOSE.
   The B-2 Highway Commercial District is intended to provide areas suitable
for the location of commercial enterprises which require special traffic access
considerations due to the nature of use. It is the intent of this district to
guide the development of these uses in a manner which will be beneficial to
both the residents and the land use growth pattern of the city by avoiding
costly “strip” development.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
§ 155.121 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following uses shall include, but not be limited to the type of use
within a B-2 Highway Commercial District.
   (A)   Automobile, truck and farm implement dealers, new and used vehicle
lots, boat, trailer and manufactured home display lots and structures.
   (B)   Bus stations.
   (C)   Motels, hotels, and automobile trailer courts (overnight or temporary
stay only).
   (D)   Commercial retail and service establishments.
   (E)   Service stations and repair garages for motor vehicles; tire and
battery sales.
   (F)   Taverns and restaurants, to include drive-in type facilities.
   (G)   Truck and machinery sales and service.
   (H)   Lumber yards, laundromats.
   (I)   Municipal service and utility buildings, to include water treatment
plants, transformer and relay stations, fire stations, highway department
vehicle and equipment garages.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.122 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted accessory uses within a B-2 District.
   (A)   Uses customarily incidental to the uses listed in §§
155.121 and
155.123 of this subchapter. All accessory uses shall be on the same lot as the
principal use.
   (B)   Off-street parking and loading as regulated in §§
155.205 through
155.217.
   (C)   Signs as regulated in §
155.190.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.123 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted subject to the issuance of a conditional
use permit as provided in §§
155.250 through
155.254.
   (A)   Any commercial use of the same general character as those listed in §§
155.121.
   (B)   Single and multiple-family dwellings as regulated in §§
155.035 through
155.053, R-2 and R-3 Residential Districts.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.124 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The height, yard, setbacks and lot coverage requirements for the B-
2 District shall be those stated in the Appendix: Height, Area, Yard
Regulations.
   (B)   Additional regulations applicable to the B-2 District are set forth in
§§
155.180 through
155.217.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
B-3 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
§ 155.135 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the B-3 General Business District is to provide a district
for high-density retail sales, business and personal services, business and
professional offices, and for specialized businesses dependent upon a high
volume of pedestrian traffic, and to serve the community.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
§ 155.136 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
   (A)   The following shall be permitted in the B-3 District.
      (1)   Commercial retail and service establishments.
      (2)   All apparel shops.
      (3)   Appliance and furniture stores.
      (4)   Restaurants.
      (5)   Banks and financial institutions including drive-up facilities.
      (6)   Blueprinting and photostating establishments.
      (7)   Catering establishments.
      (8)   Department stores.
      (9)   Lodge halls and fraternal organizations, including the sale of
food, refreshments or entertainment.
      (10)   Pool and billiard parlors.
      (11)   Theaters.
      (12)   Pawn shops.
      (13)   Pet shops.
      (14)   Medical supply stores, excluding the manufacturing or assembly of
appliances or goods.
      (15)   Off-sale liquor stores.
      (16)   Taverns.
      (17)   Ticket agencies (amusement).
      (18)   Travel bureaus and transportation ticket offices.
      (19)   Sporting good stores.
      (20)   Government services and offices, including fire stations and
utility buildings.
      (21)   Public utility service stores.
      (22)   Trading stamp redemption stores.
      (23)   Music supply stores.
      (24)   Parking lots and garages other than those necessary to a principal
use for the parking of automobiles only.
      (25)   Coin and philatelic shops.
      (26)   Hobby shops.
      (27)   Jewelry stores.
      (28)   Leather goods and luggage shops.
      (29)   Office supply stores.
      (30)   Optical shops.
      (31)   Paint and wallpaper stores.
      (32)   Art centers.
      (33)   Libraries.
      (34)   Hotels and motor hotels.
      (35)   Physical culture and health services, reducing salons and
masseurs.
      (36)   Service stations and repair garages for motor vehicles; tire and
battery sales.
      (37)   Laundromats.
      (38)   Municipal service and utility buildings, to include water
treatment plants, transformer and relay stations, fire stations, highway
department vehicle and equipment garages.
   (B)   Height, yard and lot area requirements as permitted and regulated in
the Appendix: Height, Area, Yard Regulations.
   (C)   Requirements for signs, parking and other regulations in the B-
3 General Business District are as set forth in §§
155.180 through
155.217.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.137 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   Permitted accessory uses shall be uses incidental to and located on the same
lot as the permitted use.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
§ 155.138 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted subject to the issuance of a conditional
use permit as provided in §§
155.250 through
155.254.
   (A)   Armory.
   (B)   Bowling alley.
   (C)   Dance hall.
   (D)   Skating arena.
   (E)   Bus stations.
   (F)   Indoor climate-controlled storage. A principal permitted use must
occupy at least 40% of the gross floor area of the first floor and extend along
at least 60% of the first-floor store front.
   (G)   Any other building use or service similar to the uses permitted
herein, in the number of persons or cars to be attracted to the premises, or in
the effect upon adjacent areas in restricted districts.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995; Am. Ord. 289, passed 5-4-2020)
Penalty, see § 10.99
I-1 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
§ 155.150 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the General Industrial District is to provide areas in the
city which will permit industry at standards that will not impair the traffic-
carrying capabilities of abutting thoroughfares and encourage development that
is compatible with surrounding or abutting districts.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
§ 155.151 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
   (A)   All new industrial development shall be permitted and further
regulated under §§
155.165 through
155.170, Planned Unit Development. Unless otherwise provided by this chapter,
no building or land shall be used except for the following.
      (1)   Blacksmith shops.
      (2)   Building materials; storage and sales.
      (3)   Cartage and express facilities.
      (4)   Creameries.
      (5)   Contractors offices, shops, yards and storage facilities for
plumbing, heating, glazing, painting, roofing, ventilating, air conditioning,
lumber, masonry, electrical and refrigeration industries.
      (6)   Freight and transportation terminals, including airports.
      (7)   Fuel and ice sales and storage facilities.
      (8)   Garages for storage, repair and servicing of motor vehicles and
farm implements.
      (9)   Gasoline and bulk oil stations and distributing plants.
      (10)   Highway maintenance shops and yards.
      (11)   Medical, dental and optical laboratories.
      (12)   Monument works.
      (13)   Public service structures, including power substations, gas
regulator stations, sewage disposal plants, telephone exchanger, elevated
tanks, and water works.
      (14)   Manufacturing, processing, storage, servicing and testing
establishments, except rendering of animal by-products.
      (15)   Adult use (principal) businesses as defined in §
114.02.
   (B)   Height, yard, lot width and lot coverage regulations shall be as
permitted and regulated in the Appendix: Height, Area, Yard Regulations.
   (C)   General regulations shall be as set forth in §§
155.180 through
155.217.
   (D)   Performance standards shall be as set forth in §§ 155.180 through
155.217.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995; Am. Ord. 253, passed 8-1-2005)
§ 155.152 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted accessory uses within a I-1 District.
   (A)   Uses customarily incidental to the principal, use and shall be located
on the same lot as the principal use.
   (B)   Signs as permitted and regulated in § 155.190.
   (C)   Off-street parking and loading as regulated in §§ 155.205 through
155.217.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.153 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted subject to the issuance of a conditional
use permit as provided in §§ 155.250 through 155.254.
   (A)   Uses of similar character to, but not listed with those uses in §
155.151(A).
   (B)   Extraction, processing and storage of sand, gravel, stone and other
raw material.
   (C)   Junk yards and salvage yards, provided that they are properly screened
and further provided they meet the standards of the state.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
IOR INSTITUTIONAL OFFICE RESIDENCE
§ 155.155 PURPOSE.
   The office residence districts are established to provide an environment of
mixed residential, office, institutional, and service uses designed to utilize
existing nonconforming properties in residential areas. As the use of
institutional properties change, it is necessary to allow flexibility for reuse
while maintaining the character of the surrounding neighborhood. These office
residence districts may serve as small to medium scale mixed use areas within
neighborhoods or as freestanding institutions and employment centers throughout
the city.
(Ord. 262, passed 11-17-2008)
§ 155.156 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
   Within an IOR District, unless otherwise provided by this chapter, no
building or land shall be used except for the following.
   (A)   Hospitals, nursing homes and assisted living facilities.
   (B)   Service businesses (that obtain less than 50% of on-site revenue from
retail sales).
   (C)   Health and medical services (clinics, chiropractors, physical
therapists, dentists, optometrists).
(Ord. 262, passed 11-17-2008)
§ 155.157 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   Permitted accessory uses shall be uses incidental to and located on the same
lot as the permitted use.
(Ord. 262, passed 11-17-2008)
§ 155.158 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted subject to the issuance of a conditional
use permit as provided in §§
155.250 through
155.254.
   (A)   Hotels and motels.
   (B)   Multiple family dwellings, apartment buildings.
(Ord. 262, passed 11-17-2008)
PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
§ 155.165 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide areas which can be developed
with some modification of the strict application of regulations of the normal
zoning districts in accordance with the provisions and regulations contained
herein.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
§ 155.166 RESTRICTIONS. 
   Planned Unit Developments can be developed within any district with the
overall population density, number of living units or intensity of use
permitted to be constructed in general conformance with the provisions of the
basic zoning district in which it is located. Densities or intensities may be
permitted higher than those permitted in the zoning district with the specific
density or intensity determined by the Planning Commission and City Council.
However, rather than strictly enforcing the concept of uniformity of building
types in each district, this provision will encourage the following.
   (A)   Flexibility in land development to benefit from new technology in
building design and construction and land development.
   (B)   Variety in the organization of site elements, building densities and
housing types.
   (C)   Higher standards of site and building design through the use of
trained and experienced Land Planners. Registered architects and/or landscape
architects shall prepare plans for all Planned Unit Developments.
   (D)   Preservation and enhancement of desirable site characteristics and
open space.
   (E)   More efficient and effective use of land, open space and public
facilities.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.167 PERMITTED USES.
   Within a PUD, no land shall be used except for one or more of the following
uses.
   (A)   Those uses listed as permitted or conditional uses in the district(s)
in which the development is proposed.
   (B)   Educational, religious, cultural, recreational or commercial
facilities that are designed and intended to serve the residents of the Planned
Unit Development. The burden of proof shall rest upon the applicant to show
that nonresidential uses, when located in a Residential District, are designed
and intended for the primary use of the residents in the PUD; provided further
that no commercial uses shall be constructed until 75% of the total dwelling
units contained in the entire project are completed. COMPLETED shall mean
qualifying for a certificate of occupancy.
   (C)   Uses normally more appropriate in other zoning districts shall not
occupy more than 15% of the land area within the district(s) in which the
development is proposed.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.168 AREA, SETBACK, HEIGHT AND COVERAGE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Lot area regulations. The minimum total project area shall be not less
than ten acres. Projects of less than ten acres may qualify only if the
applicant can show that the minimum lot area requirement should be waived
because the PUD is in the public interest and that one or both of the following
conditions exist.
      (1)   Unusual physical features of the property itself or of the
surrounding neighborhood are such that development under the standard
provisions of the normal district would not be appropriate in order to conserve
a physical or terrain feature of importance to the neighborhood or community.
      (2)   The property is adjacent to or across the street from property
which has been developed under the provisions of this section and will
contribute to the amenities of the neighborhood.
   (B)   Density. A PUD may provide for a variety of housing types in any one
of the basic residential zoning districts. The total number of dwelling units
permitted in a development shall be determined by either the area standards of
the zoning district in which the proposed development is to be located; or the
density specified by the Planning Commission or City Council consistent with
the intent of the city land use plan. A plan may provide for a greater number
of dwelling units per acre than would otherwise be permitted by the regulations
otherwise applicable to the site; however, the applicant has the burden to show
that the excess will not have an adverse effect on existing public facilities
and on the reasonable enjoyment of neighboring property. The Planning
Commission and City Council, in determining the reasonableness of the increase
in the authorized dwelling units per acre, shall recognize that increased
density may be compensated for by additional private amenities, and by
increased efficiency in public facilities and services to be achieved by the
location, amount and proposed use of common open space; the locations, design
and type of dwelling units; and the physical characteristics of the site.
   (C)   Front, rear and side yard building setback regulations. The PUD plan
shall state front, rear and side yard building setbacks for each lot in the
development.
   (D)   Building height regulations. There shall be no height limitations for
any buildings in a PUD, except that all buildings shall observe the setback
requirements and densities as specified in this section.
   (E)   Lot coverage.  
      (1)   In residential districts, the total ground area occupied by
buildings in a PUD shall not exceed 20% of the total site area. It the total
project is to be staged as regulated below, open space shall be provided so
that the ground coverage of each stage shall not exceed the maximum allowable
coverage.
      (2)   In nonresidential districts, the total ground area occupied by
buildings in a PUD shall not exceed 50% of the total project or commercial
facilities that are designed and intended to serve the residents of the Planned
Unit Development. The burden of proof shall rest upon the applicant to show
that nonresidential uses, when located in a residential district, are designed
and intended for the primary use of the residents in the PUD, provided further
that no commercial uses shall be constructed until 75% of the total dwelling
units contained in the entire project are completed. COMPLETED shall mean
qualifying for a certificate of occupancy.
      (3)   Uses normally more appropriate in other zoning districts shall not
occupy more than 15% of the land area within the district(s) in which the
development is proposed.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995; Am. Ord. 246, passed 11-1-2004)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.169 DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Number of buildings per plat. More than one building may be placed on
one platted or recorded lot in any PUD. Areas for single-family detached
dwellings must comply with Chapter 154, Subdivision
Regulations in all respects not specifically noted in this subchapter as
appropriate variances or waivers.
   (B)   Building type. A PUD which only involves one building or housing type,
such as all detached or all attached units, shall not be considered as
inconsistent with the stated purposes and objectives of this subchapter, and
shall not be the sole basis for denial or approval.
   (C)   Considerations for review. Architectural style of buildings shall not
solely be a basis for denial or approval of a plan. However, the overall
appearance and compatibility of individual buildings to other site elements, or
to surrounding development, will be primary considerations in the review stages
of the Planning Commission and City Council.
   (D)   Land being reviewed. No building permit shall be granted for any
building on land for which a plan for a PUD is in the process of city review,
or which does not conform to the approved final plan or for one phase of the
final plan.
   (E)   Staging of development.
      (1)   Any PUD plan proposed to be construed in stages shall include full
details relative thereto, and the City Council may approve or modify, where
necessary, any such proposals.
      (2)   The staging shall include the time for beginning and completion of
each stage. The timing may be modified by the City Council on the showing of
good cause by the developer.
      (3)   The land owner or developer shall make any easements, convenants
and other arrangements, and shall furnish any performance bond or bonds as may
be determined by the City Council to be reasonably required to assure
performance and completion of private streets and utilities, landscaping and
privately-owned and maintained recreational facilities in accordance with the
plan, and to protect the public interest in the event of abandonment of the
plan before completion. The bond shall not be required to exceed 20% of the
estimated development costs for each stage.
   (F)   Open space.
      (1)   A primary function of PUD provision is to encourage development
which will preserve and enhance the worthwhile, natural terrain characteristics
and not force intense development to utilize all portions of a given site in
order to arrive at the minimum intensity or density permitted. When evaluating
individual proposals, the recognition of this objective will be a basic
consideration when granting approval or denial, including but not limited to
the following.
         (a)   The amount and location of common open space shall be consistent
with the stated purpose and intent of this subchapter, and in no case shall be
less than 15% of the total project area. The Planning Commission and City
Council may determine that portions of this open space, not to exceed 5% of the
total area site, will be dedicated to the city for general public recreation or
open space purposes.
         (b)   All common open space shall be labeled as such and as to its
intent or designed functions.
      (2)   In the event certain land areas or structures are provided within
the Planned Unit Development for private recreational use or as service
facilities, the owner of the land and buildings shall enter into an agreement
with the city to assure the continued operation and maintenance to
predetermined reasonable standards. Common areas may be placed under the
ownership of one of the following.
         (a)   Dedicated to public where a community-wide use would be
anticipated.
         (b)   Landlord control.
         (c)   Homeowner’s Association, provided all of the following
conditions are met.
            1.   The Homeowner’s Association must be established prior to any
sale.
            2.   Membership must be mandatory for each owner, and any
successive buyer.
            3.   The open space restrictions must be permanent, not for a given
period of years.
            4.   The Association must be responsible for liability insurance,
local taxes, and the maintenance of residential and other facilities.
            5.   Landowners must pay their pro rata share of the cost and the
assessment levied by the association that can become a lien on the property, in
accordance with the Minnesota Statutes.
            6.   The Association must be able to adjust the assessment to meet
changed needs.
   (G)   Convenants, easements and restrictions. The final plan shall contain
proposed covenants, easements and other provisions relating to the bulk,
location and density of residential units, nonresidential uses and public
facilities as are necessary for the welfare of the Planned Unit Development and
are consistent with the best interests of the entire city. All or any
covenants, easements and other provisions which are part of the final plan may
be modified, enforced, removed or released as deemed necessary by the City
Council for the preservation of the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare of all city residents.
   (H)   Streets, utilities, services, and public facilities. The uniqueness of
each proposal for a PUD requires that specifications and standards for streets,
utilities and services shall be subject to minor modifications from the
specifications and standards established in this chapter and other city
ordinances governing their construction. The City Council may, therefor, waive
or modify the specifications or standards where it is found that they are not
required in the interests of the residents or of the entire city. The plans and
profiles of all streets, utilities and services shall be reviewed and modified
if necessary,
and approved by the appropriate city staff prior to the final approval of the
PUD plan by the City Council. All PUD projects shall be served by public or
community water and sewer systems. All utilities including electrical will be
placed underground.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.170 APPLICATIONS, REVIEW AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   General procedure for application, review and action. The general
procedure for application, review and action on a PUD shall be according to the
following outline, with more detailed requirements found in the remainder of
this subdivision.
      (1)   The applicant shall file the completed application form together
with required exhibits, for the preliminary plan, with the Zoning
Administrator, and shall pay a filing fee as established by the Council.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and within
ten business days after receiving the application shall notify the applicant in
writing if the application is not complete, and what additional information is
required.
      (3)   When the Zoning Administrator determines the application to be
complete, the Zoning Administrator shall set the date for a public hearing and
shall have notices of the hearing published in the legal newspaper, and shall
notify all property owners within 350 feet of the outer boundaries of the
property in question; not less than ten days and not more than 30 days prior to
the hearing. However, failure of any property owner to receive notification
shall not invalidate the proceedings at least once. The Council may waive the
mailed notice requirements for a city-wide amendment to this chapter initiated
by the Planning Commission or City Council. Notice of hearings shall be posted
at the City Hall and in one other place at least ten days prior to the public
hearing, in addition to publishing the notice in the official newspaper. This
notice shall describe the particular amendment, date, time and place of
hearing. The current City Assessor’s current tax records shall be deemed
sufficient for the location or certification of ownership of the adjacent
properties.
      (4)   The city shall take action to approve or deny the application
within 60 days of receiving a completed application. If the city cannot take
action to approve or deny the application within 60 days of receiving the
completed application, the city may make a one-time extension of the time for
taking action before the end of the initial 60-day period by providing written
notice of the extension, the reasons for the extension, and its anticipated
length, which may not exceed 60 days unless approved by the applicant in
writing. A valid reason for this extension may be that the city needs more time
to consider the application. A motion to approve the application which fails to
pass because of sufficient votes, shall not be deemed to be a denial of an
application. The passage of a motion to deny the application is required in
order for an application to be denied. Additional extensions beyond the first
extension will require the approval by the applicant in writing.
      (5)   The Planning Commission shall hold the public hearing, and may
table the application for further investigation if necessary, or the Commission
shall recommend to the Council one of three actions: approval, conditional
approval or denial.
      (6)   The Council shall act upon the application within 30 days after
receiving the recommendation of the Planning Commission.
      (7)   If the City Council approves the preliminary plan, the Zoning
Administrator changes the zoning classification on the Official Zoning Map if a
zoning change was made, and further designates the district or portion of a
district as a PUD.
      (8)   The applicant shall submit final plans and all of the required
attachments to the city within 90 days of preliminary plan approval.
      (9)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the application, and within
ten business days after receiving the application, shall notify the applicant
in writing if the application is not complete and what additional information
is required.
      (10)   When the Zoning Administrator determines the application to be
complete, the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall transmit copies of the
final plan to the Planning Commission and appropriate city staff.
      (11)   The Planning Commission shall review the final plans and may table
the application for further investigation if necessary, or the Commission shall
recommend to the Council one of three actions, approval, conditional approval
or denial, at least five days before the next Council meeting.
      (12)   The Council shall act upon the application after receiving the
recommendation of the Planning Commission.
   (B)   Similar to amendment procedure. Application procedures for a PUD
generally follow the procedure for amendment, set forth in § 155.007, with more
specific application requirements in the following divisions.
   (C)   Application by property owner. Application for a PUD shall be made by
the owner of the property, except that an option holder may apply for a PUD,
provided the application is accompanied by a signed statement indicating no
objections from the owner or owners of all properties involved in the
application.
   (D)   Preliminary PUD plan. Application for a preliminary PUD plan shall be
filed with the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, and shall be accompanied by
six copies of the following plans and information.
      (1)   Location maps, showing location within city and more specific
location on a halt section plat map, showing all surrounding property lines and
ownership within 200 feet of the proposed PUD as the same appears on the
records of the County Auditor.
      (2)   All information required in chapter 154, Subdivision Regulations,
for a preliminary plat.
      (3)   General development plan to include regulations set forth in §
155.169(G), and in addition, indicating the following.
         (a)   All types of uses proposed.
         (b)   Density of each type of use.
         (c)   Height and bulk of all buildings.
      (4)   A summary sheet indicating the following.
         (a)   Area of land for each use within separate intensity of use.
         (b)   Number of units proposed, including number of bedrooms in each
area above.
         (c)   Number of acres of common open space.
         (d)   Modifications of any provisions of this chapter or any other
ordinance, codes or regulations of the city.
      (5)   A phasing plan indicating geographical staging and approximate
timing of the plan or portions thereof.
      (6)   A written statement by the applicant indicating how his or her
proposed development conforms to the stated objectives and purpose of this
subchapter, and why his or her proposal would be in the public interest.
      (7)   The fee for filing a PUD, which includes the fees for subdivision;
newspaper publications of the public hearing; mailing of notices to owners
within 300 feet; and staff reports shall be $100 plus $10 for each residential
unit, the amounts to be as set by the City Council.
   (E)   Planning Commission study and review of preliminary plan.
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall make its recommendations to the City
Council for project approval, approval with conditions, or denial.
Recommendations shall be made within 30 days of the initial hearing unless the
applicant files a written request to the Planning Commission for delay. If the
Planning Commission does not make its recommendations within the specified time
period and a delay has not been requested by the applicant, the City Council
may take action on request by the applicant.
      (2)   The Planning Commission shall forward to the City Council its
recommendation based on and including, but not limited to the following.
         (a)   Compatibility with the stated purposes and intent of the Planned
Unit Development.
         (b)   Relationship of the proposed plan to the neighborhood in which
it is proposed to be located, to the city land use plan, and to other
provisions of this chapter.
         (c)   Internal organization and adequacy of various uses or densities;
circulation and parking facilities; public facilities, recreation areas and
open spaces.
   (F)   Application and review procedures subject to change. The Planning
Commission and City Council may from time to time amend or vary the application
and review procedures and the amount and type of documents to be presented.
   (G)   Approval as a PUD. If the zoning change or the preliminary plan is
approved by the City Council as a PUD, the plan is attached to and is a part of
the ordinance establishing the zoning change. The Zoning Administrator shall
then change the zoning classification on the official Zoning Map if a zoning
change was made, and further designate the district or portion of a district as
a PUD, whether or not a zoning change was made.
   (H)   Final plan review.
      (1)   A final plan shall be submitted with an application for final plan
approval within 90 days after City Council approval of the preliminary plan.
Unless a written request for an extension is received within 90 days, the
preliminary plan will be considered abandoned and a new application for a
preliminary plan must be submitted following the preliminary plan procedure.
The maximum extension period shall not exceed one year.
      (2)   The City Council shall review the final plan at the first regularly
scheduled meeting which occurs at least 14 days after filing of the application
for final plan approval.
      (3)   The final plan shall be in substantial compliance with the approved
preliminary plan. SUBSTANTIAL COMPLIANCE shall be defined as follows.
         (a)   The number of residential living units has not been increased.
         (b)   The floor area of nonresidential uses has not been increased.
         (c)   Open space has not been decreased or altered to change its
original intended design or use.
         (d)   All special conditions prescribed in the preliminary plan by the
applicant or any of the reviewing bodies have been incorporated in the final
plan.
      (4)   The application for final plan (or for any stages of the final
plan) approval shall be accompanied by a legal description of the project
property, together with copies of the following plans and data.
         (a)   A plan with locations of all structures including placement,
size and type with topography showing two-foot contour intervals.
         (b)   Preliminary architectural delineations, including but not
limited to building plans, elevations and sections, together with preliminary
specifications. These plans and specifications are applicable to all structures
other than single-family dwellings.
         (c)   Elevations or sections through the site which will best indicate
the relationship of the buildings with the various terrain features and site
elements.
         (d)   Grading and drainage plan at two-foot contour intervals.
         (e)   Utility plan for all public utilities.
         (f)   Landscape plan prepared by a professional landscape architect.
         (g)   Proposed zoning changes with the legal descriptions of all
district boundary changes.
         (h)   Deed restrictions, covenants, agreements, by-laws of proposed
Homeowner’s Association and other documents controlling the use of property,
type of construction or development or the activities of future residents.
         (i)   The procedures for approving and recording of plats shall be
followed if the final plan involves platting or division of land or the
platting of public streets.
         (j)   Any other information which is necessary to fully represent the
intention of the Preliminary Plan.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 155.180 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Except as may otherwise be provided in §§ 155.230 through 155.237,
Nonconforming Structures and Uses, all buildings erected hereafter, all uses of
land or buildings established hereafter,
all exterior structural alterations or relocation of existing buildings
occurring hereafter, and all enlargements or additions to existing uses
occurring hereafter shall be subject to all regulations of this chapter which
are applicable to the zoning districts in which the buildings, uses or land
shall be located.
   (B)   No application for a building permit or other permit or license, or
for a certificate of zoning compliance, shall be approved by the Zoning
Administrator, and no permit or license shall be issued by any other city
department which would authorize the use or change in use of any land or
building contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or the erection, moving,
exterior alteration, enlargement, or occupancy of any building designed or
intended to be used for a purpose or in a manner contrary to the provisions of
this chapter.
   (C)   No lot area shall be so reduced or diminished that the yards or other
open spaces shall be smaller than prescribed by this chapter, nor shall the
density of population be increased in any manner except in conformity with the
area regulations as herein provided, nor shall the area of any lot be reduced
below the minimum requirements herein established except by variance granted by
the Council.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.181 MORE THAN ONE PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE.
   In any district, more than one structure housing a permitted or permitted
principal use may be erected on a single lot, provided that yard and other
requirements of this chapter shall be met for each structure as though it were
on an individual lot.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.182 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   (A)   In case an accessory building is attached to the main building, it
shall be made structurally a part of the main building, and shall comply in all
respects with the requirements of this chapter applicable to the main building.
An accessory building, unless attached to and made a part of the main building,
shall not be closer than 12 feet to the main building.
   (B)   A detached accessory building shall not be located in any required
front yard.
   (C)   A detached accessory building shall not exceed one story, shall not
exceed 12 feet in height and shall occupy no more than 30% of the area of any
side or rear yard, provided further that no detached accessory building shall
be placed nearer than four feet from any side or rear lot line, except in the
case of alleys, which shall require 2½ feet.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995; Am. Ord. 246, passed 11-1-2004)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.183 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Where the average slope of a lot is greater than one foot rise or fall
in seven feet of horizontal distance from the established street elevation at
the property line, one story in addition to the number permitted in the
district in which the lot is situated shall be permitted on the downhill side
of any building.
   (B)   Height limitations set forth elsewhere in this chapter may be
increased by 100% when applied to chimneys, cooling towers, elevators
bulkheads, fire towers, monuments, water towers, stacks, storage lofts, tanks,
ornamental towers and spires, wireless towers, or necessary mechanical
appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level and not
intended for human occupancy.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.184 YARD REGULATIONS.
   The following requirements qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the
district regulations appearing elsewhere in this chapter. Measurements shall be
taken from the nearest points of the wall of a building to the lot line
question, subject to the following qualifications.
   (A)   Projections. Every part of a required yard or court shall be open from
its lowest point to the sky, unobstructed, except for the ordinary projections
of window wells above the bottom of the yard or court, and except for the
projections of sill belt courses, cornices, and ornamental features, shall not
exceed 4½ feet.
   (B)   Fire escapes and balconies. Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes,
fireproof outside stairways and balconies opening upon fire towers may extend
into a required front or rear yard a distance not to exceed 4½ feet.
   (C)   Yard exclusive to building. A yard, court, or other open space
provided about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of
this chapter shall not again be used as a yard, court, or other open space for
another building.
   (D)   Corner lots. The setback requirements shall be observed on each street
side of a corner lot; provided, however, that the buildable width of a lot
shall not be reduced to less than 30 feet.
   (E)   Setbacks in certain circumstances. A total setback requirement of 300
feet shall be mandatory for all land uses handling highly explosive or
inflammable materials in quantity, such as gas service stations, bulk fuel or
oil dealers and similar operations, from all schools, churches, hospitals, or
any public meeting place having a seating capacity of 50 or more persons.
   (F)   Yards for open land uses. Where a lot is to be occupied for permitted
uses without buildings or structures thereon, the side yards and front yards
required herein for the zone within which the lot
is located shall be provided and maintained between the use and the respective
lot lines; provided that side and rear yards shall not be required on lots
without buildings or structures when used for garden purposes or public
playgrounds.
   (G)   Permitted obstructions in required yards. The following shall not be
considered to be obstructions when located in the required yard specified.
      (1)   In front yards.
         (a)   One-story bay windows projecting three feet or less into the
yard; and overhanging eaves and gutters projecting 2½ feet or less into the
yard.
         (b)   A landing place or uncovered porch may extend into the required
front yard to a distance not exceeding six feet, if the landing place or porch
has its floor no higher than the entrance floor of the building. An open
railing no higher than 3½ feet may be placed around such place.
         (c)   The required front yard of a corner lot shall not contain any
wall, fence, or other structure, tree, shrub, or other growth which may cause
danger to traffic on a street or public road by obscuring the view, except the
wall, fence, or hedge may occupy part of a required yard, except that on corner
lots there shall be a triangular area formed by the property lines of
intersecting streets, intersecting alleys and streets, and a line joining
points on lines 25 feet distance from the intersection, in which area there
shall be no wall, fence or hedge, and trees shall be trimmed from the ground to
a height of ten feet above curb level.
         (d)   On double frontage lots, the required front yard shall be
provided on both streets.
      (2)   In side yards. Overhanging eaves and gutters projecting into the
yard for a distance of two inches per foot of required side yard.
      (3)   In rear yards.
         (a)   Enclosed, attached, or detached off-street parking spaces; open
off-street parking spaces; accessory structures, tool rooms, and similar
buildings or structures for domestic storage; balconies, breezeways and open
porches; one-story bay windows projecting 2½ feet or less into the yard; and
overhanging eaves and gutters projecting 2½ feet or less into the yard.
         (b)   In determining the depth of rear yard for any building where the
rear yard opens into an alley, one-half the width of the alley, but not
exceeding ten feet, may be considered as a portion of the rear yard.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.185 VISION CLEARANCE.
   (A)   Fences, walls in front yard. In any residence zone on any corner lot,
no fence or accessory structure or planting shall rise over 2½ feet in height
above the level of the public sidewalk within 20 feet of any corner, so as to
interfere with traffic visibility across the corner. No fence or wall shrub
planting of more than 2½ feet in height above the level of the public sidewalk
shall be erected on any interior lot within ten feet of the front property line
where it will interfere with traffic visible from a driveway.
   (B)   Fences in side yard. No fence or wall, other than a retaining wall,
along a side line of a lot in a residential zone, shall be higher than six feet
to the front yard setback line, unless any part above such a height has at
least 50% of the surface uniformly open and unobstructed, unless the adjoining
lot is not in a residential zone.
   (C)   Fences in rear yard. Fences having a height of eight feet or less may
be used to locate property lines within the required rear yards in the
residential district.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.186 STREET CLOSURES.
   Whenever any street, alley, or other public way is vacated by official
action of the city, the zoning district adjoining each side of the street,
alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of the
vacation, and all area included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be
subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended districts.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.187 AREAS UNDER WATER.
   All areas within the corporate limits of the city which are under water and
not shown as included within any zone shall be subject to all of the
regulations of the zone which immediately adjoins the water area. If the water
area adjoins two or more zones. the boundaries of each zone shall be construed
to extend into the water area in a straight line until they meet the other
district at a half-way point.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.188 ESSENTIAL SERVICES.
   Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and
other ordinances of the city in any district, it being the intention hereof to
exempt erection, construction, alteration, and maintenance from the application
of this chapter.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.189 ACCESS TO STRUCTURES.
   Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a
public street, or with access to an approved private street, and all structures
shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for
servicing, fire protection, and required off-street parking.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.190 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General provisions for all districts. The following regulations shall
apply to all signs hereinafter permitted in all districts.
      (1)   Signs shall not be permitted within the public right-of-way or
easements.
      (2)   Flashing or rotating signs resembling emergency vehicles shall not
be permitted in any district.
      (3)   No sign shall be permitted to obstruct any window, door, fire
escape, stairway or opening intended to provide light, air or access to any
building or structure.
      (4)   Upon notification by the City Council or Zoning Administrator that
a sign is rotted, unsafe or unsightly, the owner of the sign or owner of
property thereunder shall remove or repair the same.
      (5)   The owner, lessee or manager of any ground sign, and the owner of
the land on which the same is located, shall keep grass or weeds and other
growth cut, and debris and rubbish cleaned up and removed from the lot on which
a sign is located.
      (6)   All non-commercial signs of any size may be posted from August 1 in
a state general election year until ten days following the state general
election.
   (B)   Signs in residential districts. No sign shall be erected in any R-1,
R-2 or R-3 District except as follows.
      (1)   A nameplate sign identifying the owner or occupant of a building or
dwelling unit, provided the sign does not exceed two square feet in surface
area. The sign may be illuminated.
      (2)   A sign pertaining to the lease or sale of the building or property,
provided the sign does not exceed four square feet in surface area. The sign
shall not be illuminated.
      (3)   A temporary sign identifying an engineer, architect, contractor, or
product engaged in or used in the construction of a building, provided the sign
does not exceed four square feet in surface area and is removed prior to the
occupancy of the building. The sign shall not be illuminated.
      (4)   One identification sign not to exceed 40 square feet in surface
area, displaying location information for churches, schools, hospitals, nursing
homes, clubs, offices, libraries or similar use. An additional sign will be
permitted for a lot frontage exceeding 200 feet and every 200 feet thereafter.
The sign may be illuminated. Flashing or scrolling signs may not be illuminated
from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
      (5)   Directional, unilluminated signs not exceeding two square feet in
surface area displaying directional information for churches, schools,
hospitals, nursing homes, clubs, libraries or similar uses, excluding office or
commercial establishments, provided that each use shall be limited to one sign
per thoroughfare approach.
      (6)   Public street identification signs, traffic signs, and directional
signs in any parking area where the signs are necessary for the orderly
movement of traffic.
   (C)   Signs in business districts. Signs may be erected in business
districts subject to the following provisions.
      (1)   The total surface area of all business signs on a lot shall not
exceed two square feet per lineal foot of lot frontage, or 10% of the building
frontage area, or 75 square feet in area, whichever is greater. Signs may be
illuminated.
      (2)   Advertising sign structures shall be limited to one for a lot of
100-foot frontage or less, and to only one for each additional 100 feet of
additional lot frontage.
      (3)   An advertising structure may not contain more than two signs per
facing, nor exceed 55 feet in total length.
      (4)   An advertising sign erected within 100 feet of an adjoining
residential district must also comply with the sign regulations outlined in
division (B) of this section, Signs in residential districts.
      (5)   For corner lots, the frontage used to determine allowable sign area
shall be the least dimension along a street, but an equivalent sign area shall
be allowed facing the intersecting street.
      (6)   No sign shall project higher than six feet above the height of the
building, or 32 feet above the average grade at the building line, whichever is
greater.
      (7)   Signs painted on a building shall be governed by the square footage
limitations specified above. Such signs shall be maintained in good condition
and shall be repainted, removed, or painted out when, in the opinion of the
Council and/or Zoning Administrator, they are not so maintained.
      (8)   Where a sign is illuminated, the source of light shall not be
visible from any public right-of-way, and the light shall be directed away from
any residential district.
      (9)   No signs shall project more than one foot perpendicular to the
building.
   (D)   Signs in I-1 General Industry District. Signs may be erected in the I-
1 Districts subject to the following provisions.
      (1)   Advertising sign structures shall be limited to one for a lot of
100-foot frontage or less, and to only one for each additional 100-foot
frontage or less, and to only one for each additional 100 feet of additional
lot frontage. The structures shall not exceed 55 feet in length. No advertising
sign may be erected within 100 feet of a residential district. Signs may be
illuminated.
      (2)   Sign lighting shall not be directed toward a public right-of-way or
any residential district.
      (3)   The total surface area of all business signs on a lot shall not
exceed three square feet per lineal foot of lot frontage, or 20% of the
building frontage area, or 300 square feet in area, whichever is greater. Signs
may be illuminated.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995; Am. Ord. 274, passed 4-21-2014; Am. Ord. 298,
passed 1-16-2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.191 EXTRACTION OF MATERIALS AND MINERALS.
   All excavations, extractions of materials and minerals, open pits and
impounding of waters hereafter established or enlarged shall conform with the
provisions of this section and any other ordinance or regulations of the city.
   (A)   Definition.  EXCAVATION, as used in this section, shall mean any
artificial excavation of the earth, within the city, dug, excavated, or made by
the removal from the natural surface of the earth of sod, soil, sand, gravel,
stone or other matter, or made by tunneling or breaking or undermining the
surface of the earth. Excavating ancillary to other construction of any
installation erected or to be erected, built, or placed thereon
contemporaneously with or immediately following the excavation and covering, or
to cover the excavation when completed, are excepted, it a permit has been
issued for construction or installation. Excavation not exceeding 50 square
feet of surface area or two feet in depth and excavation including impounding
of water for agriculture purposes are exempted.
   (B)   Conditional use permit required. No person shall hereafter dig,
excavate, enlarge, make, maintain or allow to be maintained, upon property
owned or used by him or her, any open pit or excavation or any impounded water,
without first making an application for and obtaining from the city a
conditional use permit therefor.
   (C)   Application. Application for a permit shall be made in such form, and
the applicant shall furnish information as shall be required by the City
Planning Commission or Council, and among other things shall state the
following. The application shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator and
processed in a manner required for all conditional use permit applications.
      (1)   His or her true name and address.
      (2)   A full description of the location of the land where the pit or
excavation is or is to be, where the impounded waters are or are to be
maintained, and also a full description of the location on the land of the pit,
excavation or impounded waters.
      (3)   When required by the state, an approval by the state to impound the
waters or to make the excavation as described in the application.
      (4)   The purpose of the pit or excavation or the quantity of water
impounded.
      (5)   The highways, roads, or other public ways in the city upon and
along which any material for removal is to be hauled or carried.
      (6)   The estimated time when building or removing will begin and be
completed.
   (D)   Filing of map, plat. The City Planning Commission or Council may
require a map or plat of the proposed pit or excavation to be made and filed
with the application before acting on the same, showing the confines or limits
thereof, together with a plan indicating the topography and overall condition
of the site after extraction is completed. A similar map or plat may be
required to the proposed container for the impounded waters.
   (E)   Conditions of permit. The Planning Commission or Council, as a
prerequisite to the granting of a permit or after a permit has been granted,
may require the applicant to whom a permit is issued or the owner or user of
the property on which the open pit or excavation or impounded waters are
located to do the following.
      (1)   Properly fence any pit or excavation.
      (2)   Slope the banks and otherwise properly guard and keep any pit or
excavation in such condition as not to be dangerous from caving or sliding
banks.
      (3)   Properly drain, fill or level any pit or excavation, after created,
so as to make the same safe and healthful as the Commission shall determine.
      (4)   Keep any pit, excavation or impounded waters within the limits for
which the particular permit is granted.
      (5)   Remove excavated material from any pit or excavation, away from the
premises, upon and along any highways, streets or other public ways as the
Commission shall order and direct.
      (6)   Secure a bond. The City Planning Commission or Council may require
either the applicant or the owner or uses of the property on which to open pit
or excavation or impounded waters is located to post a bond, in a form and sum
as the Board shall determine, with sufficient surety running to the city,
conditioned to pay the city extraordinary cost and expense or repairing, from
time to time, any highways, streets, or other public ways where repair work is
made necessary by the special burden resulting from hauling and travel, in
removing materials from any pit, excavation or impounded waters, the amount of
the cost and expense to be determined by the appropriate city employee, and
conditioned further to comply with all the requirements of this section and the
particular permit, and to pay any expense the city may incur by reason of doing
anything required to be done by any applicant to whom a permit is issued.
   (F)   Fill or deposition in the floodplain. The fill or deposition of
materials in the floodplain shall be permitted only in instances where it will
not interfere or add to or increase flood potential at other locations in the
floodplain. The fill or deposition area will be so constructed as not to add
siltation to the flood waters.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.192 REQUIREMENTS FOR VEHICULAR CIRCULATION.
   (A)   (1)   All commercial buildings or structures and their accessory uses
shall be accessible to and from nearby public streets and sidewalks by
driveways and walkways surfaced with a hard, all weather, durable, dust-free
material, and shall be properly drained.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic generated by a commercial use shall be channeled
and controlled in a manner that will avoid congestion on the public streets,
traffic hazards, excessive traffic through residential areas, particularly
truck traffic. The adequacy of any proposed traffic circulation system to
accomplish these objectives shall be determined by the Planning Commission, who
may require additional measures for traffic control as they may deem necessary,
including but not limited to directional signalization, channelization, stand-
by turn lanes, illumination, and storage area and distribution facilities
within the commercial site to prevent back-up of vehicles on public streets.
   (B)   No area used by motor vehicles other than driveways serving as ingress
and egress to the commercial site shall be located within the public street
right-of-way.
      (1)   Driveway widths. Measurements between roadway edges shall be as
follows:
   Type   Maximum   Minimum
   One-way   25 feet   12 feet
   Two-way   30 feet   24 feet
      (2)   Minimum driveway angle to street. Shall be 30° when the driveway is
one-way or divided, otherwise 60°.
      (3)   Minimum distance between driveways. Shall be 20 feet between
roadway edges measured along street curb line.
      (4)   Minimum distance of driveway from street intersections. Measured
along street curb line between nearest driveway edge and intersecting street
curb line shall be as follows:
 
                                And the         And the driveway enters lane
If the driveway enters a street intersecting    approaching or leaving
classified as a                 street is       intersection
                                classified as a Approaching Leaving
                 Minor Street
Minor Street     Collector Street or            15 feet     15 feet
                 Minor Arterial
                 Major Arterial                 20 feet     15 feet
                 Minor Street                   20 feet     15 feet
Collector Street Collector, Minor
                 Arterial                       25 feet     15 feet
                 Major Arterial                 35 feet     20 feet
                 Minor Street                   20 feet     15 feet
Major Arterial   Collector, Minor
                 Arterial                       25 feet     15 feet
                 Major Arterial                 40 feet     20 feet
 
*Note:   Minimum distance to be the same as that specified for approaching lane
it left turns are permitted into or out of driveway.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.193 SCREENING, LANDSCAPING, LIGHTING, STORAGE AND OUTDOOR DISPLAYS.
   (A)   Screening. All principal and accessory uses, except business signs,
which are situated within 50 feet of a residential district, shall be screened
from the district by a wall or fence of not less than 90% opacity, and not less
than five nor more than seven feet in height above the level of the residential
district property at the district boundary. Walls or fences of lesser heights
or planting screens may be permitted by the City Council, if there is a finding
that the nature or extent of the use being screened is such that a lesser
degree of screening will as adequately promote and protect the use and
enjoyment of the properties within the adjacent residential district, or there
is a finding that a screening of the type required by this chapter would
interfere with the provisions of adequate amounts of light and air to some
properties. Loading docks in the Business or Industrial District shall be
screened so as not to be visible from any public street right-of-way within a
Residential District. All required screening devices shall be designed so that
they are architecturally harmonious with the principal structures on the site,
and they shall be properly maintained so as not to become unsightly, hazardous,
or less opaque than when originally constructed.
   (B)   Landscaping. All exposed ground areas surrounding or within a
principal or accessory use, including street boulevards, which are not devoted
to drives, sidewalks, patios, or other such uses, shall be landscaped with
grass, shrubs, trees, or other ornamental landscaped materials. All landscaped
areas shall be kept neat, clean and uncluttered. No landscaped area shall be
used for the parking of vehicles or the storage or display of materials,
supplies or merchandise.
   (C)   Lighting. All sources of artificial light situated in a Business or
Industrial District site shall be so fixed, directed, designed or sized that
the sum total of their illumination will not increase the level of illumination
on any nearby residential property by more than 0.1 foot-candle in or within 25
feet of a dwelling, nor more than 0.5 foot-candles on any other part of the
property. Glare, whether direct or reflected, as differentiated from general
illumination, shall not be visible from beyond the limits of the immediate site
from which it originates.
   (D)   Storage; displays. All materials, supplies, merchandise or other
similar matter not on display for a direct sale, rental or lease to the
ultimate consumer or user shall be stored within a completely enclosed building
within the Business or Industrial District, or within the confines of a 100%
opaque wall or fence not less than five feet high. Merchandise which is offered
for sale as described above may be displayed beyond the confines of a building
in the Business Industrial District, but the area occupied by the outdoor
display shall not constitute a greater number of square feet than 10% of the
ground floor area of the building housing the principal use, unless the
merchandise is of a type customarily displayed outdoors, such as garden
supplies. No storage of any type shall be permitted within the one-half of the
required front or side street setback nearest the street.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.194 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   In order to insure compliance with the performance standards set forth
below, the City Council may require the owner or operator of any permitted use
to have made any investigations or tests as may be required to show adherence
to the performance standards. Any investigation or tests as are required shall
be carried out by an independent testing organization selected by the city. Any
investigations or testing shall be ordered by the owner or operator. The cost
of same shall be shared equally by the owner or operator and the city, unless
the investigation or tests disclose noncompliance with the performance
standards, in which situation the entire costs shall be paid by the owner or
operator.
   (B)   The performance standards are as follows.
      (1)   Noise. At any property line, the sound pressure level of noise
radiated from the industrial operation shall not exceed the values given in the
table in this division. The sound pressure shall be measured with a sound level
meter and an associated octave band analyzer, both of which are manufactured to
specifications published by the American Standard Specifications for an Octave
Band Filter Set for the Analysis of Noise and Other Sounds, Z24.10, 1953,
American Standards Association, Inc., New York, New York. Measurements shall be
made using the flat network of the sound level meter.
   Frequency Band   Maximum Permitted
   (Cycles Per Second)   Sound Level (Decibels)
   20 - 75   72
   75 - 150   67
   150 - 300   59
   300 - 600   52
   600 - 1,200   46
   1,200 - 2,400   40
   2,400 - 4,800   34
   Over 4,800   32
      (2)   Odors. No odors shall be detectable beyond the limits of the
property.
      (3)   Exterior lighting. Any lights used for exterior illumination shall
direct light away from adjoining property. Glare, whether direct or reflected,
such as from floodlights, spotlights, or high- temperature processing, and as
differentiated from general illumination, shall not be visible beyond the
limits of the property.
      (4)   Vibration. No vibration shall be discernible at any property line
to the human sense of feeling for an accumulated total of three or more minutes
during any hour.
      (5)   Smoke. The emission of smoke shall be regulated in accordance with
the provisions of the State Pollution Control Agency.
      (6)   Dust. The emission of dust shall be regulated in accordance with
the provisions of the State Pollution Control Agency.
      (7)   Fumes or gases. Fumes or gases shall not be emitted at any point in
concentrations or amounts that are noxious, toxic or corrosive. The values
given in Table I (Industrial Hygiene Standards - Maximum Allowable
Concentration for eight-hour day, five days per week), Table III (Odor
Thresholds), Table IV (Exposure to Substances Causing Pain in the Eyes), and
Table I (Exposure to
Substances Causing Injury to Vegetation) in the latest revision of Chapter 5,
“Physiological Effects,” that contains such tables, in the Air Pollution
Abatement Manual, by the Manufacturing Chemists’ Association Inc., Washington,
D.C., are hereby established as guides for the determination of permissible
concentration or amounts. Detailed plans for the elimination of fumes or gases
may be required before the issuance of a building permit.
      (8)   Sewer and water. The design and construction of water supply
facilities and treatment of all sewage and waste shall comply with the city,
county and state health standards and requirements.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.195 SHORELAND STANDARDS.
   (A)   The purpose of this section is to establish controls over development
adjacent to rivers and streams independent of the standards as described in
this chapter for zoning districts.
   (B)   The standards as set forth in this section shall apply to all
shoreland classifications within the city, and shall supersede the requirements
for other zoning districts in such cases where other land classification zoning
districts fall within the jurisdiction of this section.
      (1)   Classification. Rivers and streams listed in §
155.024 of this chapter which lie within the jurisdiction of the city are
hereby classified as Natural Environment Streams.
      (2)   Jurisdiction. Shoreland standards as defined in this section shall
have jurisdiction over all lands within 300 feet of the high water mark of all
rivers, streams and landward extents of all floodplains.
      (3)   Permitted uses.
         (a)   All uses permitted in the designated Zoning District in
Chapter 153, Floodplain Management, and in §§
155.035 through
155.170 of this chapter as regulated therein and by this section.
         (b)   Seasonal dwellings.
         (c)   Permanent single-family dwellings and manufactured homes.
         (d)   Subdivisions.
      (4)   Conditional uses.
         (a)   Manufactured home parks as regulated in §§
155.080 through
155.091.
         (b)   Multiple dwellings as regulated in §§
155.065 through
155.068, R-3 District.
         (c)   Resorts and hotels and motels, provided the density is based
upon density requirements of this section, and upon a modification of the
prescribed densities as permitted in §
155.106(A), B-I District and the State Commissioner of Natural Resources.
         (d)   Boat houses.
         (e)   Public swimming pools.
         (f)   Public or semipublic recreation facilities.
         (g)   Conditional use permitted in the designated Zoning Districts.
      (5)   Accessory uses.
         (a)   Garages.
         (b)   Private docks.
         (c)   Private Recreational Facilities.
         (d)   Uses customarily incidental to the permitted and conditional
uses of this section.
      (6)   Lot area, width, depth, height, coverage and shoreland setback
requirements. These shall be as set forth in the Appendix: Height, Area, Yard
Regulations.
      (7)   Setbacks. Front side yard setbacks shall be determined by the
applicable zoning district as shown on the city Zoning Map.
      (8)   Highwater elevation. In addition to the setback requirements listed
in the Appendix: Height, Area, Yard Regulations, structures shall be placed at
an elevation consistent with the floodplain requirements of Chapter Section
153, Floodplain Management.
      (9)   Subdivision on unsuitable land. No land shall be subdivided which
is held unsuitable by the city for the proposed use because of flooding,
inadequate drainage, soil and rock formations with severe limitations for
development, severe erosion potential, unfavorable topography, inadequate water
and sewage services or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health,
safety or general welfare of the future residents of the proposed subdivision
or the city.
      (10)   State Commissioner of Natural Resources.  
         (a)   All variances, conditional uses, subdivisions and amendments to
this chapter that fall within the jurisdiction of this section shall be
forwarded to the State Commissioner of Natural Resources at least ten days
prior to the official city public hearing date for his or her review and
comments. The submittal shall include the type of request, the specific problem
instituting the request when applicable, and the time, date and place of
hearing.
         (b)   Any alteration to the bed of public waters, including
construction of channels, ditches, lagoons, dredging of bottom, muck or weeds
or filling in a river bed, including marshland, must receive approval by the
State Commissioner of Natural Resources, the Planning Commission and Council
prior to the commencement of operations.
      (11)   Natural vegetation. Natural vegetation in shoreland areas shall be
preserved insofar as practical and reasonable to retard surface runoff and soil
erosion, to utilize excess nutrients in the soil to alleviate pollution
problems and to provide sufficient cover to screen cars, dwellings and other
structures from view from the rivers and streams.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.196 BED AND BREAKFAST.
   (A)   Definition. BED AND BREAKFAST is an owner managed and owner occupied
residential structure used as a lodging establishment where a room or rooms are
rented on a nightly basis, and in which only breakfast is included as part of
the basic compensation.
   (B)   Zoning requirements. A bed and breakfast establishment is permitted
(with a conditional use permit) only in the R-1, R-2, and R-3 zoning districts
of the city. Bed and breakfast establishments are prohibited in all other
districts.
   (C)   Accessory use. A bed and breakfast facility must be accessory to the
use of a property as a single-family residential home. This means that the
individual or family who operates the facility must also occupy the house as
their primary residence. The house must be at least 20 years old before a bed
and breakfast facility is allowed.
   (D)   Maximum size. Bed and breakfast facilities are limited to a maximum of
four bedrooms available for rent to guests. All guest rooms shall be contained
within the principal structure.
   (E)   Employees. There shall be no more than two full time equivalent
persons employed by the bed and breakfast residence who is not a resident of
the dwelling.
   (F)   Permits/licenses required. No bed and breakfast use may be lawfully
established without first obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to the
provisions of §§
155.250—
155.255. Additionally, before issuance of a conditional use permit, an
applicant must show satisfactory written proof that all required licenses have
been issued by Fillmore County and/or the State of Minnesota.
   (G)   Lighting. Lighting shall be provided and shall be kept to a
contiguous, compact and well-defined area between the residential structure and
parking area. Any additional exterior lighting for the bed and breakfast is
prohibited.
   (H)   Signage. Bed and breakfast establishments are allowed an
identification sign not exceeding six square feet in size. The signs shall be
located on site. The sign must match the architectural features of the primary
residential structure.
   (I)   Appearance. Residential structures may be remodeled for the
development of a bed and breakfast facility. However, structural alterations
may not be made which prevent the structure from being used as a residence in
the future. Internal or external changes which will make the dwelling appear
less residential in nature or function are not allowed. Examples of such
alterations include paving of required setbacks, and commercial-type exterior
lighting.
   (J)   Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided as specified in §
155.214(B)(3).
   (K)   Existing businesses. This section shall apply to bed and breakfasts
established after the date this section is adopted.
(Ord. 250, passed 5-22-2006)
§ 155.197 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   (A)   General. Home occupations shall be allowed as conditional uses in R-1,
R-2 and R-3 residential districts subject to the following standards:
      (1)   Not more than 25% of the total floor area of the dwelling shall be
used for this purpose.
      (2)   Only articles made or originating on the premises shall be sold on
the premises, unless such articles are incidental to permitted commercial
service.
      (3)   No articles for sale shall be displayed so as to be visible from
any street.
      (4)   The occupation is to be conducted solely by members of the
household residing on the premises, except that one person necessary to the
occupation may be employed.
      (5)   No mechanical or electrical equipment is used if the operation of
such equipment interferes unreasonably with the desired quiet residential
environment of the neighborhood or if the health and safety of the residents is
endangered.
      (6)   No outside storage of materials, product, equipment or display of
merchandise shall be allowed.
      (7)   Conducting of the home occupation shall not require substantial
interior or exterior alterations of the dwelling.
      (8)   No sign shall be allowed other than one non illuminated name plate
measuring not more than one by one and one-half feet and placed near the
building entrance.
      (9)   Home occupations shall generate minimal traffic and parked vehicles
so as to not change the character of the neighborhood.
      (10)   Uses specifically prohibited as home occupations include clinics,
hospitals, mortuaries, motor vehicle repairing for hire, welding, animal
hospitals and kennels.
(Ord. 251, passed 12-19-2005)
§ 155.198 SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Purpose. This section permits, as an accessory use, solar energy
systems, while protecting the health, safety and welfare of city residents and
the property interests of adjacent and surrounding land uses through
appropriate zoning and land use controls.
   (B)   Definitions.
      (1)   BUILDING-INTEGRATED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A solar energy system that
is directly incorporated into the building by replacing typical building
materials.
      (2)   GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A solar energy system that is
installed onto the ground directly or by means of brackets or poles.
      (3)   ROOF-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A solar energy system mounted to
a house or other building.
      (4)   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A set of devices whose primary purpose is to
provide for the collection, storage and distribution of solar energy for space
heating or cooling, electricity generation or water heating.
   (C)   Solar energy systems.
      (1)   Permitted accessory use. Solar energy systems, with the exception
of ground-mounted photovoltaic systems larger than 5kw, are allowable as an
accessory use in all zoning districts, subject to the following requirements:
         (a)   Standards.
            1.   Height. Roof-mounted solar energy systems shall not project
beyond the peak of the roof and shall not be more than three feet above the
roof surface to which they are attached. Ground-mounted solar energy systems
shall not exceed 12 feet in height.
            2.   Location. Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall be located
in the rear yard only.
            3.   Setbacks. Ground mounted solar energy systems shall be set
back a minimum of 15 feet from all property lines, a minimum of 30 feet from
all dwellings located on adjacent lots, a minimum of 20 feet from all public
right-of-way, and a minimum of ten feet from all utility easements. Roof-
mounted solar energy systems shall comply with all building setbacks in the
applicable zoning district and shall not extend beyond the exterior perimeter
of the building on which the system is mounted.
            4.   Feeder lines. All power exterior electrical or other service
lines shall be buried below the surface of the ground.
            5.   Maximum area. Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall be
limited to a maximum area consistent with the lot coverage limitations or no
more than 25% of the rear yard, whichever is less.
            6.   Exemption. Building integrated solar energy systems are exempt
from the requirements of this section and shall be regulated as any other
building element.
         (b)   Safety.
            l.   Compliance with building codes. All solar energy systems shall
comply with the Minnesota Building Code and any local building code
requirements.
            2.   Compliance with electric code. All solar energy systems shall
comply with the National Electrical Code.
            3.   Compliance with plumbing code. All solar thermal systems shall
comply with the Minnesota State Plumbing Code.
         (c)   Approval.
            1.   Permits. The erection, alteration, improvement,
reconstruction, and movement of a solar energy system requires a building
permit from the city.
            2.   Utility notification. The owner of a solar energy system that
will physically connect to a house or other building's electrical system and/or
the electric utility grid shall enter into a signed interconnection agreement
with the utility prior to the issuance of a building permit.
         (d)   Abandonment. If the solar energy system remains nonfunctional or
inoperative for more than 12 consecutive months, the system shall constitute a
public nuisance. The owner shall obtain a demolition permit and remove the
abandoned system at their expense. Removal includes the entire structure,
including collector, mount, and transmission equipment.
      (2)   Conditional use. Ground-mounted photovoltaic systems larger than
5kw, may be allowed as a conditional use in the R-1 and I-1 zoning districts,
subject to the above requirements and other conditions as determined by the
city.
   (D)   Aesthetics. All solar energy systems shall use colors that blend with
the color of the roof or other structure. Reflection angles from collector
surfaces shall be oriented so as not to interfere with the use and enjoyment of
other properties. Where necessary, screening may be required to address glare.
   (E)   Easements. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to
secure any desired solar easement to protect solar access for the system (per
M.S. § 500.30).
(Ord. 285, passed 9-3-2019)
PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS
§ 155.205 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   All parking hereafter constructed or maintained shall conform to the
provisions of this subchapter and any other ordinance or regulations of the
city. For any and all uses or structures not specifically provided for
hereunder, parking space shall be determined by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
§ 155.206 MINIMUM SIZE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The required parking and loading spaces shall be provided on the
premises of each use. Each parking space shall contain a minimum area of not
less than 300 square feet, including access drives, and a width of not less
than nine feet, and a depth of not less than 20 feet.
   (B)   The minimum number of required off-street parking spaces for various
uses shall be as follows.
      (1)   Reduction and use of parking and loading space. Whenever, after the
date of this chapter, there is a change in the lawful use of the premises or in
any unit of measurement specified in this subchapter, and whenever change
creates a need for an increase or decrease of more than 15% of the number of
required off-street parking spaces, the number of off-street parking facilities
shall be provided, on the basis of adjusted needs, within six months, or as
determined by the Board of Adjustments. Should an unusual hardship result due
to the requirements of this division, an appeal may be made to the Board in the
manner provided by law. Required parking or loading space shall not be used for
storage of goods or vehicles that are inoperable or for sale or rent.
      (2)   Computing requirements. In computing the number of parking spaces
required, the following rules shall govern.
         (a)   FLOOR SPACE shall mean the gross floor area of the specified
use.
         (b)   Where tractional space results, the parking spaces required
shall be construed to be the nearest whole number.
         (c)   The parking space requirements for a use not specifically
mentioned herein shall be the same as required for a use of similar nature, as
determined by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.207 YARDS.
   On-site parking and loading facilities shall not be subject to the front
yard, side yard and rear yard regulations for the use district in which the
parking is located, except for the following.
   (A)   In a Business District, no parking or loading space shall be located
within ten feet of any property line that abuts a road or highway right-of-way
or any Residential District.
   (B)   In an I-1 General Industry District, no parking or loading space shall
be located within ten feet of any property line that abuts a highway right-of-
way line or any Residential District, except for railroad loading areas.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.208 BUFFER AND FENCES; PLANTING SCREENS.
   On-site parking and loading areas near or abutting Residential Districts
shall be screened by a buffer fence of adequate design, or a planting buffer
screen; plans for any screen or fence shall be submitted for approval as a part
of the required site or plot plan, and the fence or landscaping shall be
installed as a part of initial construction.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.209 ACCESS.
   (A)   Parking and loading space shall have proper access from a public
right-of-way.
   (B)   The number and width of access drives shall be so located as to
minimize traffic congestion and abnormal traffic hazards.
   (C)   Vehicular access to business or industrial uses across property in any
Residential District shall be prohibited.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.210 LOCATION OF PARKING AND COMBINED FACILITIES.
   (A)   Required on-site parking space shall be provided on the same lot as
the principal building or use, except that combined or joint parking facilities
may be provided for one or more buildings or uses in Commercial Districts and
Industry Districts, provided that the total number of spaces shall equal the
sum of the requirements for each building or use.
   (B)   Special purpose off-street automobile parking facilities, to the
extent required in this subchapter, may be provided on the same lot or premises
with the parking generator, or on any lot or premises, a substantial portion of
which is within 800 feet of the parking generator.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.211 CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   No driveway or curb cuts in any district shall exceed 35 feet in
width.
   (B)   All parking areas shall be paved with an asphaltic or concrete
surfacing, afford adequate drainage and shall have bumper guards where needed.
   (C)   The operator of the principal building or use shall maintain parking
and loading areas, access drives and yard areas in a neat and adequate manner.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.212 LIGHTING.
   Lighting shall be reflected away from the public right-of-way and nearby or
adjacent Residential Districts.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.213 REQUIRED SITE PLAN.
   Any application for a zoning permit shall include a site plan or plot plan
drawn to scale and dimensioned, showing on-site parking and loading space to be
provided in compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.214 REQUIRED ON-SITE PARKING SPACES.
   (A)   Off-street parking areas of sufficient size to provide parking for
patrons, customers, suppliers, visitors and employees shall be provided on the
premises of each use.
   (B)   The minimum number of required on-site parking spaces for various uses
shall be as follows.
      (1)   One and two-family dwellings. Two parking spaces per family. No
garage shall be converted into living space unless other acceptable on-site
parking spaces are provided.
      (2)   Multiple dwellings. Two parking spaces for each apartment, except
housing for the elderly projects, which shall provide 0.3 parking spaces for
each dwelling unit.
      (3)   Lodging, rooming and boarding houses, tourist homes, bed and
breakfasts, cabins or motels. One parking space for each guest or sleeping room
or suite; plus three spaces for the owner or manager, if resident on the
premises.
      (4)   Hotels. One parking space for each room or suite; plus, two spaces
for each five employees.
      (5)   Manufactured home parks. Two off-street parking spaces for each
manufactured home berth.
      (6)   Travel trailer courts or camps. One and one-half parking spaces for
each trailer space.
      (7)   Private clubs or lodges. Parking spaces equal in number to not less
than 20% of the active membership thereof; plus one space for each employee of
the club or lodge.
      (8)   Hospitals, sanitariums, convalescent homes. One parking space for
each two beds (excluding bassinets); plus one for each staff or visiting
doctor; plus one for each two employees, including nurses. Loading and
unloading space for all emergency vehicles is not included in the space herein.
      (9)   Mortuaries or funeral parlors. One parking space for all official
vehicles plus one parking space for each family in residence on the premises;
plus one space for each 35 square feet of seating area.
      (10)   Community centers, libraries, museums, post offices, civic clubs
and similar uses. One parking space for each two employees; plus one parking
space for each 500 square feet of floor area.
      (11)   Dance hall. One space for each 35 square feet of dance floor area;
plus one space for each two employees.
      (12)   Bowling alleys. Five parking spaces for each bowling lane, plus
one parking space for each two employees.
      (13)   Miniature golf course, archery or golf driving range. Ten parking
spaces or one parking space for each practice area, whichever is greater.
      (14)   Convention halls, auditoriums, theaters, stadiums, sports arenas
or similar uses. One parking space for each four seats based upon design
capacity, plus one parking space for each two employees.
      (15)   Churches. One parking space for each four seats based on the
design capacity of the main seating area.
      (16)   Medical and dental clinics and similar professional offices. Four
parking spaces, plus one space for each 500 square feet of floor area over
1,000 square feet.
      (17)   Golf courses, golf clubhouses, country clubs, swimming clubs,
tennis clubs, public swimming pools. Twenty spaces, plus one space for each 500
square feet of floor area in the principal structure.
      (18)   Auto sales, trailer sales, marine and boat sales, implement sales,
garden supply stores, building material sales, auto repair. Six parking spaces
plus one parking space for each 500 square feet of floor area over 1,000 square
feet.
      (19)   Retail sales and service establishments. One parking space for
each 100 square feet of floor area.
      (20)   Restaurants, night clubs, tearooms, lunch counters. One parking
space for each 100 square feet of gross floor area.
      (21)   Schools.
         (a)   Elementary. One and one-half parking spaces for each classroom.
         (b)   Senior high. One parking space for each classroom, plus one
space for each five students, based on design capacity.
      (22)   Office, professional or public buildings. One parking space for
each 250 square feet of gross floor area.
      (23)   Automobile service stations. Four parking spaces plus two parking
spaces for each service stall. Parking spaces shall be in addition to the gas
pump service area.
      (24)   Drive-in restaurants. Twenty parking spaces or one space for each
20 square feet of floor area, whichever is greater.
      (25)   General business, commercial and personal service establishments.
One parking space per 400 square feet of gross floor area.
      (26)   Shopping centers. Where several business uses are grouped together
according to a general development plan, five parking spaces shall be provided
on site for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area; separate on-site space
shall be provided for loading and unloading.
      (27)   Industrial or manufacturing establishment and storage, wholesale
or warehouse establishments. One off-street parking space for each two
employees on the major shift, or one parking space for each 1,000 square feet
of gross floor area within the building, whichever is greater; plus one space
for each company motor vehicle when customarily kept on the premises.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995; Am. Ord. 246, passed 11-1-2004; Am. Ord. 250,
passed 5-22-2006)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.215 PARKING LOTS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   The Planning Commission may permit temporarily or permanently, when in its
opinion the best interests of the community will be served, the use of land in
a Residential District (other than in a one- and two-family district) for a
parking lot where the land abuts or is across the street from a district other
than a Residential District provided that the following apply.
   (A)   The lot is used for only the parking of passenger vehicles of
employees, customers or guests of the person or firm controlling and operating
the lot, who shall be responsible for its maintenance.
   (B)   There shall be no charge for parking on the lot.
   (C)   The lot shall not be used for sales, repair work or servicing of any
kind.
   (D)   Ingress and egress for the lot shall be located in such a way as to do
no harm to the Residential District.
   (E)   There shall be no advertising signs or material located on the lot.
   (F)   All parking shall be kept back of the setback building line by barrier
unless otherwise specifically authorized by the Board of Adjustment.
   (G)   The parking lot and that portion of the driveway back of the building
line shall be adequately screened from the street and from adjoining property
in a Residential District by a hedge or slightly fence or wall not less than
six feet in height and not more than ten feet in height, located at the back of
the setback building line.
   (H)   All lighting shall be arranged so that there will be no glare
therefrom which is annoying to the occupants of adjoining property in a
Residential District.
   (I)   The surface shall be an all-weather substance and adequately drained.
   (J)   Any other conditions as may be deemed necessary by the Board of
Adjustments to protect the character of the Residential District.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.216 PARKING LOTS AND DRIVEWAYS ABUTTING RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   Whenever a parking lot or a driveway to a parking lot is hereinafter
established in other than a Residential District so as to abut the side or rear
line of a lot in a Residential District, a solid masonry wall or substantial
slightly fence not less than six feet and no more than ten feet in height shall
be constructed and maintained at least five feet from the side or rear lot line
up to, but not beyond, the front building setback line. In addition, in all use
districts, the lighting, including any permitted illuminated sign on any
parking lot or driveway, shall be arranged so that there will be no annoying
glare directed or reflected toward residential buildings or districts.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.217 OFF-STREET LOADING DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Location. All required loading or unloading into or out of trucks in
excess of ¾-ton capacity, or railroad cars, shall be conducted at facilities
specifically designed or designated for that purpose. These facilities shall be
located upon the zoning lot of principal uses required them. All berths beyond
one shall be separate from areas used for off-street parking.
   (B)   Access. Each required off-street loading berth shall be so designated
as to avoid undue interference with other vehicular or rail access or use of
public streets, alleys, or other public transport systems.
   (C)   Surfacing. All off-street loading, including loading berths and
maneuvering areas, shall be surfaced with a hard, all-weather, dust-free
durable surfacing material, and shall be well drained and landscaped, and shall
be maintained in a sightly and well-kept condition.
   (D)   Landscaping and screening. All berths shall be screened from view from
the property street frontage and from the zoning district boundary when the
adjacent property or across the street or side street frontage is zoned or used
for residential purposes. The screening shall be accomplished by a solid wall
not less than eight feet in height, and shall be so designed as to be
architecturally harmonious with the principal structure. Screen plantings may
be substituted for the prescribed wall, however, the plantings must not be less
than 2½ inches in diameter, and of such a type as to permit a minimum of 90%
opacity during all months of the year.
   (E)   Design. All of the required number of truck berths shall be 50 feet in
length, 12 feet in width, and 15 feet in height. All loading areas shall
consist of a maneuvering area in addition to the berth, and shall not use any
of that portion of the site containing parking stalls. Maneuvering areas shall
be of such size as to permit the backing of truck tractors and coupled trailers
into a berth, without blocking the use of other berths or drive or maneuvering
areas.
   (F)   Required loading areas. Space for loading and unloading of goods,
supplies and services shall be provided in addition to required off-street
parking spaces, and shall be sufficient to meet the requirements of each use as
indicated in this subchapter.
Use Required Spaces
Use                                     Required Spaces
Motels, hotels, lodging and rooming     One space for each structure over
houses, private lodges and clubs        20,000 square feet of gross floor area
                                        One space for the first 10,000 square
                                        except where otherwise specified feet
Retail and wholesale commercial uses    of gross floor area; plus one space for
                                        each additional 5,000 square feet of
                                        gross floor area
Auditoriums, stadiums, gymnasiums,
community centers, religious            One space for each structure over
institutions and schools (public and    100,000 square feet of gross floor area
private)
                                        One space for buildings between 30,000
Office buildings and professional       and 100,000 square feet of gross floor
offices (other than doctor and dentist) area; plus one space for each
and banks                               additional 100,000 square feet of gross
                                        floor area
Restaurants and other food-dispensing   One space for each structure with over
establishments, except drive-in         10,000 square feet of gross floor area
restaurants
Furniture, automobile and boat sales    One space; plus one space for each
and appliance sales                     25,000 square feet of gross floor area
Hospitals, nursing homes, rest          One space; plus one space for each
homes,and the like                      100,000 square feet of gross floor
                                        area.
Bowling alleys                          One space for each structure over
                                        20,000 square feet of gross floor area.
Manufacturing and research,             One space for each 50,000 square feet
experimental or testing stations.    of gross floor area.
                                        
 
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
NONCONFORMING USES
§ 155.230 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   This chapter and the districts herein, or any later amendments, may
create situations where structures, buildings or uses of the land previously
permitted may become prohibited, regulated or otherwise restricted. It is the
intent of this chapter to permit the continuance of these nonconforming
structures or uses until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival.
These uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with the permitted
uses in the districts involved.
   (B)   An existing building or premises devoted to a use not permitted by
this chapter in the district in which the building or premises is located,
shall not be enlarged upon, extended, reconstructed or structurally altered,
nor shall it be used as grounds for adding other buildings or structures
prohibited elsewhere in the same district, except when required to do so by law
or ordinance, unless the use is changed to one permitted in the district in
which the building or structure or land is located.
   (C)   A nonconforming use of a building may be replaced with another
nonconforming use, provided no structural alterations are made.
   (D)   No change from one nonconforming to another shall be made without
first applying to and receiving a permit from the Planning Commission to make
the change, except as defined in division (E) below.
   (E)   A nonconforming use may be changed to a more conforming use at any
time.
   (F)   Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use, the
use shall not thereafter be changed to a less conforming use.
   (G)   The extension or addition of a lawful use to any portion of a
nonconforming building or structure or land shall not be deemed as the
extension of the nonconforming use.
   (H)   Where nonconforming status applies to a building or structure, the
removal or destruction of same shall eliminate the nonconforming status of
land.
   (I)   If a building or structure is moved for any reason for any distance
whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in
which it is located after it is removed.
   (J)   All uses which lawfully exist on the effective date of this chapter
and are classified as a conditional use by this chapter for the district in
which they are located shall be considered lawful conditional uses.
   (K)   Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to
transfer an area from one district to another district of a different
classification, the provisions of this subchapter shall also apply to any
nonconforming uses developing as a result of that action.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.231 NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.
   (A)   A single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings,
notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter, may be
erected in any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted on any
single lot of record at the effective date of adoption of or amendment to this
chapter. The lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage
with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply even though
the lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are
generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions and other
requirements not involving area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to
the regulations for the district in which the lot is located.
   (B)   Variance of area, width, and yard requirements shall be obtained only
through action of the Board of Adjustment.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.232 PRIOR APPROVAL.
   To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall require a change in
the plans construction or designated use of any building or structure provided
that the following apply.
   (A)   A building permit has been issued within 60 days prior to the adoption
of this chapter.
   (B)   That the construction is continuous of which shall have commenced
within 30 days after the adoption of this chapter.
   (C)   That the construction is continuous until the building or structure is
completed.
   (D)   ACTUAL CONSTRUCTION is defined to include the placing of construction
materials in permanent position; except where demolition or removal of an
existing building or structure has commenced preparatory to construction, the
demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that
work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building or
structure involved.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.233 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the reconstruction, repairing or
rebuilding of a nonconforming building, structure or part thereof existing at
the effective date of this chapter, rendered necessary by wear and tear,
deterioration or depreciation, provided the cost of the work shall not exceed
50% of the replacement value of the building or structure at the time the work
is done, nor prevent compliance with the provisions of the City Building Code
or City Housing Code relative to the maintenance of buildings or structures;
provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of
passage or amendment of this chapter shall not be increased.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the reconstruction, repairing,
rebuilding and continued use of any nonconforming building or structure damaged
by flood, fire, collapse, explosion, or Acts of God, subsequent to the date of
this chapter, wherein the expense of the work does not exceed 50% of the
replacement cost of the building or structure at the time the damage occurred.
However, the Board of Adjustment may issue a conditional use permit for
reconstruction it the use is located outside the floodway and, upon
reconstruction, is adequately floodproofed, elevated, or otherwise protected in
conformity with Chapter 153, Floodplain Management.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.234 DISCONTINUANCE.
   (A)   When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in
combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive months or for 18
months during any three-year period, the structure, or structure and premises
in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the
regulations of the district in which it is located.
   (B)   A nonconforming use shall be considered discontinued when the
following apply.
      (1)   When the intent of the owner to discontinue the use is apparent.
      (2)   When the characteristic equipment and the furnishing of the
nonconforming use have been removed from the premises and have not been
replaced by similar equipment within 90 days, unless other facts indicate the
intention to resume the nonconforming use.
      (3)   When it has been replaced by a conforming use.
      (4)   Uses or adjuncts thereof which are or become nuisances shall not be
entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
      (5)   Nonconforming uses located in the floodway portion of the
Floodplain District shall be eliminated or brought into conformity with the
standards contained in
Chapter 153, Floodplain Management, within a reasonable period of time as
determined by the Board of Adjustment, after a hearing for each nonconforming
use. The Board shall make its determination upon the basis of the normal useful
life of any improvement upon the premises. In addition, the monetary value of
any competitive advantage derived by the operation of the nonconforming use, by
reason of the limitation on establishment of competing businesses as a result
of this chapter, shall be considered as a reduction of losses resulting from
the requirement of termination of the use under this chapter.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.235 CLOSING OF JUNK AND SALVAGE YARDS.
   Junk or salvage yards not within an enclosed masonry building, and not
within an Industrial District, shall not be operated or maintained for more
than 12 months after a zoning change to a use district within which the yard is
not permitted, except where the Board of Adjustment determines that it is
impractical to roof over a large area containing junk or salvage material, the
Board may permit the construction around the area of a fence, screen planting
or other device of such height as to completely screen the operation, and may
then permit the continued use of the property for that purpose for a specified
period.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.236 CERTIFICATE OF NONCONFORMING USE.
   (A)   Upon the effective date of this chapter the Zoning Administrator shall
issue a certificate of nonconforming use to all owners of property, the use of
which does not conform to the provisions of the use zone in which the property
is located. It shall be the responsibility of the individual property owner to
contact the Zoning Administrator in cases where his or her property or use
thereof shall be made nonconforming; contact shall be made within 30 days after
passage of this chapter.
   (B)   In accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, no use of land,
buildings or structures shall be made other than that specified on the
certificate of nonconforming use, unless the use shall be in conformity with
the provisions of the use zone on which the property is located.
   (C)   A copy of each certificate of nonconforming use shall be filed with
the office of the Zoning Administrator. No permit or license shall be issued to
any property for which a certificate of nonconforming use has been issued until
the permit or license has been approved by the Planning Commission.
   (D)   Any alteration or addition to any nonconforming use which would result
in increasing its flood damage potential shall be protected in accordance with
Chapter 153, Floodplain Management.
   (E)   The Zoning Administrator shall prepare a list of those nonconforming
uses which have been floodproofed or otherwise adequately protected in
conformity with
Chapter 153, Floodplain Management. He or she shall present the list to the
Board of Adjustments, which may issue a certificate to the owner stating that
the uses as a result of these corrective measures are in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.237 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   Signs existing on the effective date of this chapter which do not
conform to the regulations set forth in this chapter shall become nonconforming
uses, and shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter concerning
nonconforming use.
   (B)   Business signs on the premises of a nonconforming building or use may
be continued, but the signs shall not be increased in number, area, height or
illumination.
   (C)   No sign erected before the passage of this chapter shall be rebuilt,
altered, or moved to a new location on the affected property without being
brought into compliance with the requirements of this chapter, except as
provided in §
155.233.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS; PROCEDURES
§ 155.250 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Conditional use permits may be issued for any and only the uses or
purposes for which such permits are required or permitted by provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   An application for a conditional use permit shall be filled with the
Zoning Administrator indicating the section of this chapter under which the
conditional use permit is sought, and stating the grounds on which it is
requested. The application shall be accompanied by plans and elevations and
site plans as prescribed by the Board of Adjustment and presented by the Zoning
Administrator to the Board. A copy of all applications for a conditional use
under the provisions of the floodway and/or flood fringe portions of the
Floodplain District shall be forwarded to the Commissioner of Natural Resources
ten days prior to a public hearing.
   (C)   The applicant shall file the completed application form together with
required exhibits with the Zoning Administrator, and shall pay a filing fee as
established by the Council.
   (D)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and within ten
business days after receiving the application, shall notify the applicant in
writing if the application is not complete, and advise the applicant of what
additional information is required.
   (E)   When the Zoning Administrator determines the application to be
complete, the Zoning Administrator shall set the date for a public hearing, and
shall have notices of the hearing published in the legal newspaper, and shall
notify all property owners within the affected zone and within 350 feet of the
outer boundaries of the property in question; however, failure of any property
owner to receive notification shall not invalidate the proceedings at least
once, not less than ten days and not more than 30 days prior to the hearing.
The Council may waive the mailed notice requirements for a city-wide amendment
to this chapter initiated by the Planning Commission or City Council. Notice of
hearings shall be posted at the City Hall and in one other place at least ten
days prior to the public hearing. This notice shall describe the particular
amendment, date, time and place of hearing. The current City Assessor’s current
tax records shall be deemed sufficient for the location or certification of
ownership of the adjacent properties.
   (F)   The city shall take action to approve or deny the application within
60 days of receiving a completed application. If the city cannot take action to
approve or deny the application within 60 days of receiving the completed
application, the city may make a one-time extension of the time for taking
action before the end of the initial 60-day period by providing written notice
of the extension, the reasons for the extension, and its anticipated length,
which may not exceed 60 days unless approved by the applicant in writing. A
valid reason for this extension may be that the city needs more time to
consider the application. A motion to approve the application which fails to
pass because of sufficient votes, shall not be deemed to be a denial of an
application. The passage of a motion to deny the application is required in
order for an application to be denied. Additional extensions beyond the first
extension will require the approval by the applicant in writing.
   (G)   The Planning Commission shall hold the public hearing, and may table
the application for further investigation if necessary, or the Commission shall
recommend to the Council one of three actions: approval, conditional approval
or denial.
   (H)   No application of a property owner for an amendment to the text of
this chapter or the zoning map shall be considered by the Planning Commission
within the one-year period following a denial of the request, except the
Planning Commission may permit a new application, if, in the opinion of the
Planning Commission, new evidence or a change of circumstances warrant it.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.251 PUBLIC HEARING; NOTIFICATION.
   Upon receipt in proper form of the application and other requested material,
the Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing in a location to
be prescribed by the Planning Commission. At least ten days in advance of each
hearing, a notice of the hearing shall be published in the official newspaper
of the city and like notification at least ten days prior to the hearing to the
owner or owners of property within 350 feet of the subject property. Notices of
hearings shall be posted at the City Hall and in one other public place at
least ten days prior to the public hearing. This notice shall describe the
particular conditional use, date, time and place of the hearing. The City
Assessor’s current tax record shall be deemed sufficient for the location or
certification of ownership of the adjacent properties.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.252 FINDINGS.
   No conditional use shall be recommended by the City Planning Commission
unless the Commission shall find the following.
   (A)   That the conditional use will not be injurious to the use and
enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purpose already
permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the
immediate vicinity.
   (B)   That the establishment of the conditional use will not impede the
normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding vacant property
for uses predominant in the area.
   (C)   That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary
facilities have been or are being provided.
   (D)   That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide
sufficient off-street parking and loading space to serve the proposed use.
   (E)   That adequate measures have been or will be taken to prevent or
control offensive odor, fumes, dust, noise and vibration, so that none of these
will constitute a nuisance, and to control lighted signs and other lights in
such a manner that no disturbance to neighboring properties will result.
   (F)   A copy of all decisions regarding conditional uses under the
provisions of the Floodplain District shall be forwarded to the Commissioner of
Natural Resources within ten days after the decision is made.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.253 FEES.
   To defray administrative costs for processing requests for conditional use
permits, a fee shall be paid by the applicant. The fee shall be established by
the City Council.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.254 CONDITIONS AND SAFEGUARDS.
   (A)   The Planning Commission may prescribe appropriate conditions and
safeguards in conformity with this chapter.
   (B)   The Commission shall prescribe a time limit within which the action
for which the conditional use is required shall commence or be completed, or
both. Failure to commence, or complete, or both within the time limit set,
shall void the conditional use permit.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
§ 155.255 VIOLATIONS.
   Violations of any conditions and safeguards, when made part of the terms
under which the conditional use permit is granted, shall be deemed a violation
of this chapter as provided for in §
155.285.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
BUILDING AND USE PERMITS
§ 155.265 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Except as hereinafter provided, no person, firm or corporation shall
construct, erect, alter, wreck or move any building or structure or parts
thereof within the corporate limits of the city without first securing a
building and use permit.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.266 APPLICATION; FEES.
   (A)   Application for a building permit shall be made to the city on blank
forms to be furnished by the city. Each application for a permit to construct
or alter a building shall be accompanied by a plan drawn to scale, showing the
dimensions of the lot to be built upon and the size and location of the
building and accessory buildings to be erected. Applications shall contain
other information as may be deemed necessary for the proper enforcement of this
chapter or any other ordinance.
   (B)   The fee for a building permit shall be determined by the City Council.
   (C)   The city shall issue or may direct the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer to issue the building permit only after determining that the building
plans together with the application comply with the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.267 (RESERVED)
§ 155.268 PRIVATELY-OWNED SWIMMING POOLS.
   (A)   A swimming pool, whether submerged, elevated, temporary or permanent,
is deemed to be a structure under this chapter, and all work must be done in
accordance with the building code. A building permit shall be required for any
swimming pool with a depth greater than one and one-half feet. Any application
for a building permit to construct or erect a swimming pool shall be
accompanied by plans of sufficient detail to show the following.
      (1)   The proposed location and its relationship to the other principal
buildings on the lot and adjacent lots.
      (2)   The size of the pool.
      (3)   Fencing and other fixtures on the lot; trees, utility location,
easements and drainage easements.
      (4)   The location, size and a statement as to the types of equipment to
be used in connection with the pool, including, but not limited to filter unit,
pump, wiring, heating unit, back flush, and drainage outlet, fencing and the
pool itself.
      (5)   Grading plans and finished elevations.
      (6)   Proposed fencing plans.
   (B)   (1)   Pool locations must conform with requirements of the National
Electric Code and may not be within any private or public utility, walkway,
drainage or other easement.
      (2)   The pool shall be designed and constructed in such a manner so as
not to endanger the health and safety of its users, and to not unduly interfere
with the use and enjoyment of adjacent property.
      (3)   To the extent feasible, back-flush water or water from pool
drainage shall be directed onto the owner's property or onto approved public
drainage ways, and shall not drain onto adjacent private land. Drainage onto
public streets or other public drainage ways shall require permission of the
appropriate local city officials. Pools may not be drained into the city
sanitary sewer system.
   (C)   The construction, plumbing and electrical work connected with any pool
shall conform to all applicable codes of the city.
   (D)   All pools shall be provided with safeguards to prevent children from
gaining uncontrolled access. This can be accomplished with fencing, screening
or other enclosure, or any combination thereof, of sufficient density as to be
impenetrable. If fences are employed, they shall be at least five feet in
height for all pools. The bottom of the fence shall not be more than four
inches from the ground. All fence openings or points of entry into the pool
area enclosure shall be equipped with gates or doors. All gates or doors shall
be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices, installed in such a
manner so as to be inaccessible to all small children.
   (E)   This section shall apply to all privately-owned swimming pools
heretofore constructed in the city, and to all private swimming pools
constructed in the future. However, owners of pools heretofore constructed
shall have a reasonable time to comply herewith after notification of the
provision of this section.
(Ord. 283, passed 6-17-2019)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.269 SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES.
   (A)   The City Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges, and
expenses, and a collection procedure, for building permits, certificates of
occupancy, appeals, and other matters pertaining to this chapter. The schedule
of fees shall be posted in the office of the administrative official, and may
be altered or amended only by the City Council.
   (B)   No permit, certificate, conditional use permit, or variance shall be
issued unless or until any costs, charges, fees, or expenses have been paid in
full, nor shall any action be taken on proceedings before the Board of
Adjustment, unless or until preliminary charges and fees have been paid in
full.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
§ 155.270 COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS.
   Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs or is alleged to have occurred,
any person may file a written complaint. The complaint, stating fully the
causes and basis thereof, shall be filed with the administrative official. He
or she shall record properly the complaint, immediately investigate, and take
action thereon as provided by this chapter.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 155.280 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   A Zoning Administrator for the city shall be appointed or hired by the City
Council, and the Zoning Administrator shall have the power and duty to enforce
this chapter, and to perform the following duties.
   (A)   Examine all applications pertaining to use of land, buildings, or
structures, and approve same when the application conforms with the provisions
of this chapter.
   (B)   Keep a record of all non-conforming uses.
   (C)   Periodically inspect buildings, structures, and uses of land to
determine compliance with the terms of this chapter. In regard to performance
standards, the Zoning Administrator may require the services of a testing
laboratory to determine compliance. The cost of employing the laboratory shall
be paid for by the owner if a violation of this chapter is established,
otherwise by the city.
   (D)   Notify, in writing, any person responsible for violating a provision
of this chapter, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action
necessary to correct it.
   (E)   Order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures;
order removal of illegal buildings, structures, additions, alterations; order
discontinuance of illegal work being done; or take any action authorized by
this chapter to insure compliance with or to prevent violation of its
provisions.
   (F)   Maintain permanent and current records of the Zoning Ordinance,
including all maps, amendments, conditional use, and variations.
   (G)   Maintain a current file of all permits, all certificates, and all
copies of notices of violations, discontinuance, or removal for such time as
necessary to insure a continuous compliance with the provisions of this
chapter, and, on request, provide information to any person having a
proprietary or tenancy interest in any specific property.
   (H)   Provide technical assistance to the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
§ 155.281 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Establishment of Commission. A Planning Commission for the city is
established. The Commission shall be the city planning agency as authorized by
M.S. § 462.354, Subdivision 1.
   (B)   Composition.
      (1)   Membership. The Planning Commission shall consist of five members
from the resident population of the city to be appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of the City Council. One member may be a Council Member or the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, appointed by the Mayor with Council approval,
for a one-year term to expire on December 31 of each year. If no member of the
City Council is appointed to the Planning Commission, then one member of the
Planning Commission shall attend at least one City Council meeting per month to
advise the Council of the Planning Commission activities.
      (2)   Terms, vacancies, oath. Of the members of the Planning Commission
first appointed, one shall be appointed for the term of one year, two for the
term of two years and two for the term of three years. Their successors shall
be appointed for the terms of three years, commencing January 1 of the calendar
year. Both original and successive appointees shall hold their offices until
their successors are appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Council.
Vacancies during their term shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the
term. Every member shall, before entering upon the discharge of their duties,
take an oath that they will faithfully discharge the duties of their office.
   (C)   Organization; meetings.
      (1)   Officers. The Commission shall elect a Chairperson from among its
appointed members for the term of one year at the beginning of each calendar
year. The Commission may create and fill other offices as it may determine.
      (2)   Meetings, records, reports. The Commission shall hold at least one
regular meeting each month. It shall adopt rules for the transaction of
business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, and
findings, which record shall be a public record. The Chairperson or other
person designated by the Commission shall submit a monthly report to the City
Council of its works during the preceding month. Expenditures of the Commission
shall be within amounts appropriated for the purpose by the City Council. Three
members shall constitute a quorum. A majority vote is required to approve or
disapprove.
   (D)   Powers and duties of the Commission.
      (1)   Plan. The Planning Commission shall be the planning agency and
shall have the powers and duties given such agencies generally by law. The
Commission shall also exercise the duties conferred upon it by this chapter.
      (2)   Zoning Ordinance. No zoning ordinance or amendment thereto shall be
adopted by the Council until a public hearing has been held thereon by the
Planning Commission upon notice, as provided in M.S. § 462.357, Subdivision 3,
as it may be amended from time to time.
      (3)   Conditional uses. The Planning Commission shall make
recommendations on all requests for a conditional use permit under the terms of
this chapter. The Commission shall report its recommendations to the Council
for action.
      (4)   Variances. All applications for variances shall be referred to the
Planning Commission and forwarded with or without recommendations to the
Council for its decision.
      (5)   Subdivision/plats; approval. Any plat of land shall be referred to
the Planning Commission for review and recommendations prior to final approval
by the Council. Any plat so referred shall be returned to the Council by the
Commission within 30 days. Failure of the Commission to report within that
period is deemed to have satisfied the requirements of this subdivision.
   (E)   Appeals. The Planning Commission shall have the power and duty of
hearing and making recommendations to the City Council in the following cases.
      (1)   Appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative officer in
the enforcement of this chapter.
      (2)   Requests for a variance from the literal provisions of this chapter
in instances where their strict enforcement would cause practical difficulties
because of circumstances unique to the individual property under consideration.
   (F)   Variances. In recommending any variance, the Planning Commission may
prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this
chapter. Violation of any conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the
terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter.
   (G)   Discharge of powers.  
      (1)   In exercising the aforementioned powers, the Planning Commission
may make recommendation to the City Council, so long as the action is in
conformity with the terms of this chapter, reverse or affirm, in whole or in
part, or may modify the order, requirements, decision or determination appealed
from, and may make such order, requirements, decision or determination as ought
to be made, and to that end shall have powers of the administrative official
from whom any appeal is taken.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995; Am. Ord. 246, passed 11-1-2004; Am. Ord. 311,
passed 5-19-2025) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.282 APPEAL FOR VARIANCE.
   (A)   Application for any adjustment permissible under the practical
difficulties provision in §
155.281(E) shall be made to the Zoning Administrator in the form of a written
application for a permit to use the land or building or both, as set forth in
the application. No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures or
buildings in the same district, and no permitted use of lands, structures or
other buildings in other districts shall be considered ground for the issuance
of a variance.
   (B)   The application shall present a statement and adequate evidence
showing the following.
      (1)   The Board of Adjustment, consistent with the authority granted by
law, may grant a property owner a variance from compliance with the literal
provisions of this chapter in an instance where strict enforcement would cause
practical difficulties to the individual property owner and when it can be
demonstrated that such action will be in keeping with the spirit and intent of
this chapter.
      (2)   The term “practical difficulties” means that the:
         (a)   Property owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable
manner that is not otherwise permitted;
         (b)   The plight of the property owner is due to circumstances unique
to the property, not created by the property owner; and
         (c)   The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character
of the locality. Economic considerations alone do not constitute practical
difficulties. “Practical difficulties,” for the purposes of this section, also
means and includes, but is not limited to, inadequate access to direct sunlight
for solar energy systems.
      (3)   Notwithstanding a finding that practical difficulties exist, the
Board of Adjustment may not permit as a variance any use that is not permitted
under the provisions of this chapter for property in the zone where the land
for which the variance is sought is located.
      (4)   In its consideration of a variance request the Board of Adjustment
shall consider the following questions:
         (a)   Whether or not exceptional, unique or extraordinary
circumstances apply to the physical surrounding, shape or topographic
conditions of the parcel of land which results in practical difficulties for
the owner?
         (b)   Whether or not the variance requested will alter the essential
character of the locality?
         (c)   Whether or not granting the variance requested will:
            1.   Impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent
property;
            2.   Substantially increase congestion in adjacent public streets;
            3.   Endanger the public safety;
            4.   Substantially diminish or impair property values within the
vicinity?
         (d)   Whether the variance requested is the minimum variance which
would alleviate the practical difficulties?
         (e)   Whether or not the variance requested is consistent with the
intent of this chapter and the city’s Comprehensive Plan?
         (f)   Whether or not the variance requested provides for a reasonable
and practical solution that eliminates the practical difficulties?
         (g)   Whether or not the property owner proposes to use the property
in a reasonable manner that is not otherwise permitted?
      (5)   The Board of Adjustment, in granting a variance, may impose
additional conditions to ensure compliance with its decision and protect
adjacent properties. Such conditions must be directly related to and bear a
rough proportionality to the impact created by the variance.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995; Am. Ord. 312, passed 5-19-2025) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.283 PUBLIC HEARING; NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   Application for any adjustment permissible under the provisions of
this subchapter shall be made to the Zoning Administrator, in the form of a
written application for a building permit to use the property or premises as
set forth in the application. An application for a variance shall be
accompanied by payment of a fee as established in § 155.269, in addition to the
regular building permit fee.
   (B)   All required information shall be submitted with the application, and
the Zoning Administrator shall review the application, and within ten business
days after receiving the application, he or she shall notify the applicant in
writing if the application is not complete, and advise the applicant as to what
additional information is required.
   (C)   When the Zoning Administrator determines the application to be
complete, the Zoning Administrator shall set the date for a public hearing, and
shall have notices of the hearing published in the legal newspaper, and shall
notify all property owners within 350 feet of the outer boundaries of the
property in question; not less than ten days and not more than 30 days prior to
the hearing. However, failure of any property owner to receive notification
shall not invalidate the proceedings at least once. The Council may waive the
mailed notice requirements for a city-wide amendment to this chapter initiated
by the Planning Commission or City Council. Notice of the hearings shall be
posted at the City Hall and in one other place at least ten days prior to the
public hearing, in addition to publishing the notice in the official newspaper.
This notice shall describe the particular amendment, date, time and place of
hearing. The current City Assessor’s current tax records shall be deemed
sufficient for the location or certification of ownership of the adjacent
properties.
   (D)   The city shall take action to approve or deny the application within
60 days of receiving a completed application. If the city cannot take action to
approve or deny the application within 60 days of receiving the completed
application, the city may make a one-time extension of the time for taking
action before the end of the initial 60-day period by providing written notice
of the extension, the reasons for the extension, and its anticipated length,
which may not exceed 60 days unless approved by the applicant in writing. A
valid reason for this extension may be that the city needs more time to
consider the application. A motion to approve the application which fails to
pass because of sufficient votes, shall not be deemed to be a denial of an
application. The passage of a motion to deny the application is required in
order for an application to be denied. Additional extensions beyond the first
extension will require the approval by the applicant in writing.
   (E)   Any person may appear or be represented by an agency or attorney.
   (F)   Within a reasonable time after the hearing, the Planning Commission
shall make its order deciding the matter and serve a copy of the order upon the
applicant or the petitioner by mail.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
§ 155.284 ACTIONS ON APPEAL.
   (A)   It is the intent of this chapter that all questions of interpretation
and enforcement shall be first presented to the Administrative Official, and
that questions shall be presented to the Board of Adjustment only on appeal
from the decision of the Administrative Official, and that recourse from the
decisions of the Board of Adjustment shall be to the City Council, then to the
courts, as established by M.S. Chapter 462, as it may be amended from time to
time.
   (B)   The duties of the City Council in regard to this chapter shall include
hearing and deciding questions of interpretation and enforcement that may arise
in any case where the decision of the Board of Adjustment is challenged. The
City Council shall also have the duties of considering and adopting or
rejecting proposed amendments to the repeal of this chapter as provided by law,
and establishing a schedule of fees and charges as stated in § 155.269.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
§ 155.285 VIOLATIONS. 
   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions hereof or who shall fail
to comply with any of the provisions hereof or who shall make any false
statement in any document required to be submitted under the provisions hereof,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction therefore, shall be
subject to the terms of § 10.99. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
APPENDIX: HEIGHT, AREA AND YARD REGULATIONS
HEIGHT, AREA AND YARD REGULATIONS
             Districts*
Requirements R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4(1) B-1 B-2 B-3 I-1 IOR
HEIGHT, AREA AND YARD REGULATIONS
               Districts*
Requirements   R-1   R-2    R-3   R-4(1) B-1  B-2     B-3     I-1     IOR
MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT
Allowable      2.5   2.5    2.5   3      4    4       4       6       3
stories                           tiers
Height in feet 35    35     35    35     45   45 feet 45 feet 75 feet 35 feet
               feet  feet   feet  feet   feet
LOT REQUIREMENTS MINIMUM
Minimum total  12,000                    (2)  (2)     (2)     20,000  12,000
area
   Single-  5     8,000
family         Acres Sq.    NA    NA     NA   NA      NA      NA      NA
                     Ft.
   Zero lot       5,000  5,000
line           NA    Sq.    Sq.   NA     NA   NA      NA      NA      NA
                     Ft.    Ft.
               5     10,000
   Two-familAcres Sq.    NA    NA     NA   NA      NA      NA      NA
                     Ft.
Width at
building line
   Single-  300   80     NA    NA     NA   NA      NA      NA      NA
family         feet  feet
   Zero lot NA    50     50    50     NA   NA      NA      NA      NA
line                 feet   feet  feet
   Two-famil300   100    NA    NA     NA   NA      NA      NA      NA
               feet  feet
Depth of lots  150   100    120   NA     NA   NA      NA      NA      NA
(minimum)      feet  feet   feet
Maximum
percentage of
lot coverage   20%   35%    60%   25%    60%  60%     75%     50%     60%
(principal and
accessory
structures)
Lot area per                2,000
dwelling       NA    NA     Sq.   NA     NA   NA      NA      NA       
(Multiple                   Ft.
units only)
Lot area per
dwelling                    1,000
(Public        NA    NA     Sq.   NA     NA   NA      NA      NA       
housing;                    Ft.
multiple units
only)
YARD SETBACK (STRUCTURES ONLY)   
Front          25    20     20    20
(building line feet  feet   feet  feet   None 25 feet None    35 feet 20 feet
to RW line)
Side (Building 20    10     15
line to side   feet  feet   feet  NA     None None    None    20 feet 15 feet
property line)              (3)
Rear (rear                  15
building line  35    20     feet  NA     None None    20 feet 20 feet 15 feet
to rear        feet  feet   (3)
property line)
Corner Lot (2
street         25    20     20    NA     None None    NA      35 feet 20 feet
exposure from  feet  feet   feet
RW line)
SETBACK FOR
STRUCTURES
FROM LOW-                   50    50     50
DENSITY        NA    NA     feet  feet   feet 50 feet 50 feet 50 feet 50 feet
RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICT
BOUNDARY LINES
PERFORMANC E
STANDARDS      (4)   (4)    (4)   (4)    (4)  (4)     (4)     (4)     (4)
REQUIRED
REQUIRED
SCREENING AND  (5)   (5)    (5)   (5)    (5)  (5)     NA      (5)     (5)
LANDSCAPING
GENERAL        (6)   (6)    (6)   (6)    (6)  (6)     (6)     (6)     (6)
REGULATIONS                                                            
Notes:   
   *   PUD requirements in §§
155.165 through
155.170, for all districts.
   (1)   Refer to §§
155.080 through
155.091 for mobile home park standards.
   (2)   The required minimum total area for commercial industrial uses shall
be necessary to meet the stipulated yard setback and all parking, loading,
buffer or other space requirements set forth in this chapter pertaining to
the subject areas.
   (3)   There shall be two side yards for buildings not exceeding 30 feet in
height, each yard having a width of not less than 15 feet. For buildings
exceeding 30 feet in height, there shall be two side yards, each yard having
a width of 15 feet plus one foot for each foot of building height in excess
of 30 feet.
   (4)   Refer to the performance standards in §
155.194.
   (5)   Refer to §
155.193, screening, landscaping, lighting, storage and outdoor displays.
   (6)   Refer to §§
155.180 through
155.217.
 
(Ord. 221, passed 11-6-1995; Am. Ord. 314, passed 5-19-2025)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Table
   
I.   ANNEXATIONS
   
II.   FRANCHISES
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.  Date Passed Description
                      The city boundaries are extended to include all that
97        10-29-1947  portion of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter
                      of section 5, township 102 north of range 10 west lying
                      south of U.S. Highway 52.
                      The city boundaries are extended to include the real
                      estate beginning at south line of the northwest quarter
                      of the northwest quarter section 5, township 102 north of
98        1-2-1948    range 10 west and the most westerly point therein of the
                      center of the main channel of the Root River, first in a
                      southerly direction and then in a northeasterly
                      direction.
                      Annexing the northwest quarter of section 7, township 102
                      north of range 10 west, except for the parcel commencing
                      at the southwest corner of the northwest corner of
                      section 7, and the parcel commencing at the southeast
137       12-23-1970  corner of the northwest corner of section 7.
                      Annexing the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter
                      of section 12, township 102 north of range 11 west,
                      except for the parcel beginning in the center of the
                      County State Aid Highway 15 on the west line of the
                      northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of section 12.
                      Extending the corporate limits to include a tract of land
                      in the northeast quarter of section 36, township 103
178       8-11-1986   north, range 11 west, commencing at the northeast quarter
                      of the northeast quarter of section 36, thence due south
                      along the east line of the northeast quarter 1,032 feet
                      for a point of beginning.
                      Extending the corporate limits to include that part of
                      the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of section
187 (188) 9-12-1988   36, township 103 north, range 11 west, commencing at the
                      northeast corner of the northeast quarter, thence south
                      along the east line 1,093.29 feet.
                      Extending the corporate limits to include that part of
                      the north half of the northeast quarter of section 36,
                      township 103 north, range 11 west, beginning at the
229       10-6-1997   northeast cornet of the north half of the northeast
                      quarter thence south 00 degrees 05 minutes 04 seconds
                      west along the east line of the north half of the
                      northeast quarter 1093.29 feet.
                      Annexing Robert and Kelly Doherty property described as
249       5-15-2006   all that part of the northeast quarter of Section 36,
                      Township 103 north of Range 11 west, lying south of U.S.
                      16 and west of U.S. 52 and 16, Fillmore County.
273       3-31-2014   Annexing 8.01 acres located in Fountain Township.
 
TABLE II: FRANCHISES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Granting a nonexclusive franchise to operate a full
161      5-25-1977   service cable communications system in the city for a
                     period of 10 years, to be automatically renewed for a
                     period of five years.
                     Granting to Peoples Natural Gas Company, Division of
175      4-8-1985    Utilicorp United Inc. a nonexclusive authority for a
                     period of 25 years, to erect, maintain and operate a gas
                     distribution system.
                     Granting to Peoples Natural Gas Company, Division of
181      4-13-1987   Utilicorp United Inc. a nonexclusive authority for a
                     period of 25 years, to erect, maintain and operate a gas
                     distribution system.
182      4-28-1987   Granting to North American Communications Corporation a
                     Cable Television Franchise for a period of 15 years.
272      3-4-2013    Granting Minnesota Energy Resources a natural gas
                     franchise for a period of 25 years.
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Minnesota Statutes
References to Ordinances
 
REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES
M.S. Cite Code Section
M.S. Cite                        Code Section
Chapter 13                       34.04,
                                 34.05 
14.57—14.70                    111.36,
                                 111.99
Chapter 18A                      92.88
18.023, Subdivision 2            95.05
18.171, Subdivision 5            92.37
65B.48, Subdivision 5            70.06
84.92, Subdivision 8             70.06
84.92, Subdivision 9             70.06
84.92, Subdivision 10            70.06
88.16—88.22                    92.70
103G.245                         153.119
103G.291                         53.01
Chapter 104                      153.001
Chapter 105                      153.041
115A.93                          50.29
Chapter 134                      114.02
134.001                          32.61
134.09                           32.60
144.382, Subdivision 4           53.02
157.16                           111.03
157.16, Subdivision 3d           111.03
Chapter 169                      70.01,
                                 70.06
169.011, Subdivision 40(a)       70.06
169.045                          70.06
169.045, Subdivision 1(3)        70.06
169.045, Subdivision 7           70.06
169.70                           70.06
169.522                          70.06
Chapter 171                      70.03,
                                 70.06
176.011, Subdivision 9, clause 5 30.13
205.07                           34.01
205.10                           30.14
205.13                           30.14
205.16                           30.14
205.17                           30.14
205.175                          30.14
216C.06, Subdivision 2           153.010,
                                 155.006
237.162                          93.29
237.163                          93.29
Chapter 245A                     114.02
260.185                          130.99
297A.03                          35.16
297A.04                          35.16
297A.06                          35.16
297A.08                          35.16
297A.26                          35.16
297A.27                          35.16
297A.29                          35.16
297A.30                          35.16
300.06                           93.23
Chapter 327                      152.01
327.14, Subdivision 3            152.02
327.15                           152.03,
                                 155.081
327.31, Subdivision 6            152.02
327.31 and 327.32                152.02
327.31—327.36                  155.081
Chapter 329                      113.03
                                 111.01,
                                 111.02,
Chapter 340A                     111.20,
                                 111.23,
                                 111.36,
                                 111.99
340A.14, Subdivision 6           111.22
340A.101                         111.03,
                                 111.22
340A.404, Subdivision 1(4)       111.55
340A.404, Subdivision 4a         111.22
340A.404, Subdivision 4b         111.22
340A.404, Subdivision 5          111.22
340A.408, Subdivision 2b         111.22
340A.408, Subdivision 3          111.22
340A.408, Subdivision 5          111.23
340A.409                         111.25,
                                 111.54
340A.413                         111.20,
                                 111.55
340A.414                         111.35
340A.504                         111.33
340A.504, Subdivision 3          111.22
340A.504, Subdivision 3c         111.22
340A.509                         111.02
340A.801                         111.25
347.51                           91.12
364.06                           34.04,
                                 34.05
364.09                           34.04,
                                 34.05
394                              153.001
Chapter 412                      30.12,
                                 32.17
412.02, Subdivision 2a           30.14
412.151                          53.02
412.321—412.391                32.15
412.321, Subdivision 4           32.17
412.351                          32.16
412.501                          32.30
412.521                          32.32
412.591, Subdivision 2           30.12
412.601—412.751                53.02
415.11                           30.11
                                 33.01,
                                 33.11,
Chapter 429                      51.10,
                                 93.02,
                                 93.06
Chapter 429.091, Subdivision 7a  33.07
                                 92.01,
429.101                          92.02,
                                 92.21,
                                 92.48
444.075                          51.26,
                                 52.01
Chapter 462                      155.284
462.354, Subdivision 1           155.281
462.357, Subdivision 2           155.007
462.357, Subdivision 3           155.281
463.15—463.26                  92.01
463.17                           92.20
469.190                          35.12
471.705                          30.01
471.705, Subdivision 1c(c)       30.01
471.6985                         111.53
500.30                           155.198
514.67                           92.01
609.535                          130.01
617.241                          114.02
618.01                           114.03
Chapter 4715                     150.01
                                 
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.  Date Passed Code Section
9         4-8-1889    130.04
35        4-12-1889   34.03
36        4-12-1889   34.02
40        4-12-1889   130.03
46        2-15-1894   130.02
97        10-29-1947  T.S.O. I
98        1-2-1948    T.S.O. I
101       8-7-1951    71.03
                      71.01,
108       9-2-1958    71.03—
                      71.05
120       3-1-1965    70.01
127       9-5-1968    32.15—
                      32.17
128       10-3-1968   70.03
129       12-9-1968   34.01
135       4-6-1970    150.01
137       12-23-1970  T.S.O. I
138       6-7-1971    51.40,
                      51.41
140       8-20-1971   152.01—
                      152.10
141       9-13-1971   152.03,
                      152.04
142       12-13-1971  72.01—
                      72.06
145       6-5-1972    91.06
146       8-7-1972    130.01
148       10-17-1972  110.15—
                      110.22
155       8-12-1974   94.01,
                      94.02
158       7-7-1975    70.02
153       9-1-1975    50.01—
                      50.08
160       8-2-1976    110.01—
                      110.03
161       5-25-1977   T.S.O. II
162       12-5-1977   33.40—
                      33.46
163       9-11-1978   51.25—
                      51.29
166       9-25-1979   151.01—
                      151.06
                      51.01—
170       8-10-1981   51.05,
                      51.07—
                      51.15
172       11-27-1984  51.11
175       4-8-1985    T.S.O. II
178       8-11-1986   T.S.O. I
180       2-9-1987    32.01—
                      32.04
181       4-13-1987   T.S.O. II
182       4-28-1987   T.S.O. II
187 (188) 9-12-1988   T.S.O. I
189       9-12-1988   96.01—
                      96.06
191       2-13-1989   30.13
192       5-8-1989    90.01—
                      90.10
194       11-28-1989  50.20—
                      50.28
196       2-15-1990   91.07
                      153.001—
                      153.012,
                      153.025,
                      153.026,
                      153.040,
                      153.041,
                      153.055—
                      153.057,
197       2-26-1990   153.070,
                      153.071,
                      153.085—
                      153.087,
                      153.100—
                      153.102,
                      153.115—
                      153.118,
                      153.120
199       5-8-1990    51.27
210       9-10-1991   152.11
204       2-11-1992   50.29,
                      50.30
207       6-23-1992   51.55—
                      51.62
208       6-23-1992   93.01—
                      93.10
                      35.01—
209       4-6-1993    35.16,
                      35.99
211       7-13-1993   70.04
216       10-18-1994  153.001,
                      153.005
                      154.001—
                      154.005,
                      154.015—
                      154.018,
                      154.030,
                      154.031,
                      154.045—
                      154.055,
217       11-28-1994  154.065—
                      154.068,
                      154.080—
                      154.082,
                      154.095,
                      154.096,
                      154.110,
                      154.111,
                      154.125
219       3-6-1995    95.01—
                      95.06
                      155.001—
                      155.007,
                      155.020—
                      155.024,
                      155.035—
                      155.038,
                      155.050—
                      155.053,
                      155.065—
                      155.068,
                      155.080—
                      155.091,
                      155.105—
                      155.110,
                      155.120—
                      155.124,
                      155.135—
                      155.138,
221       11-6-1995   155.150—
                      155.153,
                      155.165—
                      155.170,
                      155.180—
                      155.195,
                      155.205—
                      155.217,
                      155.230—
                      155.237,
                      155.250—
                      155.255,
                      155.265,
                      155.266,
                      155.269,
                      155.270,
                      155.280—
                      155.285,
                      Chapter 155 Appendix
                      33.01,
                      33.07,
226       8-19-1996   33.08,
                      33.10—
                      33.12
228       11-18-1996  32.16
229       10-6-1997   T.S.O. I
232       11-15-1999  51.03,
                      51.06
233       2-7-2000    32.01
236       1-16-2001   32.30—
                      32.32
237       5-21-2001   92.85—
                      92.91
238       7-16-2001   52.01—
                      52.07, Chapter 52 Appendix
239       10-1-2001   52.04
241       10-7-2002   Adopting Ordinance
242       10-6-2003   30.14
245       11-3-2003   92.35—
                      92.48
                      155.003,
                      155.006,
                      155.066,
246       11-1-2004   155.168,
                      155.182,
                      155.214,
                      155.281, Repeals 155.267
247       5-2-2005    111.31
248       12-6-2005   92.100—
                      92.103
249       5-15-2006   T.S.O. I
                      155.038,
                      155.053,
250       5-22-2006   155.068,
                      155.196,
                      155.214
                      155.006,
                      155.038,
251       12-19-2005  155.053,
                      155.068,
                      155.197
                      114.01—
252       9-6-2005    114.04,
                      114.99
253       8-1-2005    155.151
254       9-7-2004    Chapter 73, Schedule I
255       7-16-2007   Chapter 73, Schedule I
256       8-6-2007    70.05
257       9-10-2007   33.01,
                      33.10, Repeals 33.02—33.06, 33.09
259       11-19-2007  Chapter 73, Schedule I
260       1-7-2008    Chapter 73, Schedule I
261       10-20-2008  Chapter 73, Schedule I
262       11-17-2008  155.155—
                      155.158
263       12-17-2008  50.26
                      71.01—
                      71.03,
264       4-19-2010   71.05—
                      71.09,
                      Chapter 73, Schedule I
266       3-7-2011    10.98
267       3-7-2011    150.02
268       6-6-2011    155.003
269       11-7-2011   Chapter 73, Schedule I
270       11-7-2011   Chapter 73, Schedule I
271       12-19-2011  Repeals 33.25—33.30
272       3-4-2013    T.S.O. II
273       3-31-2014   T.S.O. I
274       4-21-2014   155.190
275       7-21-2014   Chapter 73, Schedule I
277       11-7-2016   34.04,
                      34.05
278       12-18-2017  Chapter 73, Schedule I
280       12-18-2017  Chapter 73, Schedule I
281       2-4-2019    Chapter 73, Schedule I
282       6-17-2019   155.006
283       6-17-2019   155.268
                      153.001—
                      153.012,
                      153.025,
                      153.026,
                      153.040,
                      153.041,
                      153.055—
284       - -         153.057,
                      153.070,
                      153.071,
                      153.085—
                      153.087,
                      153.100—
                      153.102,
                      153.115—
                      153.120
285       9-3-2019    155.198
287       10-21-2019  Chapter 73, Schedule I
288       11-4-2019   Chapter 73, Schedule I
289       5-4-2020    155.138
290       9-9-2020    53.01—
                      53.08
291       5-17-2021   155.006
298       1-16-2024   155.190
299       1-16-2024   155.053
300       - -         70.06
305       5-19-2025   32.01—
                      32.04
306       5-19-2025   32.15—
                      32.17
307       5-19-2025   32.31
308       5-19-2025   32.45—
                      32.47
309       5-19-2025   32.60—
                      32.64
310       5-19-2025   32.75—
                      32.77
311       5-19-2025   155.281
312       5-19-2025   155.282
313       5-19-2025   154.080
314       5-19-2025   Chapter 155 Appendix
                     
 
 
