Rockford, Minnesota
Code of Ordinances
Local legislation current through: November 25, 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
100 General Provisions
101. City Code
101.01. City Code.
   Subd. 1.   How Cited. This code of ordinances shall be known as The Rockford
City Code and may be so cited.
   Subd. 2.   Additions. New ordinances proposing amendments or additions to
the code shall be assigned appropriate code numbers and shall be incorporated
into the code as of their effective date. Reference or citation to the code
shall be deemed to include such amendments and additions. When an ordinance is
integrated into the code, there may be omitted from the ordinance the title,
enacting clause, section numbers, definitions of items identical to those
contained in this ordinance, the clause indicating date of adoption, and
validating signatures and dates. In integrating ordinances into the code, the
clerk-treasurer, in cooperation with the city attorney, may correct obvious
grammatical, punctuation, and spelling errors; change reference numbers to
conform with sections, articles, and chapters; substitute figures for written
words and vice versa; substitute dates for the words "the effective date of
this ordinance"; and perform like actions to insure a uniform code of
ordinances without, however, altering the meaning of the ordinances enacted.
   Subd. 3.   Numbering. Each section number of this code consists of two
component parts separated by a decimal. The first digit of the number refers to
the chapter number and the digits after the period refer to the position of the
section within the chapter. If the chapter is divided into parts, the figure
immediately to the left of the decimal corresponds to the part number.
   Subd. 4.   Title Headings; Cross References. Chapter, part, section,
subdivision, and other titles shall not be considered part of the subject
matter of this code but are intended for convenience only and not necessarily
as comprehensive titles.
   Subd. 5.   Copies. Copies of this code shall be kept in the office of the
clerk-treasurer for public inspection or sale for a reasonable charge, as
determined by the council.
101.02. Definitions.
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words have the
meaning given them in this section.
   Subd. 1.   City. “City” means City of Rockford.
   Subd. 2.   State. “State” means State of Minnesota.
   Subd. 3.   Clerk-Treasurer. “Clerk-Treasurer” means the city Clerk-
Treasurer.
   Subd. 4.   Person. “Person” means any natural individual, firm, partnership,
association, or corporation. As applied to partnerships or associations, the
term includes the partners or members; as applied to corporations the term
includes the officers, agents, or employees.
   Subd. 5.   Code. “Code” means the Rockford City Code.
101.03. Statutory Rules Adopted.
The definitions and rules of construction, presumptions, and miscellaneous
provisions pertaining to construction contained in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter
645 are adopted by reference and made a part of this code. As so adopted,
references in that chapter to laws and statutes mean provisions of this code
and references to the legislature mean the council.
101.04. Existing Rights and Liabilities.
The repeal of prior ordinances and adoption of this code are not to be
construed to affect in any manner rights and liabilities existing at the time
of repeal and the enactment of this code. Insofar as provisions in this code
are substantially the same as pre-existing ordinances, they shall be considered
as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. Any act done, offense
committed, or right accruing, or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment
incurred or assessed prior to the effective date of this code is not affected
by the enactment of this code.
101.05 Hearings.
   Subd. 1.   General. Unless otherwise provided in this code, or by law, every
public hearing required by law, ordinance, or resolution to be held on any
legislative or administrative matter shall be conducted in accordance with this
section.
   Subd. 2.   Notice. Every hearing shall be preceded by ten days mailed notice
to all persons entitled thereto by law, ordinance, or regulation unless only
published notice is required. The notice shall state the time, place, and
purpose of the hearing. Failure to give the notice or defects in it shall not
invalidate the proceedings if a good faith effort has been made to comply with
this subdivision.
   Subd. 3.   Conduct of Hearing. At the hearing, each party in interest shall
have an opportunity to be heard and to present such evidence as is relevant to
the proceeding. The council may adopt rules governing the conduct of hearings,
records to be made, and such other matters as it deems necessary.
   Subd. 4.   Record. Upon the disposition of any matter after hearing, the
council shall have prepared a written summary of its findings and decisions and
enter the summary in official council minutes.
101.06. Penalties.
   Subd. 1.   Petty Offenses. Whenever an act or omission is declared by this
code to be a petty offense or a petty misdemeanor, any person violating the
provision shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than $300.
(Amended by Ordinance 01-06, passed September 25, 2001.)
   Subd. 2.   General Misdemeanors. In any other case, unless another penalty
is expressly provided in this code, any person violating any provision of this
code, or any rule or regulation adopted in pursuance thereof, or any other
provision of any code adopted in this code by reference, including any
provisions declaring an act or omission to be a misdemeanor, shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a
term not to exceed ninety days or both, plus, in either case, the costs of
prosecution. (Amended by Ordinance 01-06, passed September 25, 2001.)
   Subd. 3.   Separate Violations. Unless otherwise provided, each act of
violation and every day on which a violation occurs or continues constitutes a
separate offense.
   Subd. 4.   Application to City Personnel. The failure of any officer or
employee of the city to perform any official duty imposed by this code shall.
not subject the officer or employee to the penalty imposed for violation unless
a penalty is specifically provided for such failure.
   Subd. 5.   Separability. If any ordinance or part thereof in the Rockford
City Code or hereafter enacted is held invalid or suspended, such invalidity or
suspension shall not apply to any other part of the ordinance or any other
ordinance unless it is specifically provided otherwise.
101.07. Purpose and Intent.
Administrative enforcement procedures established pursuant to this chapter are
intended to provide the city with an informal, cost-effective and more
efficient alternative to criminal prosecution of civil litigation for certain
violations of the city code. The city retains the right to enforce provisions
of this code by bringing criminal charges or commencing civil litigation in any
case where the city determines it is appropriate or necessary, but finds that
an administrative process is beneficial to the residents of the city and finds
that such a process is a legitimate and necessary alternative method of
enforcement of code violations. (Added by Ordinance 06-07, June 27, 2006)
   Subd. 1.   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter. the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
CODE COMPLIANCE OFFICER. Any officer of the Wright County Sheriff’s Department
or any employee of the city who has received official authority by the City
Council to enforce the city code.
CODE OFFENSE. A violation of any section, subdivision, paragraph or provision
of the city code and is subject to a civil penalty determined according to a
schedule adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time and
payable directly to the City Treasurer. Each day the violation exists
constitutes a separate CODE OFFENSE.
   Subd. 2.   Administrative Notice. A Code Compliance Officer may issue,
either in person or by United States first class mail, an administrative notice
to any person suspect or known to have committed a code offense and/or to the
owner of property upon which a code offense is being committed. The
administrative notice shall identify the code offense, the location in which
the code offense occurred or is occurring, and the recommended corrective
action for the code offense. The administrative notice may also state that the
alleged violator has, at the discretion of the Code Compliance Officer, up to
15 days to correct or abate the code offense. If the alleged violator and/or
owner upon which a code offense is being committed is unable to correct or
abate the code offense within the prescribed time. he or she may request an
extension from the Code Compliance Officer. Any extension granted by the Code
Compliance Officer shall specifically state the date of expiration. If the code
offense is not corrected or abated, as outlined in the administrative notice,
within the prescribed time, the Code Compliance Officer may issue a citation,
as provided below.
   Subd. 3.   Citation. A Code Compliance Officer is authorized to issue a
citation upon the belief that a code offense has occurred, whether or not an
administrative notice has first been issued in regard to the code offense. The
citation shall be given to the person responsible for the violation and/or to
the owner of the property upon which the violation has occurred, either by
personal service or by United States first class mail. The citation shall state
the nature of the code offense, the time and date the code offense occurred,
the civil penalty applicable to that code offense as set forth in a schedule of
civil penalties which shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council from
time to time, and the manner for paying the civil penalty or requesting a
hearing before a Hearing Officer to contest the citation.
   Subd. 4.   Responding to Citation, Payment. Once a citation is issued, the
alleged violator and/or the owner of the property upon which the violation has
occurred shall, within 15 days of the time of issuance of the citation, either
pay the civil penalty set forth in the citation or request a hearing in writing
according to the procedure set forth in this section. The civil penalty may be
paid either in person at City Hall, or by United States first class mail,
postage prepaid and postmarked within the prescribed 15 days. Payment of the
civil penalty shall be deemed to be an admission of the code offense.
   Subd. 5.   Requesting a Hearing. Any person contesting a citation issued
pursuant to this chapter may, within 15 days of the time of issuance of the
citation, request a hearing before a Hearing Officer. Any request for a hearing
before a Hearing Officer shall be made in writing on a form provided by the
city for such a request and either delivered personally to the city at City
Hall or mailed to the city by United States first class mail, postage prepaid
and postmarked within the prescribed 15 days. The hearing shall be held at City
Hall within 30 days of the date the city received a timely written notice that
a hearing has been requested.
   Subd. 6.   Hearing Office. The City Council shall by resolution from time to
time appoint a list of persons authorized to act as a Hearing Officer. The
Hearing Officer is authorized to conduct an informal hearing to determine if a
code offense has occurred. The Hearing Officer may be compensated by the city
for such hearings and related findings. The Hearing Officer shall have the
authority to uphold or dismiss the citation or reduce or waive the civil
penalty imposed upon such terms and conditions as the Hearing Officer shall
determine. The Hearing Officer’s decision shall be made in writing on a form
provided by the city for such purpose. The Hearing Officer’s decision is final,
except as provided in this chapter for appealing the Hearing Officer’s decision
in limited cases to the City Council.
   Subd. 7.   Appeal of Hearing Officer Decision.   
   (1)   The Hearing Officer’s decision shall be applicable to the City Council
only for the following matters:
      (a)   An alleged failure to obtain a required permit (such as, without
limitation, a conditional use permit), license (such as, without limitation, a
liquor license), or other approval from the City Council as required by the
city code;
      (b)   An alleged violation of a permit (such as, without limitation, a
conditional use permit), license (such as, without limitation, a liquor
license), other approval, or the conditions attached to the permit, license, or
approval, that was issued by the City Council; or
      (c)   An alleged violation of regulations governing a person or entity
who has received a license issued by the City Council.
   (2)   An appeal to the City Council of the Hearing Officer’s decision must
be made in writing on a form provided by the city for such an appeal and must
be served on the City Clerk by United States first class mail, postage prepaid,
within ten days after the date of the Hearing Officer’s decision.
   (3)   A timely appeal will be heard by the City Council after a notice of
hearing is served by the city upon the appellant in person or by certified mail
at least ten days in advance of the date of the hearing. The parties to the
hearing will have an opportunity to present oral or written arguments regarding
the Hearing Officer’s decision.
   (4)   The City Council shall consider the record, the Hearing Officer’s
decision, and any additional arguments before making a determination. The City
Council is not bound by the Hearing Officer’s decision, but may adopt all or
part of the Hearing Officer’s decision. The City Council’s decision may be
vowed upon and given at the hearing or may be given in writing within 15 days
of the hearing.
   Subd. 8.   Failure to Pay.   
   (1)   In the event a person charged with a code offense fails to pay the
civil penalty and correct or abate the code offense for which a citation was
issued within the prescribed time, a late charge of 15% shall he imposed
thereon for each seven days the civil penalty remains unpaid and the code
offense remains uncorrected or unabated beyond the due date.
   (2)   An unpaid civil penalty and accrued late charges will constitute a
personal obligation of the person to whom the citation was issued and the city
shall have the right to collect such unpaid civil penalty and accrued late
charges, together with the city’s costs and reasonable attorneys, in a criminal
or civil proceeding.
   (3)   Pursuant to M.S. § 429.101 and M.S. § 514.67, as they may be amended
from time to time, and other applicable law, a lien in the amount of the civil
penalty and accrued late charges may be assessed quarterly or annually against
the property where the code offense occurred and collected in the same manner
as taxes. Any such assessment shall not preclude the city from issuing
additional citations for a continuing code offense.
   (4)   The city may suspend or revoke a license or permit or other approval
associated with the code offense if the civil penalty and accrued late charges
are not timely paid.
   Subd. 9.   Subsequent Violations. If a second citation for a code offense is
issued by the city to the alleged violator and/or the owner of the property
upon which the violation has occurred within 24 months of the issuance of a
previous citation for the same code offense, the civil penalty shall increase
by 25% over the scheduled civil penalty amount. If a third citation for a code
offense is issued by the city to the alleged violator and/or the owner of the
property upon which the violation has occurred within 24 months of the issuance
of a previous citation for the same code offense, the civil penalty shall
increase by 50% over the scheduled civil penalty amount. If a fourth citation
for a code offense is issued by the city to the alleged violator and/or the
owner of the property upon which the violation has occurred within 24 months of
the issuance of a previous citation for the same code offense, the civil
penalty shall increase by 100% over the scheduled civil penalty amount.
200 Council and Administration
201. The Council
201.01 Meetings.
   Subd. 1.   Time. Regular meetings of the council shall be held on the 2nd
Tuesday and 4th Tuesday of each calendar month at 6:00 P.M. Meetings will be
adjourned no later than 11:00 p.m. unless a majority vote of council agrees to
continue meetings beyond that time. Any unfinished business from the adjourned
meeting shall be tabled to the next regularly scheduled council meeting. Any
regular meeting falling upon a holiday shall be held on the following business
day at the same time and place. All meetings, including special and adjourned
meetings, shall be held in the city hall unless otherwise directed by the
council. If any council meeting is directed by council to be held in a location
other than city hall, the clerk-treasurer shall post a notice in city hall at
least 24 hours prior to the meeting stating the time, location and purpose of
the meeting. Notice shall be posted in the official newspaper of the changed
location of the council meeting when possible to do so. (Ordinance No. 14-05,
adopted July 22, 2014)
   Subd. 2.   Special Meetings. Special meeting of the council refers to any
meeting other than a regular or an adjourned regular meeting. Special meetings
of the council may be called by the Mayor or any other two members of the
council at least three days (72 hours) before the called meeting. Such a call
occurs by filing a written statement with the clerk containing, as a minimum,
the following: the names and positions of the individual or individuals calling
the meeting; the time and place of the special meeting; and a request asking
the clerk to give the council members proper notice. The clerk must mail, at
least one day before the meeting, a notice to all of the council members
stating the time and place of the meeting. For a special meeting to be valid,
all members must receive notification unless those not notified are present. In
addition to the notice to council members, public notice is necessary. In
addition to the notice to council members, public notice is necessary. The
clerk must post written notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the
special meeting on the principal bulletin board of the city. In addition to
posted notice, the city must also mail or deliver notice to each person who has
filed with the city a written request for notice of special meetings. The city
must post and mail or deliver public notice at least three days before the
meeting. An emergency meeting is a special meeting the council calls because of
circumstances that, in the judgment of the council, require immediate council
consideration. The council must make good faith efforts to provide notice of
the meeting by telephone or by any other method used to notify the council
members and must include the subject of the meeting. (Ordinance 94-06, adopted
April 12, 1994)
   Subd. 3.   First Meeting. At the first regular council meeting in January of
each year the mayor, with council approval, shall (1) designate the depository
of city funds; (2) designate the official newspaper; (3) choose an acting mayor
from the council who shall perform the duties of the mayor during the
disability or absence of the mayor from the city or, in case of vacancy in
office of mayor, until a successor has been appointed and qualifies; (4)
appoint such officers and employees and such members of boards, commissions,
and committees as may be necessary.
   Subd. 4.   Open Meetings. All council meetings, including special and
adjourned meetings, shall be open to the public, except as may be otherwise
provided by law. (Ordinance No. 94-11, adopted June 28, 1994)
   Subd. 5.   Quorum. A majority of the entire council shall be a quorum to
transact business, and less than a quorum may recess a meeting to a future
date. In the event of vacancies, the "entire council" shall be temporarily
reduced to include only those members legally entitled to participate, and the
quorum shall be a majority of the temporarily reduced “entire council”.
(Ordinance 96-05, adopted July 15, 1996)
201.02 Mayor.
   Subd. 1.   Presiding Officer. The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the
council. In the absence of the mayor, the acting mayor shall preside. In the
absence of both, the next senior councilmember shall call the meeting to order
and shall preside until the council members present at the meeting choose one
of their number to act temporarily as presiding officer.
   Subd. 2.   Duties of Presiding Officer. The presiding officer shall preserve
order, enforce the rules of procedure herein prescribed, and determine without
debate, subject to the final decision of the council on appeal, all questions
of procedure and order. Except as otherwise provided by statute or by these
rules, the proceedings of the council shall be conducted in accordance with
“Robert’s Rules of Order Revised”.
   Subd. 3.   Appeals. Any member may appeal to the council from a ruling of
the presiding officer. If the appeal is seconded, the member may speak once
solely on the question involved and the presiding officer may explain his
ruling, but no other councilmember shall participate in the discussion. The
appeal shall be sustained if it is approved by a majority of the members
present exclusive of the presiding officer.
   Subd. 4.   Participation in Meetings. Except as otherwise provided by law or
this section, the presiding officer shall not be deprived of any of the
privileges of a councilmember by reason of his acting as presiding officer,
including the power to move, second, and debate from the chair.
   Subd. 5.   Term. The term of the office of the Mayor for the City shall be
four years beginning with the term commencing January 1989. (Subd. 5 added by
Ordinance 87-4, passed May 26, 1987.)
201.03 Minutes.
   Subd. 1.   Recording. Minutes of each council meeting shall be kept by the
clerk-treasurer, or, in his absence, by the designate of the council.
Ordinances, resolutions, and claims shall be recorded in the minutes.
   Subd. 2.   Approval and Publication. The minutes of each meeting shall be
reduced to typewritten form, shall be signed by the clerk-treasurer and the
mayor. At the next regular council meeting, approval of the minutes shall be
considered by the council. The minutes need not be read aloud, but the
presiding officer shall call for any additions or corrections. If there is no
objection to a proposed addition or correction, it may be made without a vote
of the council. If there is an objection, the council shall vote upon the
addition or correction. If there are no additions or corrections, the minutes
shall stand approved.
201.04 Agenda.
   Subd. 1.   Order of Business. Each meeting of the council shall convene at
the time and place appointed therefore. Order of business shall be reviewed and
established by council annually. (Ordinance 06-12, November 28, 2006)
   Subd. 2.   Variation of Order. The order of business may be varied by the
presiding officer; but all public hearings shall be held at the time specified
in notice of hearing.
   Subd. 3.   Written Agenda. An agenda of the business and claims for each
regular council meeting shall be prepared by the clerk-treasurer for said
meeting. Any councilmember wishing an item to be placed on the agenda to be
considered by the council must have it filed in the office of the clerk-
treasurer by 12:00 P.M. on the Wednesday prior to the regular council meeting.
Any other person wishing an item to be placed on the agenda to be considered by
the council must provide a letter to the clerk-treasurer setting for his
request, by 12:00 P.M. on the Wednesday prior to the regular council meeting or
must have a councilmember place his matter on the agenda in accordance with the
above rule. Copies of the agenda shall be made available to the public.
   Subd. 4.   Additions. By majority vote of the members of the council in
attendance at the regular scheduled meeting, additional business may be added
to the agenda for consideration at the meeting in session.
   Subd. 5.   Open Forum. Open forum will be the first agenda item after roll
call. Any citizen may bring a concern to the council with the understanding
that the presentation be limited to less than three minutes and that a decision
or action may not be made by the council at that time. (Ordinance 88-7, adopted
June 13, 1988)
201.05 Quorum and Voting.
   Subd. 1.   Forum. At all council meetings a majority of the council members
elected shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a small
number may adjourn from time to time and the council may punish non-attendance
by a fine not exceeding $5.00 for each absence from any regular meeting unless
a reasonable excuse is offered.
   Subd. 2.   Recording of Votes. The votes of members on any question pending
before the council may be by voice vote, standing vote, or in any other manner
of voting which signifies the intention of the members; but if the vote is not
unanimous, there shall be a roll call and the names of those voting for and
against the question shall be recorded in the minutes. If any member, being
present, does not vote, the minutes, as to his name, shall be marked “Present -
- Abstain.”
   Subd. 3.   Majority of Passage. A majority vote of all members of the
council shall be necessary for approval of any ordinance. Except as otherwise
provided by statute, a majority of those voting shall prevail in all other
cases.
201.06 Ordinances, Resolutions and Motions.
   Subd. 1.   Form. Every ordinance and resolution shall be presented in
writing and the title shall be read in full before a vote is taken thereon. An
ordinance or resolution shall be read in full only at the request of the mayor
or a member of the council. All motions shall be stated in full before they are
submitted to a vote by the presiding officer. They shall then be recorded by
title in the minutes by the clerk-treasurer.
   Subd. 2.   Recording. Every ordinance and resolution passed by the council
shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the clerk-treasurer. Every
ordinance shall be incorporated into the text of appendices of the code with
the original passed version of the ordinance retained in an ordinance book in
chronological order. Every resolution shall be filed in the resolution book.
   Subd. 3.   Amendments and Repeals. Every ordinance or resolution repealing a
previous ordinance or resolution or a section or subdivision thereof shall give
the title of the ordinance or resolution to be repealed in whole or in part. No
ordinance or resolution or section or subdivision thereof shall be amended by
reference to title alone, but such an amending ordinance or resolution shall
set forth in full each section or subdivision to be amended.
201.07 Amendment or Suspension of Rules.
The rules for the conduct of council meetings established by
201.02 through
201.07 may be temporarily suspended by a majority vote of all council members.
201.01 through
201.07 shall not be repealed or amended except by majority vote of the whole
council, after notice has been given at some preceding council meeting.
202. Council Salaries
202.01 Definition.
For purposes of this code, "meeting" shall include regular, workshop, special,
emergency, or any and all other properly noticed meetings of the City Council.
(Ordinance No. 15-03, adopted December 22, 2015)
202.02 Compensation.
   Subd. 1.   The Mayor and Council members shall be paid compensation for all
meetings based on the rate listed below. (Ordinance No. 15-03, adopted December
22, 2015)
   Subd. 2.   Effective January 1, 2017, Council members shall be compensated
at the rate of $4,500 per year, and the Mayor at the rate of $6,600 per year.
(Ordinance No. 15-03, adopted December 22, 2015)
   Subd. 3.   If the Mayor or Council members shall fail to serve a complete
year, the compensation set forth in this subdivision shall be pro-rated and
made payable within ten (10) days of the end of the abbreviated term.
(Ordinance No. 15-03, adopted December 22, 2015)
   Subd. 4.   Compensation for the Mayor and Council members shall be paid
quarterly at the last regular Council meeting of that quarter, except that if
the Mayor or a Councilmember shall, for any reason, vacate his or her position,
the compensation shall be paid as provided in Subdivision 3 as set forth
herein.
203. Elections
203.01 Date.
The regular city election shall be held biennially on the first Tuesday after
the first Monday in November in every even-numbered year.
204. Clerk-Treasurer
204.01 Offices Combined.
Pursuant to M.S. 412.591, the separate offices of clerk and treasurer are
abolished. The duties assigned by statute to the clerk and the treasurer shall
be performed by the clerk-treasurer. The council shall provide for an annual
audit in accordance with state law.
205. Administrator
205.01 Position Re-defined.
The existing position of administrator is hereby affirmed as chief
administrative officer of the city and shall encompass the duties prescribed
hereinafter.
205.02 Appointment of Administrator.
The administrator shall be appointed by a majority of the council for an
indefinite term. He may be removed from office after thirty (30) calendar days
written notice only by a majority of the council with or without cause. If he
has served as administrator for one (1) year, written charges and a public
hearing on the charges before the council shall be provided if requested by the
administrator prior to the date wherein his removal takes place. The public
hearing must be held within thirty (30) calendar days after presentation of the
charges and he must receive the charges at least ten (10) calendar days before
the public hearing.
205.03 Qualifications.
The administrator must have considerable knowledge of municipal government
operation, proper procedures, public relations, personnel management, finances,
purchasing and all administrative requirements for proper municipal operation.
He must have knowledge of or ability to acquire full knowledge of all laws
affecting the municipality. He must have the ability to encourage harmonious
relations with municipal employees and the general public. He must have the
ability to coordinate development, to collect and analyze material for
reporting and to initiate and implement standards of procedure, operation and
organization.
He shall have a Bachelor's degree in public administration or its equivalent
and work experience in municipal administration. He shall be selected solely on
the basis of his executive, administrative and educational qualifications.
205.04 Duties and Responsibilities.
The administrator shall be responsible to the council for the proper
administration of all affairs of the city and to that end shall be empowered
and required to:
   (1)   Be cognizant of the affairs of all departments, offices and divisions
of the city except as otherwise provided by law and carry out any other
responsibilities placed under his jurisdiction by this section or by subsequent
council action.
   (2)   Interview and screen prospective city employees as permitted by law
and shall make recommendations to the council before the council makes any
appointment; he shall also rake recommendations for terminating and suspending
employees and may suspend any employee until the next council meeting when the
council shall affirm, modify or rescind the suspension.
   (3)   Prepare and submit an annual capital improvement plan and fiscal
budget to the council and keep the council advised of the financial condition
of the city and make such recommendations as he may from time to time determine
desirable and necessary.
   (4)   Attend and participate in discussions at all meetings of the council
and other official bodies as directed by the council.
   (5)   Make recommendations for enforcement of all laws and ordinances.
   (6)   Assist with all personnel matters for the city in conjunction with
policy established by the council.
   (7)   Issue purchase orders for previously budgeted items, when directed by
council action, when the amount thereof does not exceed $5,000 after receiving
estimates, quotations, sealed bids, proposals and/or contracts. (Ordinance No.
85-2, adopted March 26, 1985) (Ordinance No. 01-08, adopted September 25, 2001)
(Ordinance No. 05-14, adopted October 25, 2005)
   (8)   The administrator shall represent the city at official functions as
directed by the council and maintain good public relations with the citizens of
the community.
   (9)   Recommend from time to time the adoption of such measures as he may
deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety and welfare of the community
or for the improvement of the administration.
   (10)   Monitor all consultant and contract work performed for the city.
205.05 Compensation and Benefits and Employment Conditions.
The administrator shall receive such compensation as the council shall fix from
time to time by resolution and by the terms of an employment agreement.
205.06 Delegation of Administrator Duties and Responsibilities.
All duties and responsibilities assigned to the City Administrator shall be
delegated to the Deputy Clerk, in the absence of the City Administrator.
(Ordinance No. 91-04, adopted April 25, 1991) (Ordinance No. 02-07, adopted May
28, 2002)
206. Personnel
206.01 Purpose.
It shall be the purpose of this Chapter to establish a uniform and equitable
system of municipal personnel administration for the city to be applicable to
all employees of the city, except where the city shall otherwise hereafter
provide, and to insure:
   (1)   That employment with the city shall be as attractive as possible from
a career perspective.
   (2)   That all appointments, promotions and separation will be fair and
based on job performance.
   (3)   That the position classification and compensation plans will be based
on the principle of like compensation for like work.
The end result should be employees doing their jobs to the best of their
ability to benefit the citizens of the city. No provision of this Chapter is
intended to violate, supersede, or conflict with any applicable constitution,
statute, or regulation, whether state or federal. To the extent of conflict
with any such statute or regulation, the statute or regulation shall control.
The employment relationship between the City and the employee is not for any
fixed term. The City, in its sole discretion, reserves the right to revoke,
suspend, amend, modify, or change any of the procedures set forth in the
Personnel Chapter of the City Code and further the Personnel Chapter is not
intended as an employment contract. (Ordinance 91-06, adopted July 23, 1991.)
206.02 Scope.
Except as otherwise specifically provided, this chapter applies to all
employees of the city defined as follows:
   (1)   Full-time Employee - forty (40) hours per week.
   (2)   Regular Part-time Employee - Minimum of twenty-five (25) hours per
week but less than forty (40) hours per week. (Ordinance 89-15, adopted
November 28, 1989)
   (3)   Part-time Employee - Less than twenty-five (25) hours per week and
except the following:
      (a)   Elected officials.
      (b)   Members of appointed commissions and committees.
      (c)   Volunteer firefighters and other volunteer personnel.
      (d)   Persons engaged by appointment or under contract to supply expert,
professional, technical, or any other service.
      (e)   Temporary employees including seasonal, student, or employees hired
to meet the immediate requirements of any emergency situation.
206.03 Appointments.
   Subd. 1.   Merit. Every full-time appointment to city service shall be made
by the council on the basis of merit and fitness for the position. Every
appointment to part-time positions shall be made by the City Administrator and
Public Works Director on the basis of merit and fitness for the position. In
the case of part-time employment, the council shall formally approve the number
of part-time positions to be hired, the level of compensation and the duration
of employment. The City Administrator and Public Works Director shall make
appointments independently, governed by the policies and requirements as
established herein. When required by law or by the council, merit and fitness
shall be ascertained by written, oral, or other examinations designed to
evaluate the ability of the candidate to discharge the position for which the
examination is held. Merit shall include without limitation all job-relevant
background, education, experience or training. Fitness shall be determined by a
physical at the time of application for employment and at regularly recurring
times as set forth in individual department policies. Such examinations are to
be paid for by the City and the physician's report is to be made directly to
the Council and the employee. In no case shall any irrelevant disability be
considered. As a condition of employment, prospective employees shall sign such
releases as may be necessary to release the physician's report to the City.
   Subd. 2.   Non-Eligible. No local official or employee shall be the
immediate supervisor of a related person. Further, a local official or employee
of the City shall not influence or attempt to influence the hiring, transfer,
suspension, promotion, discharge, reward, discipline, or the adjustment of
grievances of a related person. A “related person” is defined as any parent,
parent-in-law, spouse, child, grandchild, brother, brother-in-low, sister,
sister-in-law, grandparent, grandparent-in-law, aunt, aunt-in-law, uncle,
uncle-in-law, niece, niece-in-law, nephew, or nephew-in-law of any current city
employee or any current mayor or council member. (Ordinance 2016-01, adopted
February 23, 2016)
   Subd. 3.   Duration of Employment. After an employee has successfully
completed the orientation period after hire or promotion, he/she shall be
designated as a regular employee. Such designation shall be employed to
differentiate between these employees and orientation, temporary or part-time
employees. The term “regular” shall not be used to define duration of
employment with the city. (Ordinance 91-06, adopted July 23, 1991)
206.04 Probationary Period.
   Subd. 1.   Purpose. The orientation period shall be regarded as an integral
part of the terms and conditions of employment and shall be utilized for
observing the employee's work, for securing the most effective adjustment of
the employee to the position, and for terminating such orientation employments
as may be deemed necessary in the sole discretion and judgment of the council.
(Ordinance No. 91-06, adopted July 23, 1991)
   Subd. 2.   Duration. Every original appointment and every promotional
appointment is subject to a minimum orientation period of six (6) months.
“Rehired” employees shall be required to satisfy the orientation period as if
newly hired or promoted to the position to which they return. Vacation time and
other benefits shall not accumulate unless the employee is designated a regular
employee but shall accumulate from the date of employment. Sick leave and
funeral leave are not paid during the original appointment orientation period.
(Ordinance No. 89-15, adopted November 28, 1989)(Ordinance No. 91-06, adopted
July 23, 1991)
   Subd. 3.   Termination. The council may in its sole discretion terminate an
orientation employee or an employee not advancing to Step C for the job as
defined in “The Compensation Plan” within the maximum time as stated in “The
Compensation Plan” without the right of appeal or hearing unless he is a
veteran, in which case the procedure prescribed in Minnesota Statutes §197.46
shall be followed. The employee so terminated shall be notified in writing of
the reasons for termination. (Ordinance 89-15, adopted November 28, 1989)
(Ordinance 91-06, adopted July 23, 1991)
   Subd. 4.   Completion. Prior to completion of the initial orientation
period, the appropriate supervisor and the administrator shall recommend to
council in writing, dismissal, extension of the orientation period, or hiring
as a regular employee. (Ordinance No. 91-06, adopted July 23, 1991)
206.05 Compensation.
   Subd. 1.   Amount. Employees of the city shall be compensated according to
the salaries rates and schedules established by a “Compensation Plan” prepared
by the administrator and the clerk/ treasurer, presented to council no later
than the first Regular Council Meeting in November. The council may adopt,
reject, or modify such proposal and adopt such proposal as modified. Council
may make any such action retroactive. Original appointment to any position
shall be made at the starting salary established for the position and
advancement shall be by successive steps as established by the “Compensation
Plan.” Council may, upon the recommendation of the administrator, if the
applicant demonstrates greater qualifications than minimally required for the
position, or on conditions of extreme difficulty in recruiting at the entrance
rate, make an exception to the starting salary of a position. The “Compensation
Plan” is not a seniority plan calling for automatic pay increases based upon
length of service if it is clear that the level of competence varies greatly
from one employee to another, it is equally clear that deserving and efficient
employees should be awarded merit increase. Also, such increases should be
withheld from employees whose service is not wholly satisfactory. Advancement
will be based upon criteria set with the job description information.
Advancement through the pay rates established for a position will be the first
pay period following the anniversary date determined by the employee's hiring
date or position reclassification. Cost of living pay increases, if approved by
council, for employees who have reached the last step of the “Compensation
Plan” will be the first pay period of the calendar year. (Ordinance No. 89-15,
adopted November 28, 1989)
   (1)   On-Call Duty Requirements. The Public Works department employees are
required to rotate a schedule for on call duty which starts on Wednesday and
ends on Tuesday each week. The On-Call Duty consists of taking care of the
wastewater treatment facility and water operations on Saturday and Sunday, as
well as any other unrelated duties as assigned. The employee shall complete the
lab work in the morning on Saturday and Sunday and check the water pump houses,
wells and open the compost site when applicable. The employee shall also return
to work on Saturday and Sunday afternoons to check the SCADA system, lift
stations, streets, river level and the compost site when applicable. The On-
Call employee shall also be required to report back to the city to handle any
emergencies occurring after normal working hours. The On-Call employee is
expected to be within thirty (thirty) minutes of city limits at all times
during their week-long assignment. Employees serving this assignment shall
receive the following Friday off to avoid overtime as the hours of service on
Saturday and Sunday constitute four hours of work each day. Employees working
on-call shall be allowed to use a city vehicle during their week of service;
however, employees may not use the city vehicle for any personal or non-work
related purposes.
   (2)   On Call Duty Compensation. Public Works employees serving an on-call
assignment shall be compensated at the rate of one dollar ($1.00) per hour for
the period of time that they are not reporting to work. As an example, the on-
call assigned employee would typically work 40 hours during their week-long
assignment. The on-call assigned employee would then receive on-call
compensation for the remaining unworked hours, equaling a total of 120 hours in
this example, which would then be subject to payment as on-call compensation.
This on-call compensation shall apply to any overtime hours worked during the
week of assignment. (Ordinance 17-01, adopted February 14, 2017)
   Subd. 2.   Temporary and Part-time Employees. Temporary and part-time
employees are not entitled to paid sick leave, funeral leave, vacation leave or
holidays. Regular part-time employees who work twenty-five (25) or more
regularly scheduled hours per week and who do not provide their services to the
city pursuant to a written contract, are entitled to the pro rata sick leave,
funeral leave, vacation leave and holiday pay specified elsewhere in this
Chapter. (Ordinance No. 89-15, adopted November 28, 1989)
   Subd. 3.   Normal Work Week. The normal work week shall consist of forty
(40) working hours or less for regular part-time employees and part-time
employees as set by council in any regularly scheduled seven (7) day week. The
work week is Saturday through Friday. The normal work year consists of two
thousand eighty (2,080) hours, including all authorized absences.
   (1)   Lunch periods shall begin and end at the employee's assigned work
area. Supervisors are responsible for scheduling lunch periods. The normal
lunch period shall normally not be part of the compensated work day.
   (2)   Rest period are fifteen (15) minutes and shall be allowed during each
half of a full-time employee's shift. Part-time employees working more than
four (4) hours daily are allowed one rest period daily. Rest periods are to
begin and end at the employee's assigned work area and are scheduled by the
supervisor.
   Subd. 4.   Payday. The date upon which compensation is paid to the employees
of the City of Rockford, Minnesota shall be established and amended by
Resolution of the City Council. (Ordinance 14-03, adopted April 22, 2014)
206.06 Overtime.
   (1)   Supervisors are responsible for scheduling work in their departments
to minimize overtime and may authorize overtime when emergencies arise. All
overtime shall be authorized by the administrator and/or city council. All
hourly employees, as in the provisions of the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act
(FLSA), shall receive time and one-half their regular hourly rate for all work
performed in excess of forty (40) hours including holidays and vacation days,
including vacation days, excluding sick days, in any regular work week or, at
the employee's request, may receive compensatory time off for each hour of
overtime. (Ordinance No. 91-03, adopted April 9, 1991) (Ordinance 2012-03,
adopted June 12, 2012)
Once an employee has requested that overtime be booked as compensatory time,
the employee may not be paid for this compensatory time without council
approval or unless otherwise set forth in this Chapter. Compensatory time off
may not be used during the last two (2) weeks of employment once an employee's
resignation has been submitted.
All compensatory time off must be noted on the leave calendar posted in city
hall.
The estate of any orientation or regular full time hourly employee who dies
while employed by the city shall be entitled to receive the value of the
employees' accrued unused compensatory time in cash. (Ordinance No. 91-06,
adopted July 23, 1991)
   (2)   Full time salaried employees may receive compensatory time off for
work performed in excess of forty (40) hours including holidays, excluding sick
or vacation days, in any regular work week, with approval of the administrator.
Booking compensatory time for full time salaried employees is for record
keeping purposes only and is NOT to be considered a termination nor a
retirement benefit. (Ordinance No. 91-03, adopted April 9, 1991)
All compensatory time off must be noted on the leave calendar posted in city
hall.
   (3)   Employees that must return to work for a scheduled evening meeting or
an emergency shall be compensated for a minimum of two hours. However, if the
meeting or the emergency extends beyond the two hours, the employee shall be
compensated for the actual hours worked. (Ordinance 06-11, adopted November 28,
2006)
206.07 Holidays.
The following calendar days and such other days as the city council may fix are
deemed holidays with time off with full pay for all full-time and regular part-
time employees. With the exception of Christmas Eve, if the holiday falls on a
Saturday, the previous Friday shall be designated as the official holiday and
if the holiday falls on the Sunday, the following Monday shall be designated as
the official holiday. For Christmas Eve, the holiday shall be observed the
Friday before Christmas if Christmas falls on a Sunday. With the exception of
the floating holiday, the city hall will be closed and the city may not conduct
official/ordinary business on a holiday such as holding a meeting or hearing,
collecting utility bills, or issuing licenses or permits. Request for floating
holiday shall be in writing by the employee and shall be approved by the
department supervisor and the administrator. (Ordinance 10-01, adopted January
26, 2010; Ord. 23-03, adopted April 25, 2023)
Holiday Date
Holiday                    Date
New Year's Day             January 1
Martin Luther King Day     3rd Monday in January
President's Day            3rd Monday in February
Memorial Day               Last Monday in May
Juneteenth Day             June 19th
Independence Day           July 4
Labor Day                  1st Monday in September
Veteran's Day              November 11
Thanksgiving Day           4th Thursday in November
Day after Thanksgiving Day 4th Friday in November
Christmas Eve (4 hours)    December 24
Christmas Day              December 25
Floating Holiday(s)        As scheduled
 
   (Ord. 23-03, adopted April 25, 2023)
Full-time salaried employees with two (2) or more years of continuous service
will receive one (1) extra holiday which may be employee birthday or a floating
holiday.
Full holiday pay will be granted to all regular and orientation employees for
full-time or regular part-time positions. Employees shall be at work on the
work day immediately preceding and the work day immediately following a holiday
to be eligible for that holiday with the following exceptions:
   (1)   When an official holiday occurs during a scheduled vacation, the
charge against the employee's earned vacation shall be reduced by one day.
   (2)   When requested in advance in writing to and approved in writing by the
administrator when receiving compensatory time off or a floating holiday.
   (3)   Illness when verified to the supervisor and/or the administrator.
   (4)   By council action under extraordinary circumstances responding to a
petition request by the employee in writing.
Regular part-time employees will receive pro-rata holiday pay for holidays for
which they would otherwise be scheduled to work. Holiday pay cannot allow a
regular part-time employee to receive more pay than their normal average work
week pay. (Ordinance No. 97-15, adopted October 27, 1997)
206.08 Funeral Leave.
Full time employees working forty (40) hours per week, not serving the
orientation period, are allowed three (3) days paid funeral leave or five (5)
days paid funeral leave due to the death of a spouse, child or parent. Regular
part-time employees who work twenty-five (25) or more regularly scheduled hours
per week, not serving the orientation period, are allowed pro-rata paid funeral
leave. Paid funeral leave is allowed for parent, spouse, child, grandchild,
brother, sister, grandparent, parent-in-law, brother/sister-in-law and
grandparent-in-law. Additional leave may be taken and will be deducted from
compensatory time or vacation leave and must be approved in advance by the
supervisor or administrator. Attendance at a funeral not listed as eligible
paid funeral leave may be authorized by the supervisor or administrator and
will be deducted from compensatory time or vacation leave. Employees not
eligible for paid funeral leave or employees who have no earned accumulated
compensatory time or vacation leave may attend a funeral when authorized by the
supervisor or administrator without pay. (Ordinance No. 89-15, adopted November
28, 1989)(Ordinance No. 90-01 adopted February 13, 1990)(Ordinance No. 91-06
adopted July 23, 1991)(Ordinance 10-01, adopted January 26, 2010)
206.09 Vacation With Pay.
   Subd. 1.   Amount Allowed. Full-time hourly employees shall earn paid
vacation as detailed herein. Regular part-time employees will receive a
prorated schedule of the same.
 
Years of Service       Annual Earned Vacation Max Vacation Banked
0 through 2nd year     80 hours               160 hours
3rd through 5th year   120 hours              200 hours
6th through 10th year  160 hours              240 hours
11th through 20th year 200 hours              280 hours
21st year or more      240 hours              320 hours
 
*After 6 months an employee may start using vacation earned.
(Ordinance No. 90-14, adopted December 20, 1990)(Ordinance No. 91-06, adopted
July 23, 1991)(Ordinance No. 02-17, adopted December 23, 2002)(Ordinance 10-01,
adopted January 26, 2010)(Ordiance No. 18-05, adopted February 13, 2018)
   Subd. 2.   Accumulation. Vacation earned shall be posted monthly to each
employee’s account commencing January 30, 2010. On January 29, 2010, each
employee’s vacation account shall be brought current for any vacation accrued
from the last anniversary date to January 29, 2010. For instance, accrual of
two hundred forty (240) hours of vacation per year would be posted at twenty
(20) hours each month. After December 31, 2010, employees shall not be allowed
to accumulate vacation time beyond the maximum banked amount identified in the
table above. Once an employee has reached the maximum banked amount the
employee will stop earning vacation time until the accumulated amount is
reduced below the maximum allowed amount. Council may, under exceptional
circumstances, permit an employee to take up to twenty (20) hours of vacation
before it has accrued. (Ordinance 90-14, adopted December 20, 1990)(Ordinance
10-01, adopted January 26, 2010)
   Subd. 3.   Accrual During Leave. For the purpose of accruing vacation or
sick leave, an employee using earned vacation leave or sick leave is considered
to be working. Vacation leave shall not be earned by any employee during a
leave of absence without pay, except a military reserve leave of absence
without pay, or time otherwise not worked or paid.
   Subd. 4.   Administration. Supervisors are responsible for scheduling
vacation leave and should take into consideration seasonal demands. The
employee who requests time off first shall be given priority. Should two
employees simultaneously request the same vacation time off, the senior
employee shall be given preference. Vacation leave shall normally be scheduled
in weekly periods but at no time in increments of less than one (1) hour. All
vacation leave must be noted on the leave calendar posted in city hall.
(Ordinance No. 10-02, adopted February 23, 2010)
Authorized vacation pay may be paid to the employee in advance of his/her
departure upon written request to the administrator not less than three (3)
working days prior to the last working day before departure.
Vacation leave shall not accrue during an employee's leave of absence without
pay, except in the case of a job-related injury or illness.
Employees shall not be entitled to a cash payment in lieu of vacation leave,
except upon termination in good standing or upon written request to and
approval of the council or the administrator, under exceptional circumstances.
(Ordinance No. 89-5, adopted March 28, 1989)
   Subd. 5.   Terminal Leave. Any regular full-time employee or regular part-
time employee leaving the employ of the city in good standing after giving at
least two (2) weeks notice of termination of employment shall be compensated
for all unexpired vacation time accrued and unused to the date of separation
including current year accrual for the following year use. (Ordinance No. 90-
14, adopted December 20, 1990)(Ordinance No. 91-06, adopted July 23, 1991)
   Subd. 6.   Proceeds to Employee's Estate. The estate of any regular full-
time employee or regular part-time employee who dies while employed by the city
shall be entitled to receive the value of the employee's accrued unused
vacation time in cash. (Ordinance No. 91-06, adopted July 23, 1991)
206.10 Sick Leave and Earned Sick and Safe Time.
   Subd. 1.   Amount For The Year 2010. Beginning with the adoption of this
policy and ending December 31, 2010, sick leave shall be a benefit provided to
all regular full-time and regular part-time employees which shall be accrued at
the rate of eight (8) hours per month for full-time employees and on a pro-rata
basis for regular part-time employees. The first twenty-one (21) hours of sick
time each year shall not accrue and shall be set aside to pay for the
employee’s disability insurance.
   Subd. 2.   Amount For The Year 2011 and Future. Sick leave and earned sick
and safe leave shall be a benefit provided to:
   (1)   Regular full-time and regular part-time employees which shall be
accrued at the rate of ten (10) days annually for full-time employees and on a
pro-rata basis for regular part-time employees. The maximum amount of sick
leave to be accumulated by an employee is four hundred eighty (480) hours. Once
an employee has reached the maximum banked amount the employee will stop
earning sick time until the accumulated amount is reduced below the maximum
allowed amount. There is no cash value to the sick leave accumulated under this
section. (Ordinance 10-06, adopted August 10, 2010)
   (2)   Part-time/temporary/seasonal employees who work more than eighty hours
(80) a year will accrue sick and safe leave at one (1) hour for every thirty
(30) hours worked. Sick and safe leave may be accumulated to a maximum of
forty-eight (48) hours annually with a maximum balance of eighty (80) hours.
When there is a separation from city employment, if the employee is rehired
within one hundred eighty (180) days of separation, previously accrued earned
sick and safe leave that had not been used will be reinstated and accrue
additional earned sick and safe leave at the commencement of re-employment.
(Ordinance 23-05, adopted December 12, 2023)
   Subd. 3.   Purpose and Administration. Sick leave and earned sick and safe
leave may be used for any of the eligible uses as set forth in M.S. § 181.9447,
subd. 1, with such use being tracked and used in increments of one-fourth (1/4)
hour. To be eligible for sick leave and earned sick and safe leave, the
employee shall:
   (1)   Report as soon as possible to the supervisor or administrator the
reason for absence.
   (2)   Keep the supervisor informed on the condition.
   (3)   If the employee is out of work more than five (5) days due to an
illness or serious health condition or disability the employee will not be
allowed to return to work until the required form is completed by their
physician stating that they are capable of performing their job or listing any
work restrictions. The city requires a physician’s form to return to work for
any serious illness, injury or medical condition that may affect an employee’s
job performance even if they are absent less than five (5) days. (Ordinance 10-
01, adopted January 26, 2010)
The administrator shall be notified by the supervisor of all employees absent
on sick leave. Sick leave shall not be granted for less than one-half hours.
(Ordinance No. 04-17, adopted December 14, 2004); Ordinance 23-05, adopted
December 12, 2023)
   Subd. 4.   Penalty. Using or claiming sick leave for a purpose not
authorized shall be cause for disciplinary action.
   Subd. 5.   Accrual During Leave. For the purpose of accruing vacation or
sick leave, an employee using earned vacation leave or sick leave is considered
to be working. Sick leave shall not be earned by any employee during a leave of
absence without pay, except a military reserve leave of absence without pay, or
time otherwise not worked or paid.
   Subd. 6.   Sick Leave Buy-Back. Any regular full-time or regular part-time
employee leaving the employ of the city in good standing after giving at least
two (2) weeks notice of such termination of employment shall be compensated for
all unused accrued sick leave accrued prior to January 30, 2010 as follows:
(Ordinance 04-17, adopted December 14, 2004)(Ordinance 10-01, adopted January
26, 2010)
   (1)   After ten (10) years of continuous service paid as termination pay at
twenty-five (25) percent the employee's rate of pay at the time of termination.
   (2)   After fifteen (15) years of continuous service paid as termination pay
at fifty (50) percent the employee's rate of pay at the time of termination.
   (3)   After twenty (20) years of continuous service paid as termination pay
at seventy-five (75) percent the employee's rate of pay at the time of
termination.
Sick leave accumulated after January 29, 2010 shall not be paid out to
employees upon termination of employment. The accumulated sick leave prior to
January 30, 2010 will be saved in a separate sick leave bank to be used or paid
out at termination per the policy in effect on January 28, 2010.
(Ordinance 10-01, adopted January 26, 2010; Ordinance 23-05, adopted December
12, 2023)
206.11 Injury Leave.
Injury leave shall be granted to regular and orientation full-time and regular
part-time (twenty-five (25) hours weekly or over) employees who are
incapacitated as a result of injury or occupational disease incurred, subject
to the condition that the injury or disease qualifies the employee for benefits
from Worker's Compensation insurance. During such injury leave, the employee
shall be entitled to full compensation and employee benefits for a period not
to exceed six (6) months while absent from work by reason of such injury or
disease. The amount of any compensation shall be reduced by any payment
received by the injured employee from Worker's Compensation Insurance. In no
case shall the employee's net compensation, including Worker's Compensation
insurance benefits, exceed the employee's regular rate of net compensation.
Compensation for injury leave shall be terminated upon the date of
certification of a competent medical authority, approved by the administrator
that the employee can return to duty. (Ordinance No. 91-06, adopted July 23,
1991)
The city reserves the right to require the employee to see a physician selected
by the administrator for evaluation, such examination paid for by the city. The
employee shall sign such releases as may be necessary to release the evaluation
to the city.
Whenever an employee is injured on the job, a report of such accident shall be
made immediately to the supervisor and the administrator. This report shall
give all known details and circumstances pertaining to the injury. Such
employee shall fill out such forms and reports as are required under Worker's
Compensation law and regulations and by the city's Worker's Compensation
insurance carrier.
206.12 Leaves Without Pay.
The council may grant any regular full-time or regular part-time employee a
leave of absence without pay for a period not exceeding one hundred and twenty
(120) calendar days except that council may extend such leaves to a maximum
period of one (1) year in case the employee is disabled or where extraordinary
circumstances, in council's judgment, warrant such extension. In no instances
shall an employee be granted a personal leave without pay if he/she can use
accumulated compensatory time, accumulated sick leave or accumulated vacation
time. No vacation benefits, holiday leave, or sick leave shall accrue during a
leave of absence without pay. Employees shall request such leaves in writing in
advance of the date so desired. In unusual circumstances, the administrator may
grant an employee leave without pay, not to exceed one working day, without
first obtaining council approval. All leave without pay shall be subject to
cancellation by council if at any time it is found that the employee is using
the leave for purposes other than specified. (Ordinance No. 91-06, adopted July
23, 1991)
City-paid benefits, if desired, shall be kept in force and paid by the employee
during the entire leave of absence. Upon reinstatement following leave of
absence without pay, the employee may be reinstated in the position, or a like
position, he/she vacated at the inception of the leave. If the leave was
granted for medical reasons, council may require a written statement from the
attending physician, confirming the employee's ability to perform his/her
duties. Failure to report for work within three (3) working days of the
expiration of the leave shall be considered a resignation.
206.13 Absence Without Leave.
Any absence of an employee from scheduled duty that is not promptly reported
to, and authorized by, the administrator and/or council shall be deemed an
absence without leave for which compensation shall not be paid. Unauthorized
absence of an employee for three (3) consecutive working days shall be
considered as a resignation, except in cases where the conditions of such
absence were beyond the employee's control. Such termination shall not be
considered a resignation in good standing, and the employee shall not be
eligible for separation benefits.
206.14 Jury or Witness Duty.
When an employee performs jury duty or is subpoenaed as a witness in court or
voluntarily serves as a witness in a case in which the city is a party, the
employee is entitled to compensation from the city equal to the difference
between his/her regular pay based on an eight (8) hour day and the amount
received as a juror or witness. Time spent on jury duty shall not be counted as
time worked in computing overtime. Employees shall notify the administrator as
soon as possible after receiving notice to report for jury duty and will be
responsible for insuring that a report of jury duty is completed by the Clerk
of Court each week so the city will be able to determine the amount of
compensation due for the period involved. An employee excused or released from
jury duty during his/her regular working hours shall report to work immediately
unless there is less than two (2) hours remaining in the regular working day
and then he/she will report to the administrator that he/she will report to
work the next working day.
206.15 Military Leave.
Every employee to whom Minnesota Statutes §192.26 or §192.261 or U.S.C.A.,
Title 38, §2021 applies is entitled to the benefits afforded by those sections
subject to the conditions therein prescribed.
206.16 Affirmative Action.
It is the policy and intent of the city to provide equality of opportunity in
employment to all persons. This policy prohibits discrimination because of
race, color, creed, religion, national origin, political affiliation,
disability, marital status, status with regard to public assistance,
affectional preference, sex or age (except where sex or age is a bona fide
occupational qualification) in all aspects of its personnel policies, programs,
practices, and operations.
206.17 Schools and License.
Employees shall attend such schools and obtain such licenses as the council may
require. Fees and other expenses for attending such schools shall not be at the
employee's expense.
206.18 Political Activities.
All employees and officers of the city shall be governed by the current state
and federal statutes regarding political activities.
206.19 Officials Under Worker's Compensation Act.
Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes §176.011, Subd. 9, Clause 5, the elected
officials of the city and those municipal officers appointed for a regular term
of office are hereby included in the coverage of the Minnesota Worker's
Compensation Act.
206.20 Outside Employment.
Employees of the city will obtain prior approval from the administrator and
council before engaging in any other employment, activity, or enterprise for
private gain.
   Subd. 1.   Determining Factors. In determining whether such outside
employment or activities for private employment constitute a conflict of
interest with public duties or are inconsistent or incompatible with public
employment, the following, though not necessarily limited to shall be
considered:
   (1)   The use for private gain or advantage of city time, facilities,
equipment and supplies, or the badge, uniform, prestige or influence of city
employment.
   (2)   Receipt or acceptance by the employee of any money or other
consideration from anyone other than the city for the performance of an act
which the employee would be required or expected to perform in the regular
course of his/her duties as employee.
   (3)   The performance of an act in other than his/her capacity as an
employee, which act may later be subject directly or indirectly to the control,
inspection, review, audit or enforcement by such employee.
   (4)   Potential conflicts with the best interest of the city.
   Subd. 2.   Discipline. Failure to notify administrator/ council of outside
employment by the employee shall be cause for disciplinary action as outlined
in this Chapter.
206.21 Group Insurance.
(Ordinance No. 89-15, adopted November 28, 1989)(Ordinance No. 07-15, adopted
December 11, 2007)
   (1)   A group health/dental insurance program shall be provided for all
full-time orientation and regular full-time employees. The city shall pay 60%
of dependent coverage for health insurance only. Employees electing to take the
dependent health and/or dental coverage will have the balance deducted from
their paycheck twice a month. (Ordinance No. 91-06, adopted July 23, 1991)
   (2)   Regular part-time employees who work twenty-five (25) or more
regularly scheduled hours per week, orientation or regular, shall be allowed to
participate in the group health/dental insurance program if the administrator
or clerk/treasurer is notified within thirty (30) days of employment in
writing. The City will pay a pro-rated amount of the employee’s health and
dental premium and a pro-rated amount of the employee’s dependent health
insurance premium based on number of hours worked per year (i.e., an employee
working 1,664 hours per year, the City pays 80% of single coverage and 48% of
family health insurance). Employees electing to take this coverage will have
the insurance premiums deducted from their paycheck twice a month. (Amount set
by Insurance Section of Compensation Plan.) (Ordinance No. 90-14, adopted
December 20, 1990)(Ordinance No. 91-06, adopted July 23, 1991)(Ordinance 06-01,
January 10, 2006)
   (3)   Any employee enrolled in the city's health coverage terminated for
reasons other than disability may elect to continue health coverage for the
employee and dependents for eighteen (18) months or until he/she is re-
employed, whichever occurs first, provided the employee pays the cost of such
continuation of coverage to the employer or insurer. Within five (5) days after
the termination, the city shall notify the employee of the right to continue
coverage (Minn. Stat. §62A.17). It shall be the responsibility of the city
clerk to so notify the terminated employee.
   (4)   The City shall pay the premium for life insurance for $25,000 for all
orientation and regular full-time and regular part-time employees. (Ordinance
No. 90-05, adopted May 22, 1990)(Ordinance No. 91-06 passed July 23, 1991)
(Ordinance No. 18-05, adopted February 13, 2018)
   (5)   Short and Long Term Disability Insurance Program. A group short and
long term disability insurance program shall be provided for all regular full
time employees and regular part time employees who work twenty-five (25) or
more hours per week and all those employees shall participate in the group
disability insurance program. (Amended by Ordinance 07-15, adopted December 11,
2007)
      (a)   Beginning with the adoption of this policy and ending on December
31, 2010, the city will pay the premiums by deducting time from each employee’s
sick time bank per month. Each employee is required to maintain their sick time
bank at a minimum of twenty-one (21) hours. (Ordinance 10-01, adopted January
26, 2010)
      (b)   Beginning January 1, 2011, the city will pay the short and long
term disability insurance as part of the benefits for full and part time
employees. The premium will be pro-rated for part-time employees as listed in
Section
206.21.(2) above. (Ordinance 07-15, adopted December 11, 2007)(Ordinance 10-01,
adopted January 26, 2010)
   (6)   Minnesota Deferred Compensation Plan. Employees are offered the option
to contribute to the Minnesota Deferred Compensation Plan (MNDCP) offered
through the Minnesota State Retirement Systems (MSRS). Employees shall notify
the payroll clerk of the contributions to be deducted each payroll. The city
shall be responsible for depositing the contributions into the MNDCP account.
   (7)   Minnesota Deferred Compensation Plan Roth 457(b). Employees are
offered the option to contribute to the MNDCP pre-tax option of the Roth 457
(b). Employees are responsible for notifying the payroll clerk that they are
enrolling in this plan and the amount of their contributions which will be
contributed each payroll. The contributions will be taxed and deposited into
the Roth 457(b) account and the MNDCP each payroll. (Ordinance 2012-01, adopted
February 14, 2012)
   (8)   Healthcare Savings Plan. The employees are eligible to participate in
the Minnesota Post-employment Healthcare Savings Plan (HSP) as established by
MN Statutes 352.98 and outlined in the MSRS Trust and Plan Documents. All
available and applicable funds collected by the employer on behalf of the
employee will be deposited into the employee’s post-employment health care
savings plan account after calculation of the available and applicable
termination pay is made pursuant to Ordinance 206.10 entitled “Sick Leave.”
0-10 years of service 25% of frozen bank of sick leave is contributed into the
HSP
11-15 years of service 50% of frozen bank of sick leave is contributed into the
HSP
16-20 years of service 75% of frozen bank of sick leave is contributed into the
HSP
21+ years of service 100% of frozen bank of sick leave contributed into the HSP
As an example, an employee with 20 years of service is eligible to receive 75%
of their sick leave accumulated prior to January 30th, 2010 (frozen sick bank,
pursuant to Ordinance 206.10); with 75% of that calculated amount contributed
into the HSP. All employees must participate in this plan unless you:
      (a)   Are a foreign national; or,
      (b)   Have comprehensive health insurance coverage for life; or,
      (c)   Are eligible for TRICARE retiree medical benefits or VA medical
benefits due to a service connected disability. (Ordinance 16-02, adopted May
26, 2016)
   (9)   All city employees that work at least twenty (20) hours per week are
required to contribute to the Public Employee Retirement Association PERA at a
percentage rate of gross pay which is established each calendar year. The
employer is also required to contribute a percentage of the employee’s gross
pay which is established each calendar year. The employer will deposit the PERA
into the employees account each payroll cycle. (Ordinance 2012-01, adopted
February 14, 2012)
206.22 Exposure to Hazardous Substances.
Any employee routinely exposed to hazardous substances or harmful physical
agents as defined in the Minnesota Employee Right to Know Act of 1983 (Laws
1983, Ch. 316, 182.65-182.675) shall be trained before being assigned or
reassigned work exposing him/her to such substances or agents and shall be
given training annually thereafter. Training shall include an explanation of
how and where information about hazards is stored in the workplace, how the
hazards are labeled, and where to obtain specific information. The
administrator and the public works supervisor shall provide for such training
and for compliance with the Minnesota Employee Right to Know Act of 1983,
including the establishment of specific policies to insure compliance with the
state law and regulations. An employee acting in good faith has the right to
refuse to work under conditions which the employee reasonably believes present
an imminent danger of death or serious physical harm to the employee.
206.23 Resignation.
Any employee wishing to leave the employ of the city in good standing except
for mandatory retirement under Section
206.28 shall file with the administrator, at least fourteen (14) days before
leaving, a written resignation stating the effective date of the resignation
and the reason for leaving. The administrator shall notify council as soon as
possible when an employee submits a written resignation. Failure to comply with
this procedure may be considered cause for denying the employee future
employment by the city and denying termination leave benefits.
Employees who resign in good standing shall receive pay for unused accrued
compensatory time (
206.06), vacation (
206.09), and sick leave (
206.10).
206.24 Layoffs.
After at least two (2) weeks notice to the employee, the council may lay off
any employee whenever such action is necessary because of shortage of work or
funds, the abolition of a position, or changes in organization. No regular or
orientation full-time employee shall be laid off while there is a regular part-
time, part-time or temporary employee serving in the same class of position for
which the regular or orientation full-time employee is qualified, eligible, and
available. The administrator, at his discretion, may recommend lay off based on
qualifications. (Ordinance No. 91-06, adopted July 23, 1991)
Recall shall be on the basis of qualifications as compared among those on
layoff status for a particular classification. Notice of recall, recommended by
the administrator and approved by council, indicating position and department
shall be sent by certified mail to the employee's last known address. The
employee has fifteen (15) working days from date of notice to report and
failure to report within that time shall be considered a resignation. The open
position will then be offered to the next person on the recall list following
the procedure explained above.
206.25 Grievance Policy.
It is the policy of the city insofar as possible to prevent the occurrence of
grievances and to deal promptly with those which occur. When any employee
grievance comes to the attention of a supervisory employee, the supervisor
shall discuss all relevant circumstances with the employee, and the employee's
representative if the employee so desires, consider and examine the causes of
the grievance, and attempt to resolve it to the extent that he/she is able and
authorized to do so. The supervisory employee should immediately consult with
the administrator and document action taken at this level. If the grievance is
not dealt with to the employee's satisfaction at the administrator level within
fourteen (14) days, the employee may bring it before the council, which shall
then take up the matter at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
No employee shall be disciplined for seeking redress through the grievance
procedure or as a result of his/her testimony. (Ordinance 91-02, adopted March
12, 1991)
206.26 Cause for Disciplinary Action.
   (1)   Employees shall be subject to disciplinary action and possible
immediate termination for failing to fulfill their duties and responsibilities.
(Ordinance 10-01, adopted January 26, 2010)
   (2)   An adequate reason or cause for disciplinary action shall include, but
is not limited to, each of the following kinds of conduct:
      (a)   Conduct or performance on the job which indicates a lack of ability
to adequately perform the duties of the position or classification held by the
employee.
      (b)   Conduct or performance on the job which indicates a failure to
produce the quality of work the position or classification requires.
      (c)   Conduct or performance on the job which demonstrates
insubordination, which is defined as a refusal to follow appropriate written or
oral procedures, instruction or directions from a supervisor or the
administrator.
      (d)   The solicitation or acceptance of money or anything of value to
influence the decisions of an employee in public matters or as a reward for
such decisions.
      (e)   Being under the influence of alcohol, narcotics or any other
controlled substance while on the job except drugs prescribed by the employee’s
physician. No employee shall drive any vehicle or equipment owned, leased or
under the control of the city while under the influence of alcohol, narcotics
or controlled substances, whether or not prescribed by a physician, if such
operation would threaten the safety of the employee, other persons, or
property.
      (f)   Sleeping on the job.
      (g)   Conduct or performance on the job which demonstrates a deliberate
attempt to cause poor morale or disrespect among employees by actions or
attitude on the job.
      (h)   Habitual or excessive tardiness in reporting for scheduled working
hours.
      (i)   Being absent from a scheduled work assignment during working hours
without permission.
      (j)   Stealing, misappropriation or conversion of city property or the
property of other employees.
      (k)   The willful violation of any reasonable city rule or regulation
which has been adopted in written form and is known, or reasonably should be
known, to the employees involved.
      (l)   Has engaged in political activities restricted under Section
206.18 of this Chapter.
      (m)   Personal appearance or lack of cleanliness while on the job which
exhibits symptoms of lack of hygiene, bringing unpleasantness to citizens of
the city or other city employees.
      (n)   Reporting for a scheduled work assignment in clothing or other
aspects contributing to appearance, which the supervisor or administrator has
reasonably advised the employee is not acceptable or appropriate for the work
assignment or duties performed by that employee.
      (o)   Has been convicted of a felony.
      (p)   Has been convicted of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or
casting doubt on the employee's ability to properly perform his/her job.
      (q)   If an employee has been charged with the commission of a felony,
he/she may be suspended without pay pending a valid disposition of the charge.
If final resolution of the charge does not result in a valid conviction, the
council shall determine whether the conduct of the employee involved moral
turpitude or casts doubt on the ability of the employee to perform his job; and
if council so determines, such conduct shall constitute “cause” for appropriate
disciplinary action. Any such determination may be appealed according to the
grievance procedure.
      (r)   If an employee has been charged with the commission of a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, he/she may be suspended without pay
pending a valid disposition of the charge. If final resolution of the charge
does not result in a valid conviction, the council shall determine whether the
conduct of the employee involved moral turpitude or casts doubt on the ability
of the employee to perform his/her job; and if so determined, such conduct
shall constitute “cause” for appropriate disciplinary action. Any such
determination may be appealed according to the grievance procedure.
      (s)   Conduct which constitutes harassment as defined in Section
206.30. (Ordinance No. 89-6, adopted June 12, 1989)
Retaliatory action taken against any person because such person reported
harassment, investigated harassment, was a witness in or participated in any
way in an investigation of harassment. (Ordinance No. 89-6, adopted June 12,
1989)
An employee who carry’s a gun on their person, or store it in their desk,
locker, or any city building or city vehicle. (Ordinance No. 03-04, adopted
June 24, 2003)
206.27 Disciplinary Action/At Will.
(Ordinance No. 92-03, adopted March 5, 1992)
   Subd. 1.   In General. City employees shall be subject to disciplinary
action for failing to fulfill their duties and responsibilities, including
observance of work rules adopted by the council. Employment with the City shall
be “at-will”, and may be changed or terminated by the City at any time for any
lawful reason. No contract of employment shall be binding upon the City unless
it is in writing and is signed by the Mayor and City Clerk on behalf of the
City. The terms and conditions of employment may be changed by the City at any
time for any lawful reason. There is no guarantee of employment for any
specific length of time, nor are the guidelines in the personnel ordinance
intended to create any express or implied contract rights.
   Subd. 2.   Disciplinary Actions. The City has no fixed set of graduate
disciplinary steps which are required to be adhered to in all instances. The
discipline taken could result in, but may not include, a written reprimand,
suspension from work with or without pay, or immediate termination. The action
taken will be based on the circumstances as reviewed by the Council. The City
reserves the right to evaluate each situation as it occurs and determine the
appropriate action. All supervisor initiated termination must be approved by
Council.
Should the employee have any challenges or questions regarding a discipline
that may be issued, the employee has the right to a hearing before Council.
   Subd. 3.   Definitions.
   (1)   Written Reprimand. A written reprimand may state that the employee is
being warned, description of the warning, timetables and goals for improvement
and an outline of future penalties/reprimands, should the problem continue. The
employee shall be given a copy of the reprimand and sign the original copy. The
signature of the employee does not mean that he/she agrees with the reprimand
but that he/she has received it. The reprimand shall be placed in the
employee's file but shall be removed from the file after two (2) years from the
date of issuance if there has been no subsequent reprimand and if no other
disciplinary action has been instituted.
   (2)   Suspension. An employee may be suspended by the supervisor pending
investigation of an allegation of misconduct. If the allegations prove false,
the statements shall be removed from the employee's personnel file, and the
employee shall receive compensation to which he/she would have been entitled
had the suspension not taken place.
   (3)   Termination. The Council may, as a disciplinary action, dismiss any
employee. A notice shall contain the reason for the termination, the procedure
for requesting a hearing and the employee's rights under the veteran's
preference law if he/she is a veteran.
   (4)   Hearing. An employee requesting a hearing before council regarding
disciplinary actions, must submit a written request to the City Clerk, within
five (5) working days of the notification of the action. The Council shall
consider the matter within ten (10) working days from that date of request,
unless the city and employee agree on an earlier or later date. If the action
involves the removal of a veteran, a hearing shall be held in accordance with
the MN Statutes, Section 197.46. Any employee may examine his/her personnel
file in the presence of the Administrator at a mutually convenient time or may
be given copies of his/her file at the employee's request and expense.
   Subd. 4.   Other Disciplinary Actions. The following other disciplinary
actions may be taken against any employee:
   (1)   Involuntary demotion.
   (2)   Withholding a salary increase or decreasing the employee's salary. The
employee shall be notified in writing of the action and reasons thereof. A copy
of the notice shall be placed in the employee's file. In no case shall an
employee's salary be decreased below the minimum of the salary range of the
class or below the applicable minimum wage.
206.28 Retirement Policy.
   Subd. 1.   General Rule. Every regular full-time and regular part-time
employee of the city shall automatically be retired upon reaching the age of
seventy (70) years, except as provided in Subd. 2, and except where retirement
at an earlier age is necessary as a bona fide occupational qualification. This
section does not apply to veterans (Minn. Stat. §197.46). (Ordinance No. 91-06,
adopted July 23, 1991)
   Subd. 2.   Retention After Age 70. If the administrator finds that the
interests of the city will best be served by allowing a person to remain in the
employ of the city after reaching seventy (70) years of age because the
employee's services are especially needed or a suitable replacement would be
especially difficult to find, the administrator may recommend to the council no
later than sixty (60) days before the employee's retirement date that the
employee be retained after the employee's seventieth (70th) birthday. Unless
the council disapproves such retention within three (3) weeks after receipt of
the recommendation of the administrator, the administrator may continue the
employment of such person for one (1) year. Any such employee may be retained
for successive one-year periods until reaching the age of seventy-five (75)
upon the annual recommendation of the administrator and approval of the
council.
   Subd. 3.   Retirement Pay. Retiring employees who leave the city service in
good standing shall receive pay for unused accrued compensatory time (Section
206.06), vacation (Section
206.09), and sick leave (Section
206.10).
206.29 Personnel Ordinance Distribution to Employees.
Current employees shall receive a copy of the personnel ordinance within a week
of publication and new employees shall be given a copy upon being made an offer
of employment.
All amendments shall be distributed to employees upon publication. Notice shall
be given to all employees of intent to amend the personnel ordinance including
date of council meeting at which the amendment will be considered. The employee
(s) may be heard by council but attendance is on the employee's own time.
206.30 Harassment.
   Subd. 1.   Policy and Purpose.
   (1)   This section is intended to provide each employee as well as private
citizens seeking city services or having business with the city the protection
necessary to work and function in a productive environment, free of harassment
as defined in this section. Harassment is a form of employee misconduct which
seriously undermines the integrity of the employee relationships and
relationships between members of the public and the city.
   (2)   It is the policy of the city to maintain a work environment free from
harassment. Harassment on the part of any employee toward a co-worker,
subordinate, supervisor or private person will neither be condoned nor
tolerated. All employees are responsible to uphold the highest standards of
conduct, honesty and integrity to assure proper performance of city business
and to maintain public trust. It is essential to this policy to ensure that
harassment does not occur and that city employees are sensitive to the adverse
effects of harassment. (Ordinance No. 89-6, adopted June 12, 1989)
   Subd. 2.   Harassment Defined. Harassment includes, but is not limited to
slurs, jokes, other verbal, graphic or physical conduct relating to an
individual's race, color, sex, religion, national origin, handicap, age, sexual
preference, any unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors and other
verbal, graphic or physical conduct of a discriminatory nature. (Ordinance No.
89-6, adopted June 12, 1989)
   Subd. 3.   Reporting Harassment. Any employee who believes he/she or another
employee or a member of the public is the victim or subject of harassment by a
city employee is strongly encouraged to report the harassment to his/her
supervisor or, if such supervisor is alleged to be a perpetrator of harassment,
to that supervisor's superior. For purposes of this paragraph the mayor shall
be deemed the superior of the city administrator. (Ordinance No. 89-6, adopted
June 12, 1989)
   Subd. 4.   Content of Report. The person reporting harassment, to the extent
possible, shall provide the following information:
   (1)   Specific facts about any incident;
   (2)   Dates of incidents;
   (3)   Identity of the perpetrator;
   (4)   Identity of witnesses;
   (5)   Recommendation as to remedial measures. (Ordinance No. 89-6, adopted
June 12, 1989)
   Subd. 5.   Investigations. Upon receipt of a report of harassment, the
person who received the report shall conduct, or cause to be conducted, a
thorough investigation of the allegations. (Ordinance No. 89-6, adopted June
12, 1989)
   Subd. 6.   Discipline. Any employee found to have committed harassment shall
be disciplined in accordance with Section 206 27. (Ordinance No. 89-6, adopted
June 12, 1989)
   Subd. 7.   Retaliatory Action. No employee shall take any retaliatory action
against any person because such person reported harassment, was a witness in an
investigation of harassment or participated in any way in an investigation of
harassment. It shall not be a retaliatory action to discipline an employee who
makes a false report of harassment if it is shown:
   (1)   There was absolutely no basis in fact for the report; and
   (2)   The report was made for the purpose of harassing, vexing, mollifying,
vilifying, embarrassing, or intimidating the alleged perpetrator of harassment.
(Ordinance No. 89-6, adopted June 12, 1989)
   Subd. 8.   Confidentiality. All reports, investigations, results of
investigations, identities of parties and witnesses, and disciplinary action
taken as a result of harassment shall be kept as confidential as possible
consistent with federal and state privacy laws and regulations. (Ordinance No.
89-6, adopted June 12, 1989)
   Subd. 9.   Criminal Investigation. If an investigation of harassment reveals
possible criminal activity, the investigator shall immediately report such
activity to the chief of police or the city attorney who shall determine if
further investigation or prosecution shall be taken. (Ordinance No. 89-6,
adopted June 12, 1989)
   Subd. 10.   Supervisor's Responsibilities. All supervisory personnel shall
take affirmative steps to prevent harassment including, but not limited to,
discussing this ordinance with their subordinates in general meetings, at the
time employee evaluations are made, informing all subordinates of their rights
and obligations under this ordinance, and taking measures to sensitize
subordinates as to what constitutes harassment and its impact individuals and
the work environment. (Ordinance No. 89-6, adopted June 12, 1989)
(Personnel Chapter amended by ordinance 87-17, passed November 24, 1987.)
(Entire Personnel Chapter amended by Ordinance 89-15, passed November 28, 1989,
by changing “Permanent Part-time Employee” to read “Regular Part-time Employee”
throughout.)
(Entire Personnel Chapter Amended by Ordinance 91-06, passed July 23, 1991, by
changing “Permanent Employee” to “Regular Employee”; changing “Probationary
Employee” to “Orientation Employee”; and “Probationary Period” to “Orientation
Period” throughout.)
207. Fire Department
207.01 Establishment.
For the proper protection of the lives and property of the city, there is
hereby organized a volunteer fire department to .be known as the Rockford Fire
Department.
207.02 Complement.
The department shall consist of not less than twenty firefighters and not more
than a number equal to ten percent (10%) of the area served by the fire
department.
207.03 Officers.
The officers of the department shall be a chief and an assistant chief. The
chief and assistant chief shall be elected annually at the first meeting held
in December, subject to confirmation by the council.
207.04 Chief's Duties.
   Subd. 1.   Supervision. The chief or In his absence the assistant chief
shall have supervision over all the apparatus and other equipment, examine the
same as often as necessary and see to it that it is properly kept, cared for,
and placed.
   Subd. 2.   Drills and Fires. The chief shall order drills and practices as
often as is advisable and see to it that all members of the department
understand their work. He shall have full power and absolute control at all
fires.
   Subd. 3.   Reports. The chief shall in January of each year make a report to
the council of the calls answered by the department, within and without the
city limits, stating the approximate loss or damage of each, type, location,
response time and number of personnel responding.
   Subd. 4.    Inspections of Buildings and Premises. (Ordinance No. 05-12,
adopted October 11, 2005)
   (1)   The chief of the fire department, or any subordinate designated by
him/her, may, at all reasonable hours, enter any building or premises within
his/her jurisdiction for the purpose of making any inspection, or investigation
which, under the provisions to the state fire code, he/she or they may deem
necessary to be made. Private dwellings shall not be entered without the
consent or permission of an adult occupant.
   (2)   It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to inspect,
or cause to be inspected by the fire department officers or members, all
buildings and premises, except the interior of private dwellings, as often as
may be necessary for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected
any conditions liable to cause fire or any violations of the provisions or
intent of the state fire code and of any other ordinance affecting the fire
hazards, and to insure compliance in all places of assembly with all laws,
regulations and orders dealing with overcrowding, use of decorative materials,
maintenance of exit ways, and maintenance of fire alarm and fire detecting
systems, and fire extinguishing systems and appliances.
   (3)   The chief of the fire department or an inspector thereof, upon the
complaint of any person or whenever he/she or they shall deem it necessary,
shall inspect any building and premises within their jurisdiction.
207.05 Members.
As vacancies occur or as it may be deemed necessary, new members may be
accepted into the department, subject to approval of the council. No new member
shall be accepted into the department who is under the age of 18 or over the
age of 45. Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to prohibit a member who is
45 years of age or more from continuing as a member of the department if such
person became a member prior to attaining the age of 45. (Ordinance 90-10,
adopted June 26, 1990.)
207.06 Meetings.
The department shall meet at least once a month.
207.07 Equipment.
All equipment and apparatus acquired by the department, either by purchase or
contribution, shall become and remain the property of the city.
207.08 Outside Service.
The department is hereby authorized to answer fire calls outside of the city
limits and when so doing shall be considered as on duty as firefighters of the
city.
207.09 Relief Association.
The members of the department may form and organize a Volunteer Firefighters
Relief Association, pursuant to state law.
207.10 Firefighter Banquets.
The council may authorize and pay for up to two banquets per year for the
members of the fire department and one guest for each member. (Ordinance No.
84-1, adopted April 24, 1984)
207.11 Establish fees.
This ordinance is adopted for the purposed of authorizing the City of Rockford
to charge for fire service as authorized by Minnesota Statutes.{'{'}{'
{'}366.011, 366.012, and 415.01.
   Subd. 1.   Definitions
   A.   “Fire service” means any deployment of fire fighting personnel and/or
equipment to extinguish a fire or perform any preventative measure in an effort
to protect equipment, life, or property in an area threatened by fire. It also
includes the deployment of fire fighting personnel and/or equipment to provide
fire suppression, rescue, extrication, and any other services related to fire
and rescue as may occasionally occur.
   B.   “Fire service charge” means the charge imposed by the City for
receiving fire service.
   C.   “Motor vehicle” means any self-propelled vehicle designed and
originally manufactured to operate primarily upon public roads and highways,
and not operate exclusively upon railroad tracks. It includes semi trailers. It
does not include snowmobiles, manufactured homes, all terrain vehicles, or park
trailers.
   D.   “Fire protection contract” means a contract between the City and a town
or other city for the City to provide fire service.
   E.   “Mutual aid agreement” means an agreement between the City and a town
or other city for the City’s fire department to provide assistance to the fire
department of a town or other city. (Ordinance 10-05, adopted November 23,
2010)
   Subd. 2.   Parties who may be charged for fire services.
   A.   Owner(s) of property which receives fire services.
   B.   Anyone who received fire services as a result of a motor vehicle
accident or fire.
   C.   Owners of property in towns or cities to which the City provides fire
service pursuant to a fire protection contract.
   Subd. 3:   Fee Schedule. The following fee schedule shall apply to fire
services provided to a person, an entity, and to property of all types:
Ladder 11  $300/hour
Engine 11  $200/hour
Tanker 11  $100/hour
Tanker 12  $100/hour
Grass 11   $ 75/hour
6-wheeler  $ 50/hour
Rescue 11  $100/hour
Utility 11 $ 75/hour
Responders $ 10/hour
 
   Subd. 4.   Billing and Collection:
   A.   Parties requesting and receiving fire services may be billed directly
by the City. Additionally, if the party receiving fire services did not request
services but a fire or other situation exists which, at the discretion of the
fire department personnel in charge requires fire service, the party will be
charged and billed. All parties will be billed whether or not the fire service
is covered by insurance. Any billable amount of the fire charges not covered by
a party’s insurance remains a debt of the party receiving the fire service, the
owner of the property to which services were provided, or both. All billings
under this subdivision shall be based upon the fee schedule set out in
Subdivision 3 above.
   B.   Parties billed for fire service shall have 30 days to pay. If the fire
service is not paid by that time, it will be considered delinquent and the City
will send a notice of delinquency.
   C.   If the fire service charge remains unpaid for 30 days after this notice
of delinquency is sent, the City will use all practical and reasonable legal
means to collect the fire service charge. The party receiving fire service
shall be liable for all collection costs incurred by the City including, but
not limited to, reasonable attorney fees and court costs.
   D.   If the fire service charge remains unpaid for 30 days after the notice
of delinquency is sent, the City Council may also, on or before October 15 of
each year, certify the unpaid fire service charge to the county auditor in
which the recipient of the services own real property for collection with
property taxes. The county auditor is responsible for remitting to the city all
charges collected on behalf of the city. The City must give the property owner
notice of its intent to certify the unpaid fire service charge by September 15
of the year prior to which the service charge will appear on the property tax
statement. (Ordinance 10-05, adopted November 23, 2010)
   Subd. 5:   Mutual Aid Agreement. When the City fire department provides fire
service to another fire department pursuant to a Mutual Aid Agreement, the
billing will be determined by the Mutual Aid Agreement. (Ordinance 10-05,
adopted November 23, 2010)
   Subd. 6:   Application Of Collections To Budget. All collected fire charges
will be credited to the Fire Department budget, and shall be used to reduce the
total amount of funds needed to operate the fire department prior to the
determination of how much each entity that contracts with the City for fire
service (including the City itself) is required to pay. (Ordinance 10-05,
adopted November 23, 2010)
   Subd. 7:   Enforcement. The Rockford Fire Chief, or his authorized
representative, or the City may use discretion in enforcing this ordinance,
taking into account any unique circumstances that may exist in a particular
case. (Ordinance 10-05, adopted November 23, 2010)
207.12 False Alarms.
   Subd. 1.   Purpose. The City finds that the occurrence of false alarms is a
threat to the public health and safety by causing the unnecessary mobilization
of emergency personnel and their diversion from other locations or activities
in which assistance may be needed. Many false alarms are caused by equipment
which is inadequately maintained or by inadvertent activation of a system by a
person legitimately on the premises. The City also recognizes that persons
suspecting the existence of an emergency should seek assistance immediately. In
order to balance these goals, the City seeks to allow a limited number of false
alarms but to seek reimbursement for excessive false alarms in order to
encourage proper maintenance of alarm system and security practices. (Ordinance
10-05, adopted November 23, 2010)
   Subd. 2.   Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, certain words or
terms are defined as follows:
   A.   “Alarm system” means any equipment or device, designed or intended to
signal the presence of an emergency such as a fire, unauthorized intrusion,
crime in progress or medical emergency.
   B.   “Alarm use” means the individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind occupying the premises where
an alarm system is maintained. If the occupant cannot be readily determined,
the term "alarm user" means the owner of the Premises as determined by the real
estate records of the County.
   C.   “False Alarm” means the activation of an alarm system when a condition
requiring emergency fire, police or ambulance responses does not in fact exist
and which is caused by mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation
or maintenance, animal movement, insect infestation or the actions of a person
or persons legitimately on the premises. Activations caused by utility mishaps,
weather or climatic conditions, act of God or other circumstances beyond the
control of the alarm user shall not constitute false alarms. (Ordinance 10-05,
adopted November 23, 2010)
   Subd. 3.   False Alarm Fee Established. An alarm user who incurs more than
two (2) false alarms at one address in any calendar year shall be required to
pay a false alarm fee to the City Clerk for the third and each succeeding false
alarm. The fee shall be established by the City Council by resolution. The
responding fire or police department shall file a written report of each false
alarm with the City Clerk. Upon receipt of a report of false alarm at a
particular address, the City Clerk shall notify the alarm user of the
provisions of this chapter and any fees due. The alarm user shall have ten days
after receipt of the notice to pay the fee required by this chapter. (Ordinance
10-05, adopted November 23, 2010)
   Subd. 4.   Assessment. On or before September 1 of each year, the City Clerk
shall list the total of unpaid false alarms against each lot or property to
which they are attributable under this chapter. After notice and hearing, the
City Council may charge the unpaid fees against the properties as special
assessments for certification to the county auditor for collection along with
current taxes the following year. (Ordinance 10-05, adopted November 23, 2010)
   Subd. 5.   Penalties. An alarm user who neglects or fails to pay the false
alarm fee established under the authority of this chapter within the prescribed
time period shall disconnect and cease using the alarm system immediately until
such fee is paid. Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor. (Ordinance 10-05,
adopted November 23, 2010)
208. Parks and Recreation Commission
208.01 Establishment.
There is hereby created the Rockford Parks and Recreation Commission.
208.02 Scope and Purpose.
The scope of the activity of this commission shall consist of advising the
council and other city advisory commissions regarding matters relevant to the
parks and recreation functions of the city. The general purpose of this
commission is to monitor and reflect the attitudes and concerns of the citizens
of the city relative to the parks system and recreational programs, and to
advise the council of citizen attitudes and policy matters relevant to the
parks and recreation functions in the city.
208.03 Duties and Responsibilities.
The responsibilities of the commission shall be to:
   (1)   Develop and recommend to the council, and upon their adoption, monitor
the execution of a comprehensive plan and park classification system for the
parks and recreation functions in the city and from time to time, make
recommendations for any changes it deems necessary.
   (2)   Annually report to the council regarding achievements toward
fulfillment of such comprehensive plan and recommended amendments.
   (3)   Frequently visit city parks and keep informed of current recreation
programs in order to continually review and evaluate the parks system
development and recreation programming.
   (4)   Develop and recommend methods to stimulate positive public interest in
parks and recreation functions.
   (5)   Develop and recommend feasible methods of discouraging vandalism and
destruction of park facilities.
   (6)   Develop and recommend feasible methods of financing recommended park
improvements.
   (7)   Serve as a forum for the citizens of the city to voice their opinions
regarding parks and recreation activities and functions.
   (8)   Promote coordination with the school district serving the city,
encouraging the interchangeable use of city and school district facilities and
programs to the best interest of citizens.
   (9)   Encourage dissemination of information to and coordination with city
organizations interested in the park and recreation functions such as garden
clubs, athletic groups, civic organizations and the like.
   (10)   Encourage coordination with the other communities and agencies to the
extent appropriate in matters pertinent to the parks and recreation functions.
   (11)   Develop and transmit recommended capital improvements annually to the
council for inclusion in the capital improvements program.
   (12)   Review and make recommendations to the council on development
proposals consistent with adopted policies, ordinances, regulations and the
comprehensive plan.
   (13)   Review and recommend items to be included in the parks and recreation
annual budget.
208.04 Members and Terms.
The commission shall consist of five (5) members. Members of the commission
shall be appointed by the mayor upon the majority consent of the council for
staggered terms of three years, except that any person appointed to a term for
which his predecessor was appointed shall be appointed only for the remainder
of such terms. Upon expiration of his term of office, the member shall continue
to serve until his successor is appointed. (Ordinance 87-3, adopted March 9,
1987.)
208.05 Qualifications of Membership.
Members of the commission shall be residents of the city while serving on the
commission and shall represent as broad a range as possible of interests in the
parks and recreation functions.
208.06 Chair.
The chair shall be appointed annually by the mayor with majority consent of the
council. The chair may be removed by the mayor with the majority consent of the
council. The chair shall assure fulfillment of the following responsibilities
in addition to those otherwise described:
   (1)   Preside over meetings of the commission.
   (2)   Appear or appoint a representative to appear as necessary before other
city advisory commissions and the council to present the viewpoint of the
commission on matters pertaining to parks and recreation functions as they
relate to business under consideration by said commissions or council.
   (3)   Review all council, planning commission, and other advisory commission
minutes and inform the parks and recreation commission of matters therein
relevant to the parks and recreation functions.
   (4)   Provide the liaison with other governmental and volunteer units in
matters relating to the parks and recreation functions for the purpose of
obtaining and providing timely information. The vice chair shall be appointed
annually by the chair. The vice chair shall perform such duties as may be
assigned by the chair and shall assume the responsibilities of the chair in
absence of the chair.
208.08 Resignations, Removals, and Vacancies.
Commissioners may resign voluntarily or may be removed from office by the mayor
with the consent of the majority vote of the council. Three of five unexcused
absences from duly called commission meetings shall constitute automatic
resignation from office. Vacancy in the commission shall be filled by mayoral
appointment with the majority consent of the council. Each member shall before
entering upon the disposition of his duties, take an oath that he will
faithfully perform the duties of his office.
208.09 Compensation.
Commissioners shall be paid the third week in December in an amount as
established by City Council resolution annually. (Ordinance No. 02-12, adopted
August 27, 2002)
208.10 Rules and Procedures.
The commission shall adopt such rules and procedures not inconsistent with
these provisions as may be necessary for the proper execution and conduct of
business.
208.11 Meetings.
The commission shall hold one regular every other month at city hall, unless
otherwise specified, the meeting time and day to be established by the
commission at its first meeting of the calendar year for each year. Official
minutes of each meeting shall be kept by the designated member and filed in the
office of the clerk-treasurer one week after the meeting. (Ordinance #11-10,
adopted December 13, 2011)
208.12 Staff.
The administrator/planner shall serve as staff liaison to the commission. The
staff shall perform such ministerial duties on behalf of the commission as may
be assigned.
208.13 Ex-officio Members.
The mayor shall appoint a councilmember to serve as an ex-officio member to the
commission, privileged to speak on any matter, without a vote, who shall
provide a liaison between the commission and the council.
208.14 Quorum.
A majority of the entire commission shall be a quorum to transact business, and
less than a quorum may recess a meeting to a future date. In the event of
vacancies, the “entire commission” shall be temporarily reduced to include only
those members legally entitled to participate, and the quorum shall be a
majority of the temporarily reduced “entire commission”. (Ordinance No. 96-06,
adopted August 19, 1996)
209. Escrow Deposits
209.01 Intent.
Certain licensed and permitted activities carried on in the city require the
assistance of the city engineer, city attorney, city planner, or other city
personnel. As these activities primarily benefit private persons rather than
the city as a whole, it is appropriate that the cost of these services be borne
by those benefiting thereby. Sections
209.01-
209.06 are intended to provide a method whereby this end will be furthered.
209.02 Escrow Deposit Required.
Applications for subdivision approval, rezoning, conditional use permits,
planned unit developments, zoning variances, sewer connection permits, liquor
licenses, building permits, annexation petitions, and other municipal
considerations may require a cash deposit which shall be placed in an
applicant's escrow account in an amount sufficient to pay all engineering,
legal, and planning fees incurred by the city, and such other costs as may be
made the applicant's responsibility, in connection with the application/
petition and the supervision, inspection and investigation of the permitted
activity. The deposit shall be held in the account and shall be credited to the
applicant making the deposit. All engineering, legal, and planning fees, and
such other costs as may be made the applicant's responsibility, incurred in
connection with an application shall be charged to the applicant's escrow
account and credited to the city. (Ordinance No. 95-14, adopted September 26,
1995)
209.03 Fee Schedule.
The Council shall establish fees for services rendered by the city attorney,
city engineer, city planner, and other city personnel. The fee schedule shall
be provided to all persons making applications listed in
209.02 upon request.
209.04 Individual Fees.
Based on the fee schedule adopted pursuant to
209.03, the clerk-treasurer shall determine the amount of the escrow deposit
required after consultation with the city attorney, city engineer, city
planner, and other city personnel whose services may be required. All time,
services, and materials to be billed to an escrow account shall be itemized.
209.05 Enforcement.
   Subd. 1.   Application. The application listed in
209.02 shall not be accepted or processed by the city unless accompanied by an
escrow deposit as provided in this chapter.
   Subd. 2.   Deficits. If at any time it appears that a deficit will occur in
any escrow account, the clerk-treasurer may then require an additional deposit
in the escrow account sufficient to cover the additional expenses. Failure to
make such additional deposits, or to pay to the city money owed for legal,
engineering or other services for which the applicant is by ordinance made
responsible in connection with an application in
209.02 shall be grounds for denial or revocation of the permit or license, or
cessation of work on a particular project. Such permit or license shall be
revoked only after a hearing preceded by ten days written notice.
209.06 Refund.
Any money remaining in an applicant's escrow account after payment of all
required engineering, legal, and other fees shall be returned to the applicant.
210. Civil Defense
210.01 General.
   Subd. 1.   Policy. Because of the existing and increasing possibility of the
occurrence of disasters of unprecedented size and destructiveness resulting
from enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile action, or from fire, flood,
earthquake or other natural causes, and in order to insure that preparations of
this city will be adequate to deal with such disasters, and generally, to
provide for the common defense and to protect the public peace, health, and
safety, and to preserve the lives and property of the people of this city, it
is hereby found and declared to be necessary:
   (1)   To establish a local organization for civil defense;
   (2)   To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during civil defense
emergencies;
   (3)   To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between this city and other
political subdivisions of this state and of other states with respect to the
carrying out of civil functions.
   Subd. 2.   Purpose. It is further declared to be the purpose of this chapter
and the policy of the city that all civil defense functions of this city be
coordinated to the maximum extent practicable with the comparable functions of
the Federal government, of this state and of the states and localities, and of
private agencies of every type, to the end that most effective preparations and
use may be made of the nation’s manpower, resources, and facilities for dealing
with any disaster that may occur.
210.02 Definitions.
   Subd. 1.   Civil Defense. “Civil defense” means the preparation for and the
carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for 'which
military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair
injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by enemy attack, sabotage, or
natural causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting
services, police services, medical health services, rescue, engineering, air-
raid warning services, communications, radiological, chemical and other special
weapons defense, evacuation of persons froze stricken areas, emergency welfare
services, emergency transportation, existing or properly assigned functions of
plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other
functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities
necessary or incidental to preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing
functions.
   Subd. 2.   Civil Defense Emergency. “Civil defense emergency” means an
emergency declared by the governor under Minnesota Statutes, Section 12.31, or
an emergency proclaimed by the mayor under
210.06.
   Subd. 3.   Civil Defense Forces. “Civil defense forces” means any personnel
employed by the city and any other volunteer or paid member of the local civil
defense agency engaged in carrying on civil defense functions in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter or any rule or order thereunder.
210.03 Civil Defense Agency.
   Subd. 1.   Created. There is hereby created with the city government a civil
defense agency, which shall be under the supervision and control of a director
of civil defense, hereinafter called the director. The director shall be
appointed by the mayor for an indefinite term and may be removed by him at any
time. The director shall serve without salary but shall be paid for his
necessary expenses. The director shall have direct responsibility for the
organization, administration and operation of the civil defense agency, subject
to the direction and control of the mayor. The civil defense agency shall be
organized into such divisions and bureaus, consistent with state and local
civil defense plans, as the director deems necessary to provide for the
efficient performance of local civil defense functions during a civil defense
emergency. The civil defense agency shall perform civil defense functions
within the city and in addition shall conduct such functions, outside the city
as may be required pursuant to the provisions of the Minnesota Civil Defense
Act of 1951 as amended or this chapter.
   Subd. 2.   Advisory Committee. There is hereby created within the civil
defense agency a civil defense advisory committee, hereinafter called the
“committee”. Members of the committee shall be appointed by the mayor to
represent city departments and other groups concerned with civil defense. The
mayor shall be chairman and the director shall be the secretary of the
committee. The committee shall advise the director and the council on all
matters pertaining to civil defense. Each member shall serve without
compensation and shall hold office at the pleasure of the mayor.
210.04 Powers and Duties of Director.
   Subd. 1.   Intergovernmental Relations. The director, with the consent of
the mayor, shall represent the city on any regional or state organization for
civil defense. He shall develop proposed mutual aid agreements with other
political subdivisions within or outside the state for reciprocal civil defense
aid and assistance in a civil defense emergency too great to be dealt with
unassisted and he shall present such agreements to the council for its action.
Such arrangements shall be consistent with the state civil defense plan and
during a civil defense emergency, it shall be the duty of the civil defense
agency and civil defense forces to render assistance in accordance with the
provisions of such mutual aid arrangements. Any mutual aid arrangement with a
political subdivision of another state shall be subject to the approval of the
governor.
   Subd. 2.   Research. The director shall make such studies and surveys of the
manpower industries, resources and facilities of the city as he deems necessary
to determine their adequacy for civil defense and to plan for their most
efficient use in time of civil defense emergency.
   Subd. 3.   Planning. The director shall prepare a comprehensive general plan
for the civil defense of the city and shall present such plan to the council
for its approval. When the council has approved the plan by resolution, it
shall be the duty of all municipal agencies and all civil defense forces of the
city to perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved. The
plan may be modified in like manner from time to time. The director shall
coordinate the civil defense activities of the city to the end that they shall
be consistent and fully integrated with the civil defense plan of the Federal
government and the state correlated with the civil defense plans of other
political subdivisions within the state.
   Subd. 4.   Training. In accordance with the state and city civil defense
plan, the director shall institute such training programs and public
information programs and shall take all other preparatory steps, including the
partial or full mobilization of civil defense forces in advance of actual
disaster, as may be necessary to the prompt and effective operation of the city
civil defense plan in time of a civil defense emergency. He may, from time to
time, conduct such practice air-raid alerts or other civil defense exercises as
he may deem necessary.
   Subd. 5.   City Facilities. The director shall utilize the personnel,
services, equipment, supplies and facilities of existing departments and
agencies of the city to the maximum extent practicable. The officers and
personnel of all such departments and agencies shall, to the maximum extent
practicable, cooperate with and extend such services and facilities to the
local civil defense agency and to the governor upon request. The head of each
department and tine agency, in cooperation with and under the direction of the
director, shall be responsible for the planning and programming of such civil
defense activities as will involve the utilization of the facilities.
   Subd. 6.   Volunteers. The director shall, in cooperation with existing city
departments and agencies affected, organize, recruit and train air-raid
wardens, auxiliary police, auxiliary firemen, emergency medical personnel, and
any other personnel that may be required on a volunteer basis to carry out the
civil defense plans of the city and the state. To the extent that such
emergency personnel are recruited to augment a regular city department or
agency for civil defense emergencies, they shall be assigned to such department
or agency for purposes of administration and command. The director may dismiss
any civil defense volunteer at any time and require him to surrender any
equipment and identification furnished by the city.
   Subd. 7.   Medical Facilities. Consistent with the civil defense plan, the
director shall provide and equip emergency hospitals, casualty stations,
ambulances, canteens, evacuation centers, and other facilities, or conveyances
for the care of the injured or homeless persons.
   Subd. 8.   Governor's Orders. The director shall carry out all orders, rules
and regulations issued by the governor faith reference to civil defense.
   Subd. 9.   Authority. The director shall direct and coordinate the general
operations of all local civil defense forces during a civil defense emergency
in conformity with controlling regulations and instructions of state civil
defense authorities. The heads of departments and agencies shall be governed by
his orders in respect thereto.
   Subd. 10.   Control Center. Consistent with the civil defense plan, the
director shall provide and equip at some suitable place in the city a control
center to be used during a civil defense emergency as headquarters for
direction and coordination of civil defense forces. He shall arrange for
representation at the control center by municipal departments and agencies,
public utilities and other agencies authorized by Federal or state authority to
carry on civil defense activities during a civil defense emergency. He shall
arrange for the installation at the control center of necessary facilities for
communication with and between heads of civil defense divisions, the stations
and operating units of municipal services and other agencies concerned with
civil defense and for communication with other communities and control centers,
within the surrounding area and with the Federal and state agencies concerned.
   Subd. 11.   Conscription. During the first 30 days of a civil defense
emergency if the legislature is in session or the governor has coupled his
declaration of the emergency with a call for a special session of the
legislature, the director may, when necessary to save life or property, require
any person, except members of the Federal or state military forces and officers
of the state or any other political subdivision, to perform services, for civil
defense purposes, as he directs, and he may commandeer, for the time being, any
motor vehicle, tools, appliances or any other property, subject to the owner's
right to just compensation as provided by law.
210.05 Volunteer Personnel.
   Subd. 1.   Eligibility and Oath. No person shall be employed or associated
in any capacity in the civil defense agency who advocates or has advocated a
change by force or violence in the constitutional form of government of the
United States or this state car the overthrow of any government in the United
States by force or violence, or who has been convicted of or is under
indictment for information charging any subversive act against the United
States. Each person who is appointed to serve in the civil defense agency
shall, before entering upon his duties, take an oath in writing before a person
authorized to administer oaths in this state department of civil defense, the
director, or ground observer corps supervisor. The oath shall be substantially
in the form prescribed by M.S. 12.43.
   Subd. 2.   Duties and Compensation. Civil defense volunteers shall be called
into service only in case of a civil defense emergency or a natural disaster
for which the regular municipal forces are inadequate or for necessary training
and preparation for such emergencies. All volunteers shall serve without
compensation.
   Subd. 3.   Identification. Each civil defense volunteer shall be provided
with suitable insignia or other identification as may be required by the
director. Such identification shall be in a form and style approved by the
Federal government. No volunteer shall exercise any authority over the persons
or property of others without his identification. No person, except an
authorized volunteer, shall use the identification of a volunteer or otherwise
represent himself to be an authorized volunteer.
   Subd. 4.   Weapons. No civil defense volunteer shall carry any firearm while
on duty except on written order of the chief of the police department.
   Subd. 5.   Personnel Policies.
Chapter 206 of this code shall not apply to volunteer civil defense workers,
but shall apply to any full-time paid employees of the civil defense agency.
210.06 Emergency Regulations.
   Subd. 1.   Emergency Defined. For purposes of Section
210.06, “civil defense emergency” includes, in addition to the meaning given in
210.02, Subd. 3, disasters caused by fire, flood, windstorm, or other natural
causes.
   Subd. 2.   Declaration by Mayor. Whenever necessary to meet a civil defense
emergency or to prepare for such an emergency for which adequate regulations
have not been adopted by the governor or the council, the mayor may by
proclamation promulgate regulations, consistent with applicable Federal or
state law or regulation, respecting: protection against air-raids; the sounding
of air-raid alarms; the conduct of persons and the use of property during
alarms; the repair, maintenance, and safeguarding of essential public services;
emergency health, fire and safety regulations, trials, drills or practice
periods required for preliminary training; and all other matters which are
required to protect public safety, health, and welfare in civil defense
emergencies. No regulation governing observation of enemy aircraft, air attack,
alarms, or illumination during air attacks shall be adopted or take effect
unless approved by the state director of civil defense.
   Subd. 3.   Emergency Regulations. Every proclamation of emergency
regulations shall be in writing and signed by the mayor, shall be dated, shall
refer to the particular civil defense emergency to which it pertains, if so
limited, and shall be filed in the office of the clerk-treasurer, where a copy
shall be kept posted and available for public inspection during business hours.
Notice of the existence of such regulation and its availability for inspection
at the clerk-treasurer's office shall be conspicuously posted at the front of
the city hall or other headquarters of the city and at such other places in the
affected area as the mayor shall designate in the proclamation. By like
proclamation the mayor shall modify or rescind any such regulation.
   Subd. 4.   Review and Expiration. The council may rescind any such
regulation by resolution at any time. If not sooner rescinded, every such
regulation shall expire at the end of 30 days after its effective date or at
the end of the civil defense emergency to which it relates, whichever occurs
first. Any ordinance, rule or regulation inconsistent with an emergency
regulation promulgated by the mayor shall be suspended during the period of
time and to the extent that such conflict exists.
   Subd. 5.   Emergency Contracts. During a civil defense emergency the city
is, notwithstanding any statutory or charter provision to the contrary,
empowered, through its governing body acting within or without the corporate
limits of the city, to enter into contracts and incur obligations necessary to
combat such disaster by protecting the health and safety of persons and
property, and providing emergency assistance to the victims of such disaster.
The city may exercise such powers in the light of the exigencies of the
disaster without compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities
prescribed by law pertaining to the performance of public work, entering into
contracts, incurring of obligations, employment of temporary workers, rental of
equipment, purchase of supplies and materials, limitations upon tax levies, and
the appropriation and expenditures of public funds including, but not limited
to, publication of ordinances and resolutions, publication of calls for bids,
provisions of civil service laws and rules, provisions relating to tow bids,
and requirements for budgets.
210.07 Financial Provisions.
   Subd. 1.   Accounting. There is hereby established an account in the city
general fund to be known as the civil defense fund. Into this fund shall be
placed the proceeds of taxes levied for civil defense, money transferred from
other funds, gifts and other revenues of the civil defense agency. From it
shall be made expenditures for the operation and maintenance of the civil
defense agency and other expenditures for civil defense. Regular accounting,
disbursement, purchasing, budgeting and other financial procedures of the city
shall apply to the civil defense fund insofar as practicable; but budgeting
requirements and other financial procedures shall not apply to expenditures
from the fund in any case when their application will prevent compliance with
the terms and conditions of any Federal or state grant of money or property for
civil defense purposes.
   Subd. 2.   Reporting. The director shall, as soon as possible after the end
of each fiscal year, prepare and present to the council for the information of
the council and the public, a comprehensive report of the activities of the
civil defense agency during the year.
210.08 Intergovernmental Cooperation.
   Subd. 1.   State and Federal Relations. Every officer and agency of the city
shall cooperate with Federal and state authorities and with authorized agencies
engaged in civil defense and emergency measures to the fullest extent possible
consistent with the performance of their other duties. The provisions of this
chapter and of all regulations made thereunder shall be subject to all
applicable and controlling provisions of Federal and state laws and of
regulations and orders issued thereunder and shall be deemed to be suspended
and inoperative so far as there is any conflict therewith.
   Subd. 2.   Special Police. The council may appoint any qualified person
holding a position in any agency created under Federal or state authority for
civil defense purposes as a special policeman of the city, with such police
duties and powers within the city incident to the functions of his position,
not exceeding those of a regular policeman of the city, as may be prescribed in
the appointment. Every such policeman shall be subject to the supervision and
control of the chief of police and such other police officers of the city as
the chief may designate.
210.09 Prohibited Illumination.
Any illumination within the city contrary to the provisions of this or any
other chapter pertaining to civil defense or of any regulation adopted
thereunder or of any Federal or state law, regulation, or order shall be deemed
a public nuisance. Any regular or auxiliary policeman or air-raid warden may
abate such nuisance summarily or may take any other action necessary to enforce
such provisions, including entry on private property and the use of whatever
reasonable force is necessary.
210.10 Political or Labor Activity.
The civil defense agency shall not participate in any form of political
activity nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for political
purposes, nor shall it be employed in a legitimate labor dispute.
211. Unclaimed Property
211.01 Unclaimed Property defined.
“Unclaimed property” means any money or personal property, except animals and
motor vehicles, lawfully coming into the possession of the city and remaining
unclaimed by the owner.
211.02 Procedure.
   Subd. 1.   General. The designated law enforcement agency shall make a
reasonable and diligent effort to find the owner of any unclaimed property and
restore the same to him.
   Subd. 2.   Motor Vehicles. Abandoned motor vehicles shall be disposed of as
provided by Minnesota Statutes Chapter 168B.
   Subd. 3.   Animals. Abandoned animals shall be disposed of as provided by
Section
501.09, Subd. 4.
211.03 Found Property.
A receipt shall be issued to any person who finds lost or abandoned property or
money and delivers it to the custody of the city. Such person may indicate in
writing that he wishes to assert a claim to such property or money as a finder.
If the finder so indicates, and the property or money remains unclaimed by the
owner for 90 days, the property or money shall be delivered to the finders.
211.04 Perishable or Dangerous Property.
Any unclaimed property which is perishable, or which would lose the greater
part of its value by being retained for 90 days, or which is determined by the
designated law enforcement agency to be dangerous shall be disposed of at the
discretion of the designated law enforcement agency in the manner deemed
appropriate by it.
211.05 Money.
Any money which is not claimed by the owner within 90 days or by a finder
pursuant to
211.03, or which was seized from illegal gambling, shall be deposited in the
city's general fund.
211.06 Property Seized as Evidence.
Any property seized as evidence shall, when no longer needed as evidence,
property returned to the owner, unless otherwise subject to lawful detention.
Such property which is otherwise subject to lawful detention shall be destroyed
or otherwise disposed of as directed by the court.
211.07 Disposal.
   Subd. 1.   City Use. Any unclaimed property for which no other manner of
disposal is provided by
211.01 -
211.06 and which is not claimed by the owner within 90 days may be appropriated
to city use upon approval of such appropriation by the council.
   Subd. 2.   Sale. Any property described in Subdivision 1 which is not
appropriated to city use shall be sold by the designated law enforcement agency
to the highest bidder at public auction. Notice shall be published for two
successive weeks of the time, place, and manner of sale. The notice shall also
describe the property to be sold.
   Subd. 3.   Proceeds. The proceeds from a sale of unclaimed property shall be
deposited in the city general fund. A record shall be made of the sale price of
each item sold, and the sale price shall he paid to the former owner, if claim
is made within six months of the sale and satisfactory proof of ownership is
presented.
   Subd. 4.   Unsold Property. Any unclaimed property remaining unsold after
public auction shall be disposed of as directed by the council.
212. Service, License, and Permit Fees
212.01 Intent.
It is the intent of this chapter to establish a consolidated and uniform
setting of fees for services, licenses and permits. In the event of conflict
between this general fee section and a fee established by a specific chapter,
the later adopted fee shall prevail. (Ordinance 11-01, adopted January 11,
2011)
212.02 Scope.
The following shall be the fees for the licenses, services and permits listed
below:
   (1)   All fees charged to the escrow account, Section
209.03 shall be Administrative City Staff - $60.00 per hour; hourly City Staff
- $35.00 per hour; and all other fees for attorney, engineer, planner and
development consultant shall be the rate currently being charged to the City.
   (2)   Excavation permits Section
301.02 - $100.00
   (3)   Sewer inspections, Section
401.04, Subd. 2 - $30.00
   (4)   Water permit and inspection, section
402.02 (8) -$30.00
   (5)   Utility meter installation fee, Section
402.03, Subd. 4 shall be set by resolution each year $300.
   (6)   Discontinued water service, Section
402.08, Subd. 1 - $50.00
   (7)   Dog licenses, Section
501.06 - neutered or spayed $12.00 every two years, other $18.00 every two
years. This fee will be prorated for persons purchasing their licenses after
July 1st.
   (8)   Dog tags (in the event of loss), Section
501.07 $5.00.
   (9)   Fireworks license - $200, Section
611 Sale of Fireworks.
   (10)   Impoundment of animals, Section
501.09 - $40.00 for first impoundment within twelve months, $50.00 for every
impoundment thereafter within twelve months, plus actual boarding fees and
impoundment costs of the kennel where the animal is kept.
   (11)   Kennel permit fee, Section
501.13 charged annually - $40.00
   (12)   Dance license - $100.00, late fee $10.00, lost application $5.00.
   (13)   Amusement centers and devices, Section
602.05 – one to twelve machines - $60.00; amusement centers $200.00 plus $5.00
per machine; late fee to twelve machines - $6.00; late fee amusement centers
$20.00; lost application $5.00.
   (14)   Large assembly fee - $300.00.
   (15)   Rental Housing License, Section
612 - $25.00 per Single Family home, $ 25.00 per duplex, and $75.00 per
building for buildings with more than 2 units
   (16)   Taxi Cab license, Section
607.06 - $50.00, plus $10.00 investigation fee per driver.
   (17)   Pawn Shops, Pawnbrokers and Secondhand Goods Dealer, Section
608.05 - License Fee - $100.00, Section
608.09, Subd. 2 - Investigation Fee - $250.00.
   (18)   Telecommunication Permit, Section
610.02, Subd. 4 -Permit Fee - $200.00; Lost application - $5.00.
   (19)   Intoxicating Liquor licenses, Section
701.06 – On-Sale $4,200.00, late fee $420.00; (Amended by Ordinance No. 04-02,
passed February 10, 2004,) Off-Sale $100.00, late fee $10.00; Sunday - $200.00,
late fee $20.00; Temporary $40.00, late fee $4.00; lost applications $5.00 per
application. (Amended by Ordinance No. 94-04, passed January 25, 1994.) Liquor
Licenses, Section
701.05, Subd. 1 Investigation Fee - $250.00.
   (20)   3.2 Malt Liquor licenses, Section
701.06 – On-Sale $180.00, late fee $18.00; Off-Sale - $30.00, late fee $3.00;
Sunday $200.00, late fee $20.00. Temporary - $10.00, late fee $1.00. Lost
applications $5.00 per application. Investigation fee $250.00
   (21)   Consumption and display permits, Section
701.06 - $300.00, late fee $30.00, lost application $5.00. Investigation fee
$250.00.
   (22)   Wine Licensing, Section
701.06 - $180.00, late fee $18.00, lost application $5.00. Investigation fee
$250.00.
   (23)   Motorized golf car permit fee, Section
805.02 $10.00 per year.
   (24)   False Alarms - Section 906.03 - $250.00. (Added by Ordinance No. 92-
07, passed March 27, 1992)
   (25)   Garbage Haulers' License Fee, Section 907.06 (3), $100.00 per year,
late fee $5.00, lost application $5.00.
   (26)   Conditional Use Permits/Interim Permits, Section
1001.03, Subd. 5 residential $200.00; commercial/industrial $300.00
   (27)   Mobile home park fees, Section
1001.15, new mobile home park - $500.00, plus $5.00 per lot; initial setting of
mobile home on lot - $50.00; re-inspection - $10.00
   (28)   Variance fee, Section
1001.18, Subd. 3(3) $200.00. (29) Rezoning fee, Section
1001.18, Subd. 5(1)(b) $300.00, Comprehensive Plan Amendment - $300.00.
   (30)   Plat application, Section
1002.04, Subd. 2(1)(e) and Subd. 3(2) - $1,000.00 or $20.00 per acre whichever
is greater, PUD Concept Plan - $300.00, Revised Final Plat Fee - $500.00.
   (31)   Exception to subdivision (lot division/consolidation), Section
1002.08(4) - $500.00
   (32)   Land Alteration Permit Fee, Section
1007 -$200.00
   (33)   Site plan review by Zoning Administrator for new construction -
$300.00
   (34)   Storage Tank Removal Permit, review by City Fire Marshall $100.00
   (35)   Sign Permit Fees, Section
1001.08 Subd. 3 states that sign applications shall be accompanied by a fee the
fee shall be $50.00 per permanent wall or freestanding sign with a value up to
$1,000 and an additional $20.00 per additional $1,000.00 value. A $10.00
temporary fee shall be charged for temporary/portable signs.
   (36)   Street Sweeping $120.00 an hour (minimum of 2 hours).
   (37)   Rental of Wood Chipper $75.00 an hour (minimum of 2 hours)
   (38)   Special Home Occupation License fee $30 Section
1001.09 Subd 14 (Ordinance 11-01, adopted January 11, 2011)
   (39)   Temporary Outdoor Sales Fee, Section
1001.09, Subd. 22 - $25.00
   (40)   Swimming Pool Fee, Section
1001.09, Subd. 8, 9 & 10
      a.   In Ground/Permanent Pools – value based
      b.   Seasonal Pools - $50.00 (Ord. 2012-04, adopted June 26, 2012)
212.03 General License Requirement.
All license applications to operate a business shall provide evidence of
compliance with Minnesota Statutes 176.182. Failure to provide such evidence
shall be grounds for denial of a license and terminate the processing of
application. (Ordinance 11-01, adopted January 11, 2011)
213. Code of Ethics for Council, Board and Commission Members
213.01 Purpose.
The council confirms its determination that ethical standards among its members
and members of the various city boards and commissions are essential to the
proper conduct of municipal public affairs. By eliminating conflicts of
interest and providing a guide for conduct in city matters, the council strives
to promote the faith and confidence of the citizens of the city in their
government. The following standards of conduct are intended to serve as
guidelines for members of the council, boards and commissions in carrying out
their public responsibilities. This policy is in addition to any statutory
requirements, attorney general opinions or court rulings which prescribe
allowable actions for council, board and commission members. (Ordinance No 86-
1, adopted February 10, 1986)
213.02 Standards of Conduct.
   Subd. 1.   No Special Privileges. Council members, or members of any board
or commission, shall not use their positions to secure special privileges or
exemptions for themselves or others or to intentionally jeopardize the position
or employment of others. (Ordinance No 86-1, adopted February 10, 1986)
   Subd. 2.   Conflict of Interest. Council members or members of a board or
commission may not participate in deliberations in any matter before the
council, board or commission which affects that member's financial interests
directly or indirectly or those of a business with which the member is
associated. Whenever such conflict is recognized, the affected members shall
disclose for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote and
disqualify themselves from any further official activity on the issue.
(Ordinance No 86-1, adopted February 10, 1986)
   Subd. 3.   Agent or Attorney. Council members or members of a board or
commission shall not act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter
before the council or any board or commission. (Ordinance No 86-1, adopted
February 10, 1986)
   Subd. 4.   Compensation or Gratuity. Council members or members of a board
or commission shall not directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive,
any compensation, gift, reward or gratuity as an inducement to support or
influence any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of
the office. (Ordinance No 86-1, adopted February 10, 1986)
   Subd. 5.   Active Interest. Any councilmember or member of a board or
commission who is an officer, director, partner, agent, proprietor or employee
of any firm or has a proprietary interest of 10 percent or more in any company,
business, enterprise or corporation, partnership, labor union or association
doing business with the city shall make known that interest in writing as
provided in the disclosure section of this policy. Nothing in this paragraph
shall be construed as authorizing any contract otherwise prohibited by law.
(Ordinance No 86-1, adopted February 10, 1986)
213.03 Disclosures.
No later than thirty (30) days after the date of the adoption of this policy,
existing council, board and commission members shall receive a copy of this
policy and the disclosure form and return the completed form to the city clerk.
Council members elected or appointed subsequent to the date of adoption of this
policy shall no later than thirty (30) days following election or appointment
to office complete the disclosure form and return it to the city clerk. All
subsequent applicants for membership on city boards and commissions shall file
a completed disclosure form together with the application form for board/
commission membership. Within thirty (30) days after the acquisition or sale of
any property, each councilmember or member of a board or commission shall file
as a public record with the city clerk, a list of all real property in the city
owned by such person, that person's spouse, or child, or in which the member
has a beneficial interest, disclosing each individual item held, and by whom.
Homestead shall be excluded from the above disclosure. Each councilmember and
member of a board or commission shall disclose all positions as officer,
director, partner, agent, proprietor or employee of any firm in which such
member has a proprietary interest of 10$ or more in any company, business,
enterprise, corporation, partnership, labor union or association doing business
with the city, and indicate with respect to each such relationship whether
services are gratuitous or for compensation. (Ordinance No 86-1, adopted
February 10, 1986)
213.04 Disclosure Form.
The disclosure information required by this policy shall be set forth on a form
which shall be made available by the city clerk. (Ordinance No 86-1, adopted
February 10, 1986)
213.05 Discipline.
Upon the signed written complaint of any person questioning adherence to this
policy or on the council's own volition, the council shall refer the matter to
the city attorney for investigation and the city attorney shall report the
results of his investigation to the council within forty-five (45) days
thereafter. A copy of such report shall be furnished to the person complained
against. Such person may request a hearing on this matter before the council,
which request shall be filed with the city clerk not later than ten (10) days
following receipt by such person of the city attorney's report.
Upon receipt of the city attorney's report and at the conclusion of any hearing
on the matter, the council, by majority vote, may dismiss the complaint as
having no merit, may adopt a resolution of censure, or with respect to members
of advisory boards and commissions, the council may remove a member from such
board or commission. In the event the complaint is against a member of the
council, such member shall not participate in the council's deliberations or
vote with respect thereto. (Ordinance No 86-1, adopted February 10, 1986)
214. Workers Compensation
214.01 Coverage.
Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Section 175.011, subdivision 9, clause 5, the
elected officials of the city and those municipal officers appointed for a
regular term of office, members of the Planning and Zoning Commission, members
of the Park and Recreation commission, members of the Police Advisory
Committee, and members of a council appointed committee if so designated when
appointed are hereby included in the coverage of the Minnesota Workers
Compensation Act. (Ordinance No. 91-05, adopted July 9, 1991)
300 Public Property and Improvements
301. Excavation of Streets
301.01. Permit Required.
No person shall dig or cause any digging to be done on any public street or
alley without first securing a permit therefore as herein provided.
301.02. Procedure.
Any person desiring to dig or to cause any digging to be done on any public
street or alley shall file with the administrator an application describing the
proposed project, its beginning, course, terminus and depth of such streets or
alleys. If the proposed digging project appears to comply with the ordinances
of the city and the law, the administrator shall forthwith issue a permit
therefore which shall authorize the proposed digging project to begin twenty-
four hours thereafter. The applicant shall be responsible for contacting Gopher
State One Call to obtain locations of any underground utilities prior to
beginning the project. No such digging shall unlawfully interfere with any
existing utility. A fee shall be charged per
Chapter 212, Subd. 2. (Ord. No. 00-02 adopted April 24, 2000)
301.03. Insurance.
No permit shall be issued pursuant to this section unless the applicant shall
provide proof of liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000 per person and
$1,000,000 per incident; and $1,000,000 for property damage. (Ord. No. 00-02
adopted April 24, 2000.)
302. Parks
302.01. Reservations.
   Subd. 1.   Riverside Park and Lions Shelter. The city park and shelter are
intended to be available for use by the general public. Reservations for use of
the Lions' Shelter may be made through the clerk/treasurer or designee and
shall be granted in the order received. The reservation of the Lions' Shelter
shall not prohibit any other person from using park facilities other than the
shelter during the same period as the reservation period.
   (1)   The Council shall, by resolution, establish rental rates for the park
shelter. The Council may, by majority vote, waive rent for the shelter for any
charitable, civic, fraternal, religious, scientific, public safety, literary,
educational, or other similar organizations. The City and its various
departments shall not be required to pay rent for the shelter.
   (2)   The Council shall, by resolution, establish a reasonable damage
deposit for the shelter. If no deposit is established then the damage deposit
shall be $100.00. The Council may, by majority vote, waive damage deposit for
the shelter for any charitable, civic, fraternal, religious, scientific, public
safety, literary, educational, or other similar organizations. The City and its
various departments shall not be required to pay damage deposit for the
shelter. If the shelter is left by the user in a clean undamaged condition,
then the deposit shall be returned; otherwise the cost of cleaning and repairs
shall be deducted from the deposit and the remainder shall be returned to the
user. If the cost of cleaning and repair exceeds the deposit, the person or
organization which reserved the center shall pay the City the excess cost.
   (3)   The City may refuse to rent the shelter to any person or organization
that has previously damaged the shelter, refused to pay for damage or cleaning,
or violated any section or provision of the City Code or Minnesota Statute by
or during the use of the shelter.
   (4)   It is the intent of this section that the use of the shelter and
Riverside Park be provided as equally and equitably as possible for the benefit
of people in our community. It is understood that private rentals of the park
shelter, or other facilities in the City's parks, inherently excludes use by
other members of the public. Shelter rentals extending beyond two consecutive
calendar days or of a reoccurring nature are generally disfavored and shall
require approval by majority vote of the Council. Considerations for approval
shall include the nature of the requested prolonged or reoccurring use; any
public benefit provided by requested use; the duration, frequency and length of
the requested use; and, any burden the reoccurring or length of requested use
places on the community by losing shelter availability for those days, dates or
periods of time. Current reoccurring uses, including the meetings of the
Rockford Lions, River Days Community Event, Rocktoberfest Community Event,
1,000 Hearts Serve Day, and other related uses are examples of reoccurring uses
that are supported by this section.
   Subd. 2.   Gazebo Rental. The City Council shall by resolution establish
rental rates for the gazebo. The Council may, by majority vote, waive rent for
the gazebo for any charitable, civic, fraternal, religious, scientific, public
safety, literary, educational or other similar organizations. The City and its
various departments shall not be required to pay rent for the gazebo. The
Council shall also establish a reasonable damage deposit for the gazebo.
   Subd. 3.   Other Park Feature Rentals. Features in Rockford parks; including
the hockey rink, baseball fields, basketball courts and volleyball courts, are
intended to be available for use by the general public. Reservations for the
private use of any of these facilities is generally disfavored, but may be
approved by majority vote of the City Council. The reservation of any park
facilities shall not prohibit any other person from using any park facilities
other than the reserved facility during the same period as the reservation
period.
   (1)   The Council shall, by resolution, establish rental rates for the
facilities within Rockford parks. The Council may, by majority vote, waive rent
for the shelter for any charitable, civic, fraternal, religious, scientific,
public safety, literary, educational, or other similar organizations. The City
and its various departments shall not be required to pay rent for use of park
facilities.
   (2)   The Council shall, by resolution, establish a reasonable damage
deposit for the use of park facilities. If no deposit is established then the
damage deposit shall be $100.00. The Council may, by majority vote, waive
damage deposit for facilities for any charitable, civic, fraternal, religious,
scientific, public safety, literary, educational, or other similar
organizations. The City and its various departments shall not be required to
pay damage deposit for park facilities. If the facilities are left by the user
in a clean undamaged condition, then the deposit shall be returned; otherwise
the cost of cleaning and repairs shall be deducted from the deposit and the
remainder shall be returned to the user. If the cost of cleaning and repair
exceeds the deposit, the person or organization which reserved the facilities
shall pay the city the excess cost.
   (3)   Park facility rentals are generally disfavored and shall require
approval by majority vote of the Council. Considerations for approval shall
include the nature of the requested use; any public benefit provided by
requested use; the duration, frequency and length of the requested use; and,
any burden the reoccurring or length of requested use places on the community
by losing park facility availability for those days, dates or periods of time.
Current reoccurring uses, including the River Days Community Event,
Rocktoberfest Community Event, Delano Area Youth Hockey Association practices
once per week, Delano Area High School Hockey Annual Outdoor Practice, and
other related uses are examples of reoccurring uses that are supported by this
section.
(Ord. 00-01, adopted April 24, 2000; Ord. 23-01, adopted February 14, 2023)
302.02. Regulations.
   Subd. 1.   Overnight Use. The city park shall not be used or occupied
between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day. Overnight camping or
parking is prohibited. The shelter may be used until midnight of the day for
which it is reserved. The Council may allow the shelter to be used after
midnight by permit granted upon such reasonable conditions relating to health,
safety, and welfare as the Council shall determine. Violation of such
conditions shall be a misdemeanor, and shall be cause for refusal to rent to
the organization or person on subsequent occasions. (Ord. 90-12, adopted
November 13, 1990; Ord. 23-01, adopted February 14, 2023)
   Subd. 2.   Vandalism. No person shall remove, break, destroy, injure,
mutilate, deface or damage in any way any structure, monument, statue, vase,
fountain, fence, railing, flag pole, vehicle, bench, tree, shrub, fern, plant,
flower, fireplace, or other property in the park.
   Subd. 3.   Noise. Noises or obnoxious behavior reasonably tending to annoy
other persons within or without the park is prohibited.
   Subd. 4.   Motorized Vehicles Prohibited. No person unless engaged in
official city business or otherwise specifically authorized by the city
administrator shall operate a motorized vehicle in any park or open space
within the city. (Ord. 85-4, adopted May 28, 1985)
   Subd. 5.   Park Rules. The following rules shall apply to person’s using all
of the City’s Parks. Hours are 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
   (1)   Please keep park grounds clean.
    (2)   No loud music.
   (3)   No motorized vehicles.
   (4)   No overnight camping.
   (5)   Snowmobiles prohibited.
   (6)   No parking on grass or trailways.
   (7)   Leash and clean up after your dog.
   (8)   The City is not responsible for personal injury or lost, stolen or
damaged items.
(Ord. #03-09, adopted November 10, 2003; Ord. 23-01, adopted February 14, 2023)
303 Special Assessment Policy
303.01. General Policy and Intent.
The purpose of this policy is to establish a fair and equitable manner of
assessing the cost of applicable public improvement projects and / or other
costs available for special assessment as provided herein, and ensuring that
the assessments associated with public improvements are properly correlated
with the special benefits provided to their subject properties. The procedures
used by the City for levying special assessments are those specified by
Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 429, which provide that all or a part of the
project cost of improvements and / or other costs as enumerated therein may be
assessed against benefiting properties.
Generally, three basic criteria must be satisfied before a particular parcel
can be assessed for project costs. The criteria are as follows:
   ∙    The land must have received special benefit from the improvement; and
   ∙    The amount of the assessment must not exceed the special benefit; and
   ∙    The assessment must be uniform in relation to the same class of
property within the assessment area.
As it relates to public improvement projects, it is important to recognize that
the actual cost of extending an improvement past a particular parcel is not the
controlling factor in determining the amount to be assessed. However, in most
cases the method for assigning the value of the benefit received by the
improvement, and therefore the amount to be assessed, shall be the cost of
providing the improvement. This shall be true provided the cost does not
demonstrably exceed the increase in the special benefit, typically calculated
as the increase in market value, of the property being assessed. The entire
project shall be considered as a whole for the purpose of calculating and
computing an assessment rate. The City Council or city staff may acquire a
market value analysis or various appraisals of a subject property as may be
necessary to support the proposed assessment.
On that basis, this assessment policy is intended to serve as a guide for a
systematic assessment process in the City. There may be exceptions to the
policy or unique circumstances or situations which may require special
consideration, variation and discretion by city staff and the City Council.
Therefore, city staff and the City Council may vary from the provisions of this
policy and Ordinance when such unique circumstances or situations require and /
or special considerations are present and support a different equitable
determination. (Ordinance 17-05, adopted March 14, 2017)
303.02. Public Improvements Eligible For Special Assessment.
The following public improvements and related acquisitions, construction,
extensions, and maintenance of such improvements, authorized by Minn. Stat. §
429.021 and Minn. Stat. §459.14, Subd. 7, are eligible for special assessment
within the City:
   Subd. 1.   To acquire, open, and widen any street, and to improve the same
by constructing, reconstructing, and maintaining sidewalks, pavement, gutters,
curbs, and vehicle parking strips of any material, or by grading, graveling,
oiling, or otherwise improving the same, including the beautification thereof
and including storm sewers or other street drainage and connections from sewer,
water, or similar mains to curb lines.
   Subd. 2.   To acquire, develop, construct, reconstruct, extend, and maintain
storm and sanitary sewers and systems, including outlets, holding areas and
ponds, treatment plants, pumps, lift stations, service connections, and other
appurtenances of a sewer system, within and outside the corporate limits;
   Subd. 3.   To construct, reconstruct, extend, and maintain steam heating
mains;
   Subd. 4.   To install, replace, extend, and maintain street lights and
street lighting systems and special lighting systems;
   Subd. 5.   To acquire, improve, construct, reconstruct, extend, and maintain
water works systems, including mains, valves, hydrants, service connections,
wells, pumps, reservoirs, tanks, treatment plants, and other appurtenances of a
water works system, within and without the corporate limits;
   Subd. 6.   To acquire, improve and equip parks, open space areas,
playgrounds, and recreational facilities within or without the corporate
limits;
   Subd. 7.   To plant trees on streets and provide for their trimming, care,
and removal;
   Subd. 8.   To abate nuisances and to drain swamps, marshes, and ponds on
public or private property and to fill the same;
   Subd. 9.   To construct, reconstruct, extend, and maintain dikes and other
flood control works;
   Subd. 10.    To construct, reconstruct, extend, and maintain retaining walls
and area walls;
   Subd. 11.   To acquire, construct, reconstruct, improve, alter, extend,
operate, maintain, and promote a pedestrian skyway system. Such improvement may
be made upon a petition pursuant to Minn. Stat. §429.031, Subd. 3.
   Subd. 12.   To acquire, construct, reconstruct, extend, operate, maintain,
and promote underground pedestrian concourses;
   Subd. 13.   To acquire, construct, improve, alter, extend, operate,
maintain, and promote public malls, plazas or courtyards;
   Subd. 14.   To construct, reconstruct, extend, and maintain district heating
systems;
   Subd. 15.   To construct, reconstruct, alter, extend, operate, maintain, and
promote fire protection systems in existing buildings, but only upon a petition
pursuant to Minn. Stat. §429,031, Subd. 3.
   Subd. 16.   To acquire, construct, reconstruct, improve, alter, extend, and
maintain highway sound barriers;
   Subd. 17.   To improve, construct, reconstruct, extend, and maintain gas and
electric distribution facilities owned by a municipal gas or electric utility;
   Subd. 18.   To purchase, install, and maintain signs, posts, and other
markers for addressing related to the operation of enhanced 911 telephone
service;
   Subd. 19.   To improve, construct, extend, and maintain facilities for
Internet access and other communications purposes, if the council finds that:
   (1)   the facilities are necessary to make available Internet access or
other communications services that are not and will not be available through
other providers or the private market in the reasonably foreseeable future; and
   (2)   the service to be provided by the facilities will not compete with
service provided by private entities;
   Subd. 20.   To assess affected property owners for all or a portion of the
costs agreed to with an electric utility, telecommunications carrier, or cable
system operator to bury or alter a new or existing distribution system within
the public right-of-way that exceeds the utility's design and construction
standards, or those set by law, tariff, or franchise, but only upon petition
under Minn. Stat. §429.031, Subd. 3.
   Subd. 21.   To assess affected property owners for repayment of voluntary
energy improvement financings under Minn. Stat. § 216C.436, Subd. 7. (Ordinance
17-05, adopted March 14, 2017)
303.03. Initiation of Public Improvement and Maintenance Projects.
Public improvement projects can be initiated in the City of Rockford in any of
the following ways:
   Subd. 1.   Public improvement projects may be initiated by petition of
owners of at least thirty-five (35%) percent in frontage of the property
abutting the proposed improvement;
   Subd. 2.   Public improvements also may be initiated by the City Council
when, in its judgment, such action is required.
   Subd. 3.   Pursuant to Minn. Stat. §429.031(f), a resolution ordering any
improvements initiated by the Council or by owners of less than thirty-five
(35%) percent of abutting property owners requires a four-fifths majority vote
of all members of the City Council. A resolution ordering any improvements
initiated by thirty-five (35%) percent or greater percentage of abutting
property owners requires a simple majority vote of all members of the City
Council. A resolution ordering any improvements initiated by all owners of
abutting property, and assessing the entire cost against their property, may be
adopted without a public hearing. The City Council may also consider the
request of a Developer to construct the improvements and assess the project
cost against the Developer’s property. (Ordinance 17-05, adopted March 14,
2017)
303.04. Public Improvement Procedure.
The following is the general procedure followed by the City Council for all
public improvement projects from initiation of such a project through
certification of the assessment roll to the County Auditor.
   Subd. 1.   Staff reviews property owner’s petition or Developer’s request
for submission to the City Council, if applicable.
   (1)   City Council accepts or rejects petition or request, if applicable.
   (2)   If based upon a petition, the City Council adopts a resolution
declaring whether the required percentage of property owners has signed.
   (3)   If the petition or request is accepted, the City Council may, at its
sole discretion, order preparation of feasibility report.
   Subd. 2.   Staff prepares feasibility report or memorandum regarding project
to be assessed. The report or memorandum shall preliminary evaluate whether the
proposed improvement is necessary, cost-effective, and feasible; and whether it
should be made as proposed or in conjunction with another project. The report
shall include an estimate of the cost of the improvement as proposed. The City
Council, at its sole discretion, may refer the report to the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
   Subd. 3.   City Council accepts or rejects feasibility report or Memorandum.
If accepted, the City Council orders public hearing on the improvements to be
assessed.
   Subd. 4.   Staff posts and publishes hearing notice and mails notices to
affected property owners as provided in Minn. Stat. §429.031(a).
   Subd. 5.   City Council holds public hearing.
   Subd. 6.   Within six (6) months of the hearing date, the City Council
adopts or rejects resolution ordering improvement to be constructed and
advertisement of bids, if necessary. If adopted, staff prepares final plans,
advertises for and opens bids as provided in Minn. Stat. §429.041, prepares bid
tabulation, makes recommendation to City Council for award, and prepares
proposed assessment roll. Bonds to finance project costs may be issued at any
time after the improvements are ordered.
   Subd. 7.   City Council reviews proposed assessment roll and orders
assessment hearing.
   Subd. 8.   Staff publishes hearing notice, mails notice of hearing date and
proposed assessments to the affected property owners as provided in Minn. Stat.
§429.061.
   Subd. 9.   City Council conducts assessment hearing and adopts, revises, or
rejects resolution determining the amount of the total expense the City will
pay, if any, and establishing the assessment roll. If adopted, City Council
authorizes certification of the assessment to the County Auditor.
   Subd. 10.   City Council awards contract based on the bids received.
   Subd. 11.   Staff certifies the assessment roll to the County Auditor.
   Subd. 12.   Staff supervises construction and prepares payments. (Ordinance
17-05, adopted March 14, 2017)
303.05. Financing Public Improvements.
The City encourages public improvement projects as the area or areas benefiting
and needing such improvements develop. Examples of this policy can be seen
through the subdivision regulations, zoning ordinance, and building codes; as
well as the general policy of the City Council. Developers are required to
provide the needed improvements and services before development occurs, thereby
avoiding unexpected hardships on the property owners purchasing such property
and the general public. However, it is recognized that certain areas of the
City have developed without all needed public improvements; including, but not
limited to parks, water, sewer, and street improvements, and that methods must
be found to provide these improvements without causing undue hardships on the
general public or the individual property owner.
Special assessments are generally accepted as a means by which areas can obtain
improvements or services; however, the method of financing these is a critical
factor to both the City and the property owner. Full project costs spread over
a very short term can cause an undue hardship on the property owner and,
likewise, City costs and systems costs spread over a long period of time can
produce and undue hardship on the general public of the City.
It is therefore the policy of the City not to defer assessments except in cases
where hardship to subject property owners meets the criteria established in
Section
303.11 entitled “Deferment of Special Assessments.” Additionally, the City
Council, at its sole discretion, may elect to defer assessments on undeveloped
land for a specified length of time or until the lands are developed. The terms
and conditions of any such deferral will be established in the resolution
adopting the assessments. (Ordinance 17-05, adopted March 14, 2017)
303.06. General Assessment policies Applicable to All Types of Improvements.
The cost of any improvement shall be assessed upon the subject property by the
improvements based upon the special benefits received by and / or related to
the improvement. The following general principles shall be used as a basis for
this policy:
   Subd. 1.   Project Cost. The “project cost” of an improvement includes the
costs of all necessary construction work required to accomplish the
improvement, plus engineering, legal, administrative, financing and other
contingent costs, including acquisition of right-of-way and other property. The
finance charges include all costs of financing the project. These costs
include, but are not limited to, financial consultant fees, bond rating agency
fees, bond attorney fees, and capitalized interest. The interest charged to the
project shall be included as financing charges.
   Subd. 2.   City Cost. The “city cost” of an improvement is the amount of the
total improvement expense the City will pay as determined by City Council
resolution. Where the project cost of an improvement is not entirely attributed
to the need for service to the area served by the improvement, or where unusual
conditions beyond the control of the owners of the property in the area served
by the improvement would result would result in an inequitable distribution of
special assessments, or for any other reason determined by the City Council,
the city, through the use of other funds, may pay such “City cost.”
   Subd. 3.   Assessable Cost. The “assessable cost” of an improvement is equal
to the “project cost” minus the “City cost.”
   Subd. 4.   Interest. The city will charge interest on special assessments at
a rate specified in the resolution approving the assessment roll. If bonds were
sold to finance the improvement project, the interest rate shall be two (2%)
percent more than the average interest rate of the bonds, rounded to the
nearest quarter of a percent. If no bonds were sold, the interest rate shall be
set at the rate established by resolution.
   Subd. 5.   Prepayment. Property owners may pay their assessments in full
interest free for a period of thirty (30) days after the assessment hearing.
After such period, interest shall be computed from the date specified in the
assessment resolution. The City will transmit a certified duplicate of the
assessment roll with each installment, including interest, to the County
Auditor, or in lieu of such certification, annually certify to the County
Auditor by November 30 in each year, the total number of installments of, and
interest on, assessments on each parcel which are to become due and payable in
the following year. Prior to certification of principal and interest or the
first installment thereof to the County Auditor, a property owner may make a
partial prepayment of the principal of the assessment to the City. Such partial
prepayment must be at least one hundred ($100.00) dollars. If the partial
prepayment is made after the thirty (30) day “interest free” period allowed by
State law, interest will be charged on the amount of the partial prepayment
from the date specified in the resolution and paid along with the partial
prepayment. After the City has made the first certification of principal and
interest to the County Auditor, prepayment to reduce the principle will be
accepted, but such payment must be in excess of the existing principle and
interest of the assessment due and owned, and also must be made prior to
November 15 of any given year. If a parcel has two or more separate special
assessments, prepayment of the remaining principal balance may be made on one
or more assessment totals. The remaining principal, after the partial
prepayment, will be paid in equal installments over the remaining term of the
special assessments.
   Subd. 6.   Project Extensions Beyond Initial Benefit Area. Where an
improvement is designed for service of an area beyond that receiving the
initial benefit, the City may pay for increased project costs due to such
provisions for future service extensions. At the sole discretion of the City
Council, the City may either levy assessments to cover this cost when a new
improvement is installed as an extension of the existing improvement upon
identification of such additional amount in the notice of hearing for the
extensions or new improvements; or, the City may assess these costs to the area
of future benefit immediately.
   Subd. 7.   Frontage Roads. Because frontage roads along highways or other
arterial streets are deemed to be of benefit to commercial or industrial
properties, the entire costs of any improvement on such frontage roads shall be
assessable to the benefited properties, even if only those properties on one
side of such frontage roads are benefited.
   Subd. 8.   Project Assistance. If the City receives financial assistance
from the Federal Government, the State of Minnesota, the County, or from any
other source to defray a portion of the costs of a given assessable
improvement, such aid will be used first to reduce the “City cost” of the
improvement. If the financial assistance received is greater than the “City
cost,” the remainder of the aid will be placed in the Capital Improvement Fund
to be applied towards other city projects.
   Subd. 9.   Assessable Property. All parcels of property, including property
owned by the City, governmental entities, churches and property-tax exempt
organizations; but not including public streets, alleys, and right-of-way,
shall be regarded as being assessable on the same basis as if such property was
privately owned. Private rights-of-way shall also be assessable.
   Subd. 10.   Individual Benefits. If the City constructs improvements
specifically designed for, or shown to be, of benefit solely to one or more
properties (ex: utility service lateral lines) the costs for these improvements
will be assessed directly to such properties and not included in the
assessments for the remainder of the project.
   Subd. 11.   Benefit Appraisals. In the event that city staff or the City
Council has concern as to whether or not the proposed assessments exceed the
special benefits to the property in question, the City Council may order
benefit appraisals as deemed necessary to support the proposed assessments. As
a general rule, benefit appraisals may be ordered when the proposed assessment
exceeds five thousand ($5,000) dollars for a standard City reconstruction on a
residential lot or twenty thousand ($20,000) dollars per acre for commercial or
industrial property.
   Subd. 12.   Condemnation Awards. A property owner may elect to offset
special assessments against condemnation awards. In such case, the property
owner must execute an agreement (Net Assessment Agreement) with the City
Council. (Ordinance 17-05, adopted March 14, 2017)
303.07. Methods of Assessment.
   Subd. 1.   General Statement. There are several different methods of
assessment: per lot, adjusted front foot, area, and a combination of various
aspects of these. The feasibility report will recommend one or a combination of
these methods for each project, based upon which method would best reflect the
benefit received for the area to be assessed. The City Council will select the
preferred method of calculating the assessments at the time the project is
ordered.
   Subd. 2.   Policy Statement. The following methods of assessment, as
described and defined below, are hereby established as methods of assessment in
the City.
   (1)   Adjusted Front Footage Method. The “cost per adjusted front foot”
method of assessment shall be based on the quotient of the “assessable cost”
divided by the total assessable frontage benefiting from the improvement. For
the purpose of determining the “assessable frontage,” all properties, including
governmental agencies, shall have their frontages as provided in this chapter
included in such calculation.
The actual physical dimensions of a parcel abutting an improvement (i.e.,
street, sewer, water, etc.) shall not be construed as the frontage utilized to
calculate the assessment for a particular parcel. Rather, and “adjusted front
footage” will be determined. The purpose of this method is to equalize
assessment calculations for lots of similar size. Individual parcels by their
very nature differ considerably in shape and area. The following procedures
will apply when calculating adjusted front footage. The selection of the
appropriate procedure will be determined by the specified configuration of the
parcel. All measurements will be scaled from available plat and section maps
and will be rounded down to the nearest foot dimension with any excess fraction
deleted.
      (a)   Standard or Rectangular Interior Lots. The standard or rectangular
lot is defined as having no more than two (2) feet difference between the front
and rear lot lines. The adjusted front footage is the actual front footage of
the lot. For rectangular lots whose frontage is greater than its depth, the
“odd shaped lot” method shall be used.
      (b)   Odd Shaped Lots. For odd shaped lots where there is more than two
(2) feet of difference between the front and rear lot lines, and where the lots
frontage is greater than its depth, the “odd shaped lot” method of determining
the adjusted front footage may be used. The adjusted front footage shall be
computed by dividing the area of the lot by twelve thousand (12,000) square
feet to determine the equivalent number of front footage units in the parcel.
The number of units multiplied by sixty-five (65) feet will give the adjusted
front footage.
      (c)   Corner Lot Adjustment. For street and trail assessments, the short
side will be assessed the actual front footage. The long side will be assessed
one-half the actual side footage or seventy-five (75) feet, whichever is
greater. Sanitary sewer and watermain will only be assessed on the short side
of a corner lot.
      (d)   Other lots: If a lot exists that falls outside of these three
designations, or if any lot is inequitably burdened by application of any of
the three designations above, the City may designate which of the above
categories is best suited for the lot in question, or the city can create an
equitable combination of the designations above upon determination by the City
Council that such newly created calculation is best equitably suited for the
lot.
      (e)   Zonal Assessment. When the street along the long side of a corner
lot is improved, the cost shall be assessed equally to all lots within one-half
block in each direction of the street improved. At the sole discretion of the
City Council, this method may be selected rather than the corner lot adjusted.
   (2)   Area Method of Assessment. The “area” method of assessment shall be
based on the number of square feet or acres within the boundaries of the
appropriate property lines of the areas benefiting from the project. The
assessment rate (i.e., cost per square foot) shall be calculated by dividing
the total assessable cost by the total assessable area. On large lots, city
staff may determine that only a portion of the lots receives the benefit and my
select a lot depth for the calculations equal to the benefit received. The
following items may not be included in area calculations: public rights-of-ways
and natural waterways, swamps and lakes and other wetlands designated by the
Minnesota Department of Natural Resources or the City. City staff will make a
recommendation on the boundaries or parameters of the benefited area in the
feasibility report.
   (3)    Per Lot Method of Assessment. The “per lot” method of assessment
shall be based on equal assessment of all lots within the benefited area. The
“assessment per lot” shall be the quotient of the “assessable cost” divided by
the total assessable lots or parcels benefiting from the improvement.
(Ordinance 17-05, adopted March 14, 2017)
303.08. Standards for Public Improvement Projects.
The following standards are hereby established by the city to provide a uniform
guide for improvements within the City.
   Subd. 1.   Surface Improvements. Surface improvements shall normally include
all improvements visible on or above the ground within the right-of-way, and
includes, but is not limited to trees, lighting, sidewalks, signing; street and
accessory improvements including, but not limited to, storm water drainage
ponds and facilities, parking lots, parks and playgrounds.
Policy Statement. Prior to construction or completion of surface improvements,
all utilities and utility service lines including, but not limited to, sanitary
sewers, storm sewers, water and sewer laterals, gas and electric service should
be installed to all planned service locations such as residences or buildings.
When practicable, no surface improvements to less than both sides of a full
block of street shall be approved unless found otherwise at the discretion of
the City Council. Concrete curbing or curb and gutter should be installed at
the same time as street surfacing.
   Subd. 2.   Sub-Surface Improvements. Subsurface improvements shall normally
include, but are not limited to, such items as water distribution, sanitary
sewer and storm sewers and lines, catch basins and electric and gas utilities.
Main lines are publicly owned and maintained lines or facilities such as trunk
lines, interceptors, mains, and laterals. Service lines are those privately
owned lines or facilities extending from the main line to the property line.
Policy Statement. Sub-surface improvements shall be made to serve current and
projected land use. All installations shall conform to applicable standards
established by local, state and/or federal agencies of competent jurisdiction.
Service lines from the lateral or trunk to the property line of all planned
service locations such as residences or buildings should be installed in
conjunction with the construction of the mains. (Ordinance 17-05, adopted March
14, 2017)
303.09. Public Improvement Service Life / Life Expectancy. 
The City shall design public improvements to last for a definite period of
time. The life expectancy or service life shall be as stated in the policy
statement of this section, or if different, shall be as established or updated
in the City’s Capital Improvement Plan or similar document, or as stated in the
resolution ordering improvement and preparation of plans.
   Subd. 1.   Policy Statement. The following are general guidelines for the
“life expectancies” or “service lives” of public improvements except as may be
otherwise stated in the resolution ordering improvement and preparation of
plans, or as established or updated in the city’s Capital Improvement Plan:
   (1)   Sidewalks:   20 years
   (2)   Street improvements, including surfacing and curb and gutter: 20 years
   (3)   Ornamental street lighting: 20 years
   (4)   Water Mains: 20 years
   (5)   Sanitary Sewers: 30 years
   (6)   Storm Sewers: 30 years
   Subd. 2.   It is both intended and understood that these are general
guidelines for the service life or life expectancy of these public
improvements. The specific condition of each improvement may change or deviate
from these stated durations, and the City shall reconstruct or replace these
improvements based upon actual conditions if those differ from the stated
service life or life expectancy. (Ordinance 17-05, adopted March 14, 2017)
303.10. Project Cost Assessment Computations.
The following is the typical City assessment for various specified
improvements.
   Subd. 1.   Street and Curb and Gutter Improvements.
   (1)   New Constructions. New streets are assessed one hundred (100%) percent
to the abutting benefited properties. Street, curb and gutter improvements will
normally be assessed by the adjusted front foot method, however other methods
may be utilized if conditions or equities warrant deviation as determined at
the sole discretion of the City Council. The cost of street construction should
be assessed based on the minimum design of seven (7) ton axle load in
residential areas and nine (9) ton axle load in commercial and industrial
areas. Oversizing costs which are incurred in excess of the above may be paid
by state funds, larger assessment rates to other benefited properties, general
obligation funds, or any other method or combination of methods authorized by
the City Council.
   (2)   Reconstruction and Overlays. Street reconstructions and overlays are
assessed thirty (30%) percent to the abutting benefited properties. New curb
and gutter are one hundred (100%) percent assessed.
   (3)   Gravel Streets. Upgrading of existing gravel street by adding
pavement, curb and gutter is considered new construction and all costs are
assessed one hundred (100%) percent.
   (4)   Seal Coating.    Normal costs associated with seal coating are not
assessable.
   (5)   Alleys. Upgrading existing gravel alleys by adding pavement is
assessed one hundred (100%) percent to all lots abutting on the alley in the
block being improved. Reconstructing existing paved alleys are also one hundred
(100%) percent assessed.
   Subd. 2.   Sidewalks and Trails
   (1)   New Construction. New sidewalks are assessed one hundred (100%)
percent to the abutting lots on which the sidewalk is located.
   (2)   Reconstruction. Replacement of sidewalks are assessed fifty (50%)
percent to the abutting lots.
   (3)   Trails. Bituminous walkways and/or bicycle trail expenses are
generally not assessed. New subdivisions are generally assessed one hundred
(100%) percent for bituminous walkways/bicycle trails constructed in those
subdivisions.
   Subd. 3.   Storm Sewer Improvements. Storm sewers may be assessed on a
project-by-project basis. Storm sewers in new subdivisions are generally
considered as an assessable improvement on an area basis.
Oversizing costs due to larger mains and larger appurtenances may be paid by a
combination of availability charges, user charges and/or trunk area assessment
charges. Trunk area storm sewer charges may be levied to all unplatted property
at the time of platting, to re-plats that have not been charged trunk area
charges when the land was originally platted, and to re-plats that have been
charged trunk area charges when the land was originally platted but where the
use is increasing; however, in this instance only the cost difference based on
current and prior use is charged. These charges will be set annually by City
Council in the City’s established fee schedule.
Normally, storm sewers are assessed on an area wide basis (square foot or
acres), but in certain situations the per lot method, adjusted front foot
method or modified method may be utilized at the City Council’s discretion.
The replacement of existing storm sewers is assessed thirty (30%) percent.
   Subd. 4.   Sanitary Sewer Assessments Assessments for sanitary sewer in
residential areas are based upon the cost of construction of eight (8) inch
mains, which is the smallest size installed in residential areas of the City.
Assessments for sanitary sewers in commercial and industrial areas are based
upon a standard size of twelve (12) inch mains.
Oversizing costs due to larger mains and larger appurtenances may be paid for
by a combination of availability charges, user charges and/or trunk area
assessment charges. Trunk area sanitary sewer charges shall be levied to all
un-platted property at the time of platting and to re-plats that have not been
charged trunk area charges when the land was originally platted. These charges
will be set annually by City Council in the City’s established fee schedule.
Services installed to individual properties are fully assessed to the
benefiting property.
Normally, sanitary sewers are assessed on an area wide basis (square foot or
acres), but in certain situations the per lot method or adjusted front method
may be utilized at the City Council’s discretion.
Lateral benefit from major trunk sewers or interceptors is assessed to the
properties benefited by the sewer. Any oversizing cost is assessed as described
above.
The replacement of existing sewer mains may be assessed thirty (30%) percent.
Individual service lines installed directly to specified properties are fully
assessed directly to the benefited properties. Properties that have existing
sanitary services, but do not have mainline sewers adjacent, across or up to
their property lines pay fifty (50%) percent of the assessment rate for the new
mainline sanitary sewer as well as one hundred (100%) percent of the cost
associated with replacing the service lines.
Any existing service lines found to be defective as part of a street
reconstruction are replaced as part of the project and assessed directly to the
property.
   Subd. 5.   Watermain Assessments. Assessments for watermains in residential
areas are based upon the cost of construction of eight (8) inch mains, which is
the smallest size installed in residential areas of the City. Assessments for
watermains in commercial and industrial areas are based upon the standard size
of twelve (12) inch mains.
Oversizing costs due to larger mains and larger appurtenance may paid for by a
combination of availability charges, user charges and/or trunk area assessment
charges. Trunk area water charges shall be levied to all un-platted property at
the time of platting and to re-plats that have not been charged trunk area
charges when the land was originally platted. These charges will be set
annually by City Council in the City’s established fee schedule. Services
installed to individual properties shall be fully assessed to the benefiting
property.
Normally, watermains are assessed on a per lot basis, but in certain situations
the area, adjusted front method, or modified method may be utilized at the City
Council’s discretion.
The replacement of existing watermains is assessed thirty (30%) percent.
Lateral benefit from major trunk water mains is assessed to properties
benefited by the water main. Lateral water main assessments are be based on the
costs for an equivalent 8’’ diameter water main for residential properties and
for an equivalent twelve (12) inch diameter water main for residential
properties and for an equivalent twelve (12) inch diameter water main for
commercial/industrial properties.
Individual service lines installed directly to specified properties are fully
assessed directly to the benefited properties. Properties that have existing
water services, but do not have mainline watermains adjacent, across or up to
their property lines pay fifty (50%) percent of the assessment rate for the new
watermain as well as one hundred (100%) percent of the cost associated with
replacing the service lines.
Any existing service lines found to be defective as part of the project are
assessed directly to the property.
   Subd. 6.   Street Boulevard Trees. All street boulevard trees installed as
part of new street constructions or in reconstructing existing streets shall be
included as part of the overall project costs included in the assessment
calculations, if assessments are applicable.
   Subd. 7.   Street Lights. All costs for new streetlights installed as part
of constructing new streets or streetlights relocated as part of reconstructing
streets are included in the overall project costs and included in the
assessment calculations, if assessments are applicable. In new subdivisions,
the City may require the developer to finance street light improvement rather
than assessing the cost.
   Subd. 8.   Other Improvements. Based on the City Council determination, any
other improvements may be fully assessed or assessed in part. (Ordinance 17-05,
adopted March 14, 2017)
303.11. Deferment of Special Assessments.
   Subd. 1.   Pursuant to Minn. Stat. §435.193, the City Council may defer the
payment of any special assessment on homestead property owned by a person who
is sixty five (65) years of age or older, or who is retired by virtue of
permanent and total disability, and City staff are hereby authorized to record
the deferment of special assessments where the following conditions are met:
   (1)   The applicant must apply for the deferment not later than ninety (90)
days after the assessment is adopted by the City Council;
   (2)   The applicant must be sixty (65) years of age or older or retired by
virtue of permanent and total disability;
   (3)   The applicant must be the owner of the property;
   (4)   The applicant must occupy the property as his principal place of
residence;
   (5)   The average annual payment for assessments levied against the subject
property exceed one (1%) percent of the adjusted gross income of the applicant
as evidenced by the applicant’s most recent federal income tax return. The
average annual payment of an assessment shall be the total cost of the
assessment divided by the number of years over which it is spread.
   Subd. 2.   The deferment shall be granted for as long a period of time as
the hardship exists and the conditions aforementioned have been met. However,
it shall be the duty of the applicant to notify the City or Deputy Clerk of any
change in status that would affect eligibility for deferment.
   Subd. 3.   The entire amount of deferred special assessments shall be due
within sixty (6) days after loss of eligibility by the applicant. If the
special assessment is not paid within the sixty (60) days, the City Clerk shall
add thereto interest at a per annum interest rate of two percent (2%) above the
bond interest rate and the total amount of principal and interest shall be
certified to the County Auditor for collection with taxes the following year.
Should the applicant demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City Council, that
full repayment of the deferred special assessment would cause the applicant
particular undue financial hardship, the City Council may order that the
applicant pay within sixty days a sum equal to the number of installments of
deferred special assessments outstanding and unpaid to date, including
principal and interest, with the balance thereafter paid according to the terms
and conditions of the original special assessments.
   Subd. 4.   The option to defer the payment of special assessments shall
terminate and all amounts accumulated plus applicable interest shall become due
upon the occurrence of any one of the following:
   (1)   The death of the owner when there is no spouse who is eligible for
deferment.
   (2)   The sale, transfer or subdivision of all or any part of the property.
   (3)   Loss of homestead status on the property
   (4)   Determination by the City Council for any reason that immediate or
partial payment would impose no hardship. (Ordinance 17-05, adopted March 14,
2017)
303.12 Severability.
Should any section, subdivision, clause or other provision of this Section be
held to be invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the Section as a whole, or any part thereof, other
than the part held to be invalid. (Ordinance 17-05, adopted March 14, 2017)
303.13. Enactment.
This Section shall be in full force and effect after adoption and publication
in summary from in the official newspaper of the City of Rockford in accordance
with applicable law. The Deputy Clerk is directed to prepare a summary form of
the ordinance for publication and submit the same to the city’s designated
newspaper. (Ordinance 17-05, adopted March 14, 2017)
304. Reserved
(Ordinance 17-05, adopted March 14, 2017)
305. Railway Property
305.01. Damage.
It is unlawful to break down or carry away any part of any fence, bars, or gate
at a crossing over any railway track, or plank used for such crossing, or to
destroy or injure any hedge, ditch, or other structure used or intended as a
fence to include any railroad tracks. It is unlawful to use a gate or bars, or
opening the same for any purpose, at any railway crossing, to permit an animal
to stray upon a railway track or enclosed right of way, or to leave such bars
down, or gate open, so that animals may stray on such railway track. It is
unlawful to lead, drive, or turn upon such track any animal for grazing or
other purposes. (Ord. #01-05, adopted July 24, 2001)
305.02. Trespass.
It is unlawful for a person, not an employee of a railway company, without
permission from such company, on foot or with any animal or vehicle, to enter
upon any railway bridge or trestle, or to, without a permit, ride, operate, or
propel any vehicle on or along the track of a railway. (Ord. #01-05, adopted
July 24, 2001)
305.03. Obstruction.
No person shall obstruct any public road or street by leaving, placing,
keeping, or causing to be left, placed, or kept any railway car upon or across
the same, or to stop or cause to be stopped any engine or train of cars across
any public road or street except for a sufficient time, not exceeding ten
minutes, to couple or separate the cars. (Ord. #01-05, adopted July 24, 2001)
306. RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
306.01.    Findings, Purpose and Intent.
   Subd. 1.   To provide for the health, safety and welfare of its citizens,
and to ensure the integrity of its streets and the appropriate use of the
rights-of-way, the City strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state of good
repair and free from unnecessary encumbrances. Accordingly, the City hereby
enacts this new Chapter of this code relating to right-of-way permits and
administration. This Chapter imposes reasonable regulation on the placement and
maintenance of facilities and equipment currently within its rights-of-way or
to be placed therein at some future time. It is intended to complement the
regulatory roles of state and federal agencies. Under this Chapter, persons
excavating or obstructing the rights-of-way will bear financial responsibility
for their work. Finally, this Chapter provides for recovery of out-of-pocket
and projected costs from persons using the public rights-of-way.
   Subd. 2.   This Chapter shall be interpreted consistently with 1997 Session
Laws, Chapter 123, substantially codified in Minnesota Statutes Sections
237.16, 237.162, 237.163, 237.79, 237.81, and 238.086 (the "Act") and the other
laws governing applicable rights of the City and users of the right-of-way, as
may be amended from time to time. This Chapter shall also be interpreted
consistent with Minnesota Rules 7819.0050 - 7819.9950, as may be amended from
time to time, where possible. To the extent any provision of this Chapter
cannot be interpreted consistently with the Minnesota Rules, that
interpretation most consistent with the Act and other applicable statutory and
case law is intended. (Ord. #17-06, adopted December 26, 2017)
306.02.    Election to Manage the Public Rights-Of-Way.
Pursuant to the authority granted to the City under state and federal
statutory, administrative and common law, the City hereby elects pursuant Minn.
Stat. 237.163 subd. 2(b), to manage rights-of-way within its jurisdiction.
(Ord. #17-06, adopted December 26, 2017)
306.03.    Definitions.
The definitions for the terms that apply to this Chapter of this Code are the
same as those provided in Minn. Stat. 237.162, and as may be amended from time
to time, are incorporated by reference as if set forth herein in full. (Ord.
#17-06, adopted December 26, 2017)
306.04.    Administration.
The City Administrator is the principal City official responsible for the
administration of the rights-of-way, right-of-way permits, and the ordinances
related thereto. The City Administrator may delegate any or all of the duties
hereunder. (Ord. #17-06, adopted December 26, 2017)
306.05.    Registration and Right-Of-Way Occupancy.
   Subd. 1.   Registration. Each person who occupies. uses, or seeks to occupy
or use, the right-of-way or place any equipment or facilities in or on the
right-of-way, including persons with installation and maintenance
responsibilities by lease, sublease or assignment, must register with the City.
Registration will consist of providing application information and paying a
registration fee.
   Subd. 2.   Registration Prior to Work. No person may construct. install,
repair, remove, relocate, or perform any other work on, or use any facilities
or any part thereof in any right-of-way without first being registered with the
City.
   Subd. 3.   Exceptions.
   (1)   Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or amend the provisions of
a City ordinance permitting persons to plant or maintain boulevard plantings or
gardens in the area of the right-of-way between their property and the street
curb. Persons planting or maintaining boulevard plantings or gardens shall not
be deemed to use or occupy the right-of-way, and shall not be required to
obtain any permits or satisfy any other requirements for planting or
maintaining such boulevard plantings or gardens under this Chapter. However,
nothing herein relieves a person from complying with the provisions of the
Minn. Stat. 216D, Gopher State One Call Law.
   (2)   Also excepted from the registration requirements of this Chapter is a
person who intends to install a driveway or mailbox or fence or retaining wall
upon land owned by said person. However, nothing herein relieves a person who
intends to install a fence or retaining wall from complying with the provisions
contained in the Rockford Zoning Ordinances.
   (3)   Also excepted from the registration requirements of this Chapter is a
person who has entered into a legal and binding signed written contract with
the City of Rockford to construct, install, repair, remove, relocate or perform
any other work or use any facilities in any right-of-way. (Ord. #17-06, adopted
December 26, 2017)
306.06.    Registration Information.
   Subd. 1.    Information Required. The information provided to the City at
the time of registration shall include, but not be limited to:
   (1)   Each registrant's name, Gopher One-Call registration certificate
number, address and email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile
numbers.
   (2)   The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and
facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local representative or
designee shall be available at all times. Current information regarding how to
contact the local representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time
of registration.
   (3)   A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
      (a)   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the
registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of
Minnesota, or a form of self-insurance acceptable to the City;
      (b)   Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for
personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising
out of the: (i) use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the registrant, its
officers, agents, employees and permittees;. and (ii) placement and use of
facilities and equipment in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers,
agents, employees and permittees, including, but not limited to, protection
against liability arising from completed operations, damage of underground
facilities and collapse of property;
      (c)   Naming the City as an additional insured as to whom the coverages
required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will be
provided as to all such coverages;
      (d)   Requiring that the City be notified thirty (30) days in advance of
cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term;
      (e)   Indicating comprehensive liability coverage: automobile liability
coverage, workers compensation and umbrella coverage established by the City in
amounts sufficient to protect the City and the public and to carry out the
purposes and policies of this Chapter.
   (4)   The City may require a copy of the actual insurance policies.
   (5)   If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate required to
be filed under Minn. Stat. 300.06 as recorded and certified to by the Secretary
of State.
   (6)   A copy of the person's order granting a certificate of authority from
the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other authorization or approval
from the applicable state or federal agency to lawfully operate where the
person is lawfully required to have such authorization or approval from said
commission or other state or federal agency or a statement clarifying the
persons legal right and authority to locate in and use the right-of-way and the
manner of use authorized.
   Subd. 2.    Notice of Changes. The registrant shall keep all of the
information listed above current at all times by providing to the City
information as to changes within fifteen (15) days following the date on which
the registrant has knowledge of any change. (Ord. #17-06, adopted December 26,
2017)
306.07.    Permit Requirement.
   Subd. 1.   Permit Required. Except as otherwise provided in this code, no
person may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way without first having obtained
the appropriate right-of-way permit from the City to do so.
   (1)   Excavation Permit. An excavation permit is required by a registrant to
excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit and to hinder
free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing
facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified
therein.
   (2)   Obstruction Permit. An obstruction permit is required by a registrant
to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of right-of-way by
placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the extent and for
the duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not required if a
person already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same project.
   (3)   Small Wireless Facility Permit. A small wireless facility permit is
required by a registrant to erect or install a wireless support structure, to
collocate a small wireless facility, or to otherwise install a small wireless
facility in the specified portion of the right-of-way, to the extent specified
therein, provided that such permit shall remain in effect for the length of
time the facility is in use, unless lawfully revoked.
   Subd. 2.    Permit Extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the right-
of-way beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless (i) such person
makes a supplementary application for another right-of-way permit before the
expiration of the initial permit, and (ii) a new permit or permit extension is
granted.
   Subd. 3.   Delay Penalty. In accordance with Minnesota Rule 7819.1000 subd.
3 and notwithstanding Subd. 2 of this Section. the City shall establish and
impose a delay penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation,
obstruction, patching, or restoration. The delay penalty shall be established
from time to time by City Council resolution.
   Subd. 4.   Permit Display. Permits issued under this Chapter shall be
conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated
work site and shall be available for inspection by the City.
   Subd. 5.   Permit Applications. Application for a permit is made to the
City. Right-of-way permit applications shall contain, and will be considered
complete only upon compliance with the requirements of the following
provisions:
   (1)   Registration with the City pursuant to this Chapter;
   (2)   Submission of a completed permit application form, including all
required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the
proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed
facilities.
   (3)   Payment of money due the City for:
      (a)   Permit fees, estimated restoration costs and other management
costs;
      (b)   Prior obstructions or excavations;
      (c)   Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the City
because of applicant's prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way
or any emergency actions taken by the City;
      (d)   Franchise fees or other charges, if applicable.
   (4)   Payment of disputed amounts due the City by posting security or
depositing in an escrow account an amount equal to at least 110% of the amount
owing.
   (5)   Posting an additional or larger construction performance bond for
additional facilities when applicant requests an excavation permit to install
additional facilities and the City deems the existing construction performance
bond inadequate under applicable standards. (Ord. #17-06, adopted December 26,
2017)
306.08.    Issuance of Permit; Conditions.
   Subd. 1.   Permit Issuance. If the Applicant has satisfied the requirements
of this Chapter, the City shall issue a permit.
   Subd. 2.    Conditions. The City may impose reasonable conditions upon the
issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to
protect the public health, safety and welfare or when necessary to protect the
right-of-way and its current use.
   Subd. 3.   Small Wireless Facility Conditions. In addition to subdivision 2,
the erection or installation of a wireless support structure, the collocation
of a small wireless facility, or other installation of a small wireless
facility in the right-of-way, shall be subject to the following conditions:
   (1)   A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on the particular
wireless support structure, under those attachment specifications, and at the
height indicated in the applicable permit application.
   (2)   No new wireless support structure installed within the right-of-way
shall exceed 50 feet in height without the city's written authorization,
provided that the city may impose a lower height limit in the applicable permit
to protect the public health, safety and welfare or to protect the right-of-way
and its current use, and further provided that a registrant may replace an
existing wireless support structure exceeding 50 feet in height with a
structure of the same height subject to such conditions or requirements as may
be imposed in the applicable permit.
   (3)   No wireless facility may extend more than 10 feet above its wireless
support structure.
   (4)   Where an applicant proposes to install a new wireless support
structure in the right-of-way, the city may impose separation requirements
between such structure and any existing wireless support structure or other
facilities in and around the right-of-way.
   (5)   Where an applicant proposes collocation on a decorative wireless
support structure, sign or other structure not intended to support small
wireless facilities, the city may impose reasonable requirements to accommodate
the particular design, appearance or intended purpose of such structure.
   (6)   Where an applicant proposes to replace a wireless support structure,
the city may impose reasonable restocking, replacement, or relocation
requirements on the replacement of such structure.
   Subd. 4.   Small Wireless Facility Agreement. A small wireless facility
shall only be collocated on a small wireless support structure owned or
controlled by the city, or any other city asset in the right-of-way, after the
applicant has executed a standard small wireless facility collocation agreement
with the city. The standard collocation agreement may require payment of the
following:
   (1)   Up to $150 per year for rent to collocate on the city structure.
   (2)   $25 per year for maintenance associated with the collocation;
   (3)   A monthly fee for electrical service as follows:
      (a)   $73 per radio node less than or equal to 100 maximum watts;
      (b)   $182 per radio node over 100 maximum watts; or
      (c)   The actual costs of electricity, if the actual cost exceeds the
foregoing.
   (4)   The standard collocation agreement shall be in addition to, and not in
lieu of, the required small wireless facility permit, provided, however, that
the applicant shall not be additionally required to obtain a license or
franchise in order to collocate. Issuance of a small wireless facility permit
does not supersede, alter or affect any then-existing agreement between the
city and applicant,
   Subd. 5.   Action on Small Wireless Facility Permit Applications.
   (1)   Deadline for Action. The City shall approve or deny a small wireless
facility permit application within 90 days after filing of such application.
The small wireless facility permit, and any associated building permit
application, shall be deemed approved if the City fails to approve or deny the
application within the review periods established in this section.
   (2)   Consolidated Applications. An applicant may file a consolidated small
wireless facility permit application addressing the proposed collocation of up
to 15 small wireless facilities, or a greater number if agreed to by a local
government unit, provided that all small wireless facilities in the
application:
      (a)   Are located within a two-mile radius;
      (b)   Consist of substantially similar equipment; and
      (c)   Are to be placed on similar types of wireless support structures.
      (d)   In rendering a decision on a consolidated permit application, the
city may approve some small wireless facilities and deny others, but may not
use denial of one or more permits as a basis to deny all small wireless
facilities in the application.
   (3)   Tolling of Deadline. The 90-day deadline for action on a small
wireless facility permit application may be tolled if:
      (a)   The City receives applications from one or more applicants seeking
approval of permits for more than 30 small wireless facilities within a seven-
day period. In such case, the city may extend the deadline for all such
applications by 30 days by informing the affected applicants in writing of such
extension.
      (b)   The applicant fails to submit all required documents or information
and the city provides written notice of incompleteness to the applicant within
30 days of receipt the application. Upon submission of additional documents or
information, the City shall have ten days to notify the applicant in writing of
any still-missing information.
      (c)   The City and a small wireless facility applicant agree in writing
to toll the review period. (Ord. #17-06, adopted December 26, 2017)
306.09.    Permit Fees.
   Subd. 1.   Excavation Permit Fee. The City shall establish an excavation
permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:
   (1)   The City management costs;
   (2)   Degradation costs: if applicable.
   Subd. 2.    Obstruction Permit Fee. The City shall establish an obstruction
permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover the City management costs.
   Subd. 3.   Small Wireless Facility Permit Fee. The City shall impose a small
wireless facility permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover:
   (1)   Management costs, and;
   (2)   City engineering, make-ready, and construction costs associated with
collocation of small wireless facilities.
   Subd. 4.   Payment of Permit Fees. No excavation permit or obstruction
permit shall be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit
fees. The City may allow Applicant to pay such fees within thirty (30) days of
billing.
   Subd. 5.   Non-Refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the
City has revoked for a breach as stated in Section 19 are not refundable.
   Subd. 6.   Application to Franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a
franchise, management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to
the franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user by the franchise. (Ord. #17-
06, adopted December 26, 2017)
306.10.    Right-Of-Way Patching and Restoration.
   Subd. 1.   Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the
patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under
Section 13.
   Subd. 2.   Patch and Restoration. Permittee shall patch its own work. The
City may choose either to have the permittee patch the right-of-way or to
restore the right-of-way itself.
   (1)   City Restoration. If the City restores the right-of-way, permittee
shall pay the costs thereof within thirty (30) days of billing. if, following
such restoration, the pavement settles due to permittee's improper backfilling,
the permittee shall pay to the City, within thirty (30) days of billing, all
costs associated with correcting the defective work.
   (2)   Permittee Restoration. If the permittee restores the right-of-way
itself, it shall at the time of application for an Excavation permit post a
construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota
Rule 78 19.3000.
   (3)   Degradation fee in Lieu of Restoration. In lieu of right-of-way
restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation fee. However,
the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for patching and the degradation
fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these responsibilities.
   Subd. 3.    Standards. The permittee shall perform patching and restoration
according to the standards and with the materials specified by the City and
shall comply with Minnesota Rule 7819.1100.
   Subd. 4.   Duty to Correct Defects. The Permittee shall correct defects in
patching. or restoration performed by permittee or its agents. Permittee upon
notification from the City, shall correct all restoration work to the extent
necessary, using the method required by the City. Said work shall be completed
within five (5) calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the City, not
including days during which work cannot be done because of circumstances
constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonal or
unreasonable under Section 11.05.14.
   Subd. 5.   Failure to Restore. If the permittee fails to restore the right-
of-way in the manner and to the condition required by the City, or fails to
satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the City, the
City at its option may do such work. In that event the permittee shall pay to
the City, within thirty (30) days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-
of-way. If permittee fails to pay as required, the City may exercise its rights
under the construction performance bond. (Ord. #17-06, adopted December 26,
2017)
306.11.    Joint Applications.
   Subd. 1.   Joint Application. Registrants may jointly apply for permits to
excavate or obstruct the right-of-way at the same place and time.
   Subd. 2.   Shared Fees. Registrants who apply for permits for the same
obstruction or excavation, which the City does not perform, may share in the
payment of the obstruction or excavation permit fee. In order to obtain a joint
permit, registrants must agree among themselves as to the portion each will pay
and indicate the same on their applications.
   Subd. 3.   With City Projects. Registrants who join in a scheduled
obstruction or excavation performed by the City, whether or not it is a joint
application by two or more registrants or a single application, are not
required to pay the excavation or obstruction and degradation portions of the
permit fee, but a permit is still required. (Ord. #17-06, adopted December 26,
2017)
306.12.    Supplementary Applications.
   Subd. 1.   Limitation on Area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the
area of the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work
outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any
permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the
permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater area
(i) make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees
required thereby, and (ii) be granted a new permit or permit extension.
   Subd. 2.   Limitation on Dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the
dates specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the
permit start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the end
date. If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must
apply for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new
permit or an extension of the old permit before working after the end date of
the previous permit. This supplementary application must be submitted before
the permit end date. (Ord. #17-06, adopted December 26, 2017)
306.13.    Other Obligations.
   Subd. 1.   Compliance With Other Laws. Obtaining a right-of-way permit does
not relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits,
licenses, franchises and authority and to pay all fees required by the City or
other applicable rule, law or regulation. A permittee shall comply with all
requirements of local, state and federal laws, including Minn. Stat. 216D.Ol-09
(Gopher One Call Excavation Notice System). A permittee shall perform all work
in conformance with all applicable codes and established rules and regulations,
and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to its
permit, regardless of who does the work.
   Subd. 2.   Prohibited Work. Except in an emergency and only after informing
the Director of Public Works or designee, and or with the approval of the City,
no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be done when seasonally
prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work.
   Subd. 3.   Interference with Right-of-way. A permittee shall not so obstruct
a right-of-way that the natural free and clear passage of water through the
gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with. Private vehicles of those
doing work in the right-of-way may not be parked within or next to a permit
area, unless parked in conformance with City parking regulations. The loading
or unloading of trucks must be done solely within the defined permit area
unless otherwise specifically authorized by the permit. (Ord. #17-06, adopted
December 26, 2017)
306.14.    Denial or Revocation of Permit.
   Subd. 1.   Reasons for Denial. The city may deny a permit for failure to
meet the requirements and conditions of this chapter or if the city determines
that the denial is necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when
necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use.
   Subd. 2.    Procedural Requirements. The denial or revocation of a permit
must be made in writing and must document the basis for the denial. The city
must notify the applicant or right-of-way user in writing within three business
days of the decision to deny or revoke a permit. If an application is denied,
the right-of-way user may address the reasons for denial identified by the city
and resubmit its application. If the application is resubmitted within 30 days
of receipt of the notice of denial, no additional application fee shall be
imposed. The city must approve or deny the resubmitted application within 30
days after submission. (Ord. #17-06, adopted December 26, 2017)
306.15.    Installation Requirements.
The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other work
performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with Minnesota Rule
7819.1100 and other applicable local requirements as defined in the Rockford
City Code or as established by the Director of Public Works and the City
Engineer. (Ord. #17-06, adopted December 26, 2017)
306.16.    Inspection.
   Subd. 1.   Notice of Completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is
completed, the permittee shall furnish a Completion Certificate in accordance
Minnesota Rule 78 19.1300.
   Subd. 2.   Site Inspection. Permittee shall make the work-site available to
the City and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all
reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the work.
   Subd. 3.   Authority of Director.
   (1)   At the time of inspection, the Director may order the immediate
cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety
or well-being of the public.
   (2)   The Director may issue an order to the permittee for any work which
does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards,
conditions, or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the
violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten (10) days
after issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the Director
that the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented
within the required time, the Director may revoke the permit pursuant to Sec.
11.05.20. (Ord. #17-06, adopted December 26, 2017)
306.17.    Work Without a Permit.
   Subd. 1.   Emergency Situations. 
   (1)   Each registrant shall immediately notify the Director of any event
regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The registrant
may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency.
Within two (2) business days after the occurrence of the emergency the
registrant shall apply for the necessary permits, pay the fees associated
therewith and fulfill the rest of the requirements necessary to bring itself
into compliance with this Chapter for the actions it took in response to the
emergency.
   (2)   If the City becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant's
facilities, the City will attempt to contact the local representative of each
registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event,
the City may take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the
emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the registrant whose facilities
occasioned the emergency.
   Subd. 2.   Non-Emergency Situations. Except in an emergency, any person who,
without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a
right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit or immediately remove the
equipment or utilities installed, and as a penalty pay double the normal fee
for said permit, pay double all the other fees required by the City Code,
deposit with the City the fees necessary to correct any damage to the right-of-
way and comply with all of the requirements of this Chapter. (Ord. #17-06,
adopted December 26, 2017)
306.18.    Supplementary Notification.
If an obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends sooner
than the date given on the permit, permittee shall notify the City of the
accurate information as soon as this information is known. (Ord. #17-06,
adopted December 26, 2017)
306.19.    Revocation of Permits.
   Subd. 1.   Substantial Breach. The City reserves its right, as provided
herein, to revoke any right-of-way permit, without a fee refund, if there is a
substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any applicable statute,
ordinance, rule or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A
substantial breach by permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the
following:
   (1)   The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
   (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-of-
way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit
upon the City or its citizens;
   (3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a right-
of-way permit;
   (4)   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner, unless a permit
extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to reasons
beyond the permittee's control; or
   (5)   The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not conform
to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to Sec. 16.
   Subd. 2.   Written Notice of Breach. If the City determines that the
permittee has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any
statute, ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit the City
shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The
demand shall state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the
permit. A substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the City, at its
discretion, to place additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate
and remedy the breach.
   Subd. 3.   Response to Notice of Breach. Within twenty-four (24) hours of
receiving notification of the breach: permittee shall provide the City with a
plan, acceptable to the City, that will cure the breach. Permittee's failure to
so contact the City, or permittee's failure to timely submit an acceptable
plan, or permittee's failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall
be cause for immediate revocation of the permit. Further, permittee's failure
to so contact the City, or permittee's failure to submit an acceptable plan, or
permittee's failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall
automatically place the permittee on probation for one (1) full year.
   Subd. 4.   Cause For Probation. From time to time, the City may establish a
list of conditions of the permit, which if breached will automatically place
the permittee on probation for one full year, such as, but not limited to:
working out of the allotted time period or working on right-of-way grossly
outside of the permit authorization.
   Subd. 5.   Automatic Revocation. If a permittee, while on probation, commits
a breach as outlined above, permittee's permit will automatically be revoked
and permittee will not be allowed further permits for one full year, except for
emergency repairs.
   Subd. 6.   Reimbursement of City Costs. If a permit is revoked, the
permittee shall also reimburse the City for the City's reasonable costs,
including restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable
attorneys' fees incurred in connection with such revocation. (Ord. #17-06,
adopted December 26, 2017)
306.20.    Mapping Data Information Required.
Each registrant and permittee shall provide mapping information required by the
City in accordance with Minnesota Rules 78 19.4000 and 7819.4100. (Ord. #17-06,
adopted December 26, 2017)
306.21.    Location and Relocation of Facilities.
   Subd. 1.    Other Laws. Placement, location, and relocation of facilities
must comply, with other applicable law, and with Minnesota Rules 7819.3100,
7819.5000 and 7819.5100, to the extent the rules do not limit authority
otherwise available to cities.
   Subd. 2.   Corridors.
   (1)   The City may assign specific areas within the right-of-way, or any
particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of facilities
that is or, pursuant to current technology, the City expects will someday be
located within the right-of-way. All excavation, obstruction, or other permits
issued by the City involving the installation or replacement of facilities
shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue.
   (2)   Any registrant who has facilities in the right-of-way in a position at
variance with the corridors established by the City shall, no later than at the
time of the next reconstruction or excavation of the area where the facilities
are located, move the facilities to the assigned position within the right-of-
way, unless this requirement is waived by the City for good cause shown, upon
consideration of such factors as the remaining economic life of the facilities,
public safety, customer service needs and hardship to the registrant.
   Subd. 3.   Nuisance. One year after the passage of this Chapter, any
facilities found in a right-of-way that have not been registered shall be
deemed to be a nuisance. The City may exercise any remedies or rights it has at
law or in equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance or taking
possession of the facilities and restoring the right-of-way to a useable
condition.
   Subd. 4.   Limitation of Space. To protect health, safety, and welfare or
when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use, the City shall
have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional
facilities within the right-of-way. In making such decisions, the City shall
strive to the extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users
of the right-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the
public interest, the public's needs for the particular facility, the condition
of the right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the
protection of existing facilities in the right-of-way, and future City plans
for public improvements and development projects which have been determined to
be in the public interest.
   Subd. 5.   Facilities Location. In addition to complying with the
requirements of Minn. Stat. 2160.31-09 ("One Call Excavation Notice System")
before the start date of any right-of-way excavation, each registrant who has
facilities or equipment in the area to be excavated shall mark the horizontal
placement of all said facilities. Any registrant whose facilities are less than
twenty (20) inches below a concrete or asphalt surface shall notify and work
closely with the excavation contractor to establish the exact location of its
facilities and the best procedure for excavation. (Ord. #17-06, adopted
December 26, 2017)
306.22.    Damage to Other Facilities.
When the City does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to maintain,
support, or move a registrant's facilities to protect the facility, the City
shall notify the local representative as early as is reasonably possible. The
costs associated therewith will be billed to that registrant and must be paid
within thirty (30) days from the date of billing. Each registrant shall be
responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the right-of-way which
it or its facilities damages. Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost
of repairing any damage to the facilities of another registrant caused during
the City's response to an Emergency occasioned by that registrant's facilities.
(Ord. #17-06, adopted December 26, 2017)
306.23.    Right-Of-Way Vacation.
Reservation of Right. If the City vacates a right-of-way which contains the
facilities of a registrant, the registrant's rights in the vacated right-of-way
are governed by Minnesota Rules 78 19.3203. (Ord. #17-06, adopted December 26,
2017)
306.24.    Indemnification and Liability.
By registering with the City, or by accepting a permit under this Chapter, a
registrant or permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the City in accordance
with the provisions of Minnesota Rule 7819.1250. (Ord. #17-06, adopted December
26, 2017)
306.25.    Abandoned and Unusable Facilities.
   Subd. 1.   Discontinued Operations. A registrant who has determined to
discontinue all or a portion of its operations in the City must provide
information satisfactory to the City that the registrant's obligations for its
facilities in the right-of-way under this Chapter have been lawfully assumed by
another registrant.
   Subd. 2.   Removal. Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any
right-of-way shall remove those facilities from that right-of-way if required
in conjunction with other right-of-way repair, excavation, or construction,
unless this requirement is waived by the City. (Ord. #17-06, adopted December
26, 2017)
306.26.    Appeal.
A right-of-way user that: (1) has been denied registration; (2) has been denied
a permit; (3) has had permit revoked; or (4) believes that the fees imposed are
invalid, may have the denial, revocation, or fee imposition reviewed, upon
written request, by the City Council. The City Council shall act on a timely
written request at its next regularly scheduled meeting. A decision by the City
Council affirming the denial, revocation, or fee imposition will be in writing
and supported by written findings establishing the reasonableness of the
decision. (Ord. #17-06, adopted December 26, 2017)
306.27.    Reservation of Regulatory and Police Powers.
A permittee's or registrant's rights are subject to the regulatory and police
powers of the City to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to protect
the health, safety and welfare of the public. (Ord. #17-06, adopted December
26, 2017)
306.28.    Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
Chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or
administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a
separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions thereof. If a regulatory body or a court
of competent jurisdiction should determine by a final, non-appealable order
that any permit, right or registration issued under this Chapter or any
portions of this Chapter is illegal or unenforceable, then any such permit,
right or registration granted or deemed to exist hereunder shall be considered
as a revocable permit with a mutual right in either party to terminate without
cause upon giving sixty (60) days written notice to the other. The requirements
and conditions of such a revocable permit shall be the same requirements and
conditions as set forth in the permit, right or registration, respectively,
except for conditions relating to the term of the permit and the right of
termination. Nothing in this Chapter precludes the City from requiring a
franchise agreement with the applicant, as allowed by law, in addition to
requirements set forth herein. (Ord. #17-06, adopted December 26, 2017)
306.29.    Violation a Misdemeanor.
Any person convicted of violating any provision of this ordinance is guilty of
a misdemeanor. (Ord. #17-06, adopted December 26, 2017)
400 Sewer & Water
401. Sewer System
401.01 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meaning set out below, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise.
   (1)   BOD (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) - means the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biological oxidation of organic matter expressed in
milligrams per liter, as determined in accordance with standard laboratory
procedure as set out in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater.
   (2)   Building Drain - means that part of the tower horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building
sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
   (3)   Building Sewer - means the extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection.
   (4)   Capital Costs - means all reasonable and necessary costs and expenses
incurred by the city in planning, designing, financing, and constructing
disposal system facilities, including, but not limited to, costs and expenses
for obtaining necessary permits, licenses, approvals and grants for design and
construction costs; fees for legal and consulting services; or the acquisition
of such facilities.
   (5)   COD (denoting Chemical Oxygen Demand) - means the quantity of oxygen
utilized in the chemical oxidation of organic matter, expressed in milligrams
per liter, as determined in accordance with standard laboratory procedure as
set out in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater.
   (6)   Combined Sewer - means a sewer originally designed and currently
designated to receive both surface water runoff and sewage.
   (7)   Commercial Users - means all users of the system classified as
industrial users in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, U.S.
Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented under Division A,
B, C, E, and I, but who are excluded from such definition for the purposes of
this chapter, because they discharge primarily segregated domestic wastes, or
wastes from sanitary conveniences, except that the classification shall not
include such exempted users who are otherwise classified in this chapter as
domestic users, governmental users, or institutional users.
   (8)   Contract Users - means all users who have a written contract with the
city to use the city sewer system or city wastewater treatment plant.
   (9)   Debt Service - means the principal and interest necessary to pay
bonded indebtedness.
   (10)   Deduct Meter – means a separate meter used for irrigation or by a
manufacturer to record water usage not disposed of through the sewer system.
The readings from the deduct meter will reduce the user’s sewer rate (Ord. 09-
04, adopted 11-24-09)
   (11)   Domestic User - means those establishments of which its related
occupations, if any, are usually considered a domestic service and whose
discharge consists solely of sanitary wastes.
   (12)   Flow - means the quantity of sewage expressed in gallons or cubic
feet per twenty-four hours.
   (13)   Garbage - means solid wastes resulting froze the domestic and
commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling,
storage or sale of meat, fish, fowl, fruit, vegetables, or condemned food.
   (14)   General Municipal Flow - means the total sewage flow discharged to
the treatment facilities, minus the flows from industrial users, other
municipalities, and contract users and therefore includes sanitary wastes and
infiltration. General municipal flow, based on the design of the wastewater
treatment facilities, is further defined as flows containing five day BOD
concentrations not greater than 200 mg/1 and suspended solids concentrations no
greater than 225 mg/l.
   (15)   General Municipal User - means any user discharging sewage to the
general municipal flow other than industrial users, municipalities and other
contract users. This category of user includes as sub-categories:
      A.   Domestic Users
      B.   Commercial Users
      C.   Institutional Users
      D.   Governmental Users, which are not contract users
   (16)   Governmental User - includes those establishments whose function is
the administration and/or execution of governmental programs as well as the
offices of executives, legislative bodies and agencies which provide general
support services for government.
   (17)   Industrial User - means any non-governmental user of the wastewater
treatment facilities identified in the Federal Standard Industrial
Classifications Manual, 1972, office of Management and Budget, as amended and
supplemented under the following divisions:
      A.   Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing
      B.   Mining
      C.   Manufacturing
      D.   Transportation, Communication, Electric, Gas and Sanitary Services
      E.   Services
A user in the divisions listed may be excluded and treated as a commercial user
if the city determines it will primarily introduce domestic wastes or wastes
from sanitary conveniences.
The BOD and suspended solids loads from industrial users will be based on the
actual concentrations of those constituents, except that for industrial users
with sewage containing BOD and suspended solids concentrations less than the
concentrations as defined for general municipal flow, the charges shall be
based on concentrations as defined for general municipal flow.
   (18)   Industrial Wastes - means the solid, liquid or gaseous wastes
resulting from any industrial or manufacturing processes, trade or business, or
from the development, recovery or processing of natural resources.
   (19)   Institutional User - means those establishments engaged in activities
of a non-economic nature, frequently being the performance of services
classified as a governmental or commercial user in this chapter.
   (20)   Load - means quantities of sewage characteristics such as BOD, SS and
other constituents as expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/1) or pounds per
twenty-four hours (lbs/24 hours).
   (21)   National Pollution Discharge Elimination System Permit (NPDES Permit)
- means the system for issuing, conditioning and denying permits for the
discharge of pollutants from point sources into the navigable waters, the
contiguous zone, and the oceans by the Administrator of the Environmental
Protection Agency pursuant to Section 402 and 405 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act Amendment 1972.
   (22)   Natural Outlet - means any cutlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch,
lake or other body of surface or ground water.
   (23)   Operation and Maintenance Costs (O & M Costs) - means the expenses
related to the costs of the operation, maintenance, replacement and
administration of the city facilities.
   (24)   Other Wastes - shall mean garbage, municipal refuse, decayed wood,
sawdust, shavings, bark, lime, sand, ashes, oil, tar, chemicals, offal and
other substances except sewage and industrial wastes.
   (25)   Person - means any individual, firm, company, associations, society,
corporation, municipal corporation, governmental unit, or group.
   (26)   pH - means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
   (27)   Process Water - means any water used in the manufacturing,
preparation or production of goods, materials or food. Process water is an
industrial waste.
   (28)   Public Sewer - means any sever owned or operated by a unit or agency
of government.
   (29)   Replacement Costs - means costs related to the expenditures for
obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are
necessary to maintain the capacity and performance during the service life of
the city facilities for which such facilities were designed and constructed.
The term “operation and maintenance” includes replacement.
   (30)   Sanitary Sewer - means a sewer which carries sewage and to which
storm surface and ground water are not intentionally admitted.
   (31)   Sanitary Wastes - means the liquid and water carried wastes
discharged from sanitary plumbing facilities.
   (32)   Sewage - means the liquid carried waste products from whatever source
derived, together with such ground water infiltration and surface water as may
be present.
   (33)   Sewage or Wastewater - means the water carried waste products from
residences, public buildings, institutions, industrial establishments or other
buildings including the excrementitious or other discharge from the bodies of
human beings or animals, together with such ground water infiltration and storm
and surface water as may be present.
   (34)   Sewer - means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage, industrial waste
or other waste liquids.
   (35)   Sewer Service Charge - means the aggregate of all the charges
including the user charge, debt service charges, industrial cost recovery
charges and other sewer related charges that are billed periodically to users
of the city facilities.
   (36)   Sewer System - means pipe lines or conduits, pumping stations,
forcemains, and all other devices and appliances appurtenant thereto, used for
collecting or conducting sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes to a point
of ultimate disposal.
   (37)   Sewer Truck Area Charges: These are per acre charges for all
undeveloped property, charged at the time of development. Revenue from these
charges is used to finance new trunk sewers. (Amended Ord 04-18 12-28-04)
   (38)   Significant Industrial User - means any industrial user who
discharges sewage which constitutes greater than 10% of the design flow or
design pollutant loading of the wastewater treatment plant.
   (39)   Slug - means any discharge of water, wastewater or industrial waste
which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds
for any period of duration longer than fifteen minutes more than five times the
average twenty-four hour concentration of flows during the normal operation.
   (40)   SS (denoting Total Suspended Solids) - means solids that either float
on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage, or other liquids and
which are removable by laboratory filtering, in accordance with the latest
edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater.
   (41)   Storm Sewer (sometimes termed “Storm Drain”) - means a sewer which
carries storm. and surface water and drainage but excludes sewage and
industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling or process water.
   (42)   Suspended Solids - means solids that either float on the surface of,
or are in suspension in, water, sewage, other liquids and which are removable
by laboratory filtering, in accordance with the latest edition of Standard
Methods of the Examination of Water and Wastewater.
   (43)   Unpolluted Water - means clean water uncontaminated by industrial
wastes, other wastes, or any substance which renders such water unclean or
noxious, or impure so as to be actually or potentially harmful or detrimental
or injurious to public health, safety or welfare, to domestic, commercial,
industrial or recreational use, or to livestock, wild animals, bird, fish, or
other aquatic life.
   (44)   User - means any person, or corporation, or other entity, whether
municipal or otherwise, discharging sewage into the city disposal system
facilities.
   (45)   User Charge - means a charge levied on users of city facilities for
the cost of operation and maintenance of such facilities.
   (46)   Wastewater Facilities - means the structures, equipment and processes
required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and
dispose of the effluent.
   (47)   Wastewater Treatment Works or Treatment Works - shall mean an
arrangement of devices and structures for treatment of wastewater, industrial
waste, and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous for "waste treatment plant" or
“wastewater treatment plant” or “water pollution control plant” or “sewage
treatment plant.”
401.02 Use of Public Sewers.
   Subd. 1.   Treatment Required. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any
natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the
city any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has
been provided in accordance with this chapter.
   Subd. 2.   Cesspools. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful
to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or
other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage except by variance
in accordance with
Chapter 1001 of this code.
   Subd. 3.   Connection Required. The owner of any building or property which
is located within the city and from which wastewater is discharged, shall be
required to connect to a public sewer at his expense within two years of the
date said public sewer is operational, provided that said public sewer is
within 150 feet of the structure generating wastewater and said public sewer is
located in a public right-of-way or easement for sewer purposes adjacent to the
property. All future buildings constructed on property adjacent to the public
sewer shall be required to immediately connect to the public sewer. If sewer
connections are not being made pursuant to this subdivision, an official ninety
day notice shall be served instructing the affected property owner to make said
connection. Prior to connection the property shall have been fully assessed for
sewer service or there has been paid to the city for the improvement fund a
connection charge equal to the average full assessment in the year prior to the
time such connection is made and the fee set in Section
401.08 has been paid.
   Subd. 4.   City Connection. In the event an owner shall fail to connect to a
public sewer in compliance with the notice given, the city may undertake to
have said connection made and shall assess the cost thereof against the
benefited property and said assessment shall be a lien against said property.
Such assessment, when levied, shall bear interest at the legal rate for local
improvements and shall be certified to the auditor of the county in which the
property is located and shall be collected and remitted to the city in the same
manner as assessments for local improvements. The rights of the city under this
subdivision shall be in addition to any other remedial or enforcement
provisions of this chapter.
   Subd. 5.   Storm and Other Water. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged directly or indirectly any storm water, surface water, ground water,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, waste from on-site disposal systems,
unpolluted cooling or process water to any sanitary sewer except as permitted
by the city. Storm water and all other unpolluted water shall be discharged to
a storm sewer, except that unpolluted cooling or process water shall only be so
discharged upon approval by the city or other local unit of government.
   Subd. 6.   Prohibited Discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged, directly or indirectly, any of the following described substances
to any public sewer:
   (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
   (2)   Any water or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the wastewater treatment works.
   (3)   Any water or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the wastewater treatment works. (Amended Ord. 07-05, May 8,
2007)
   (4)   Solid or viscous substances, either whole or ground, in quantities or
of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper continuation of the wastewater facilities, but not
limited to, ashes, cinders, disposable diapers, glass grinding or polishing
wastes, stone cuttings or polishing wastes, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood,
paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and sanitary napkins, paper dishes,
cups, milk containers, and other paper products.
   (5)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or substances which either singly
or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance
or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their
maintenance and repair.
   (6)   Prohibited wastes shall be regulated in accordance with the city's
NPDES permit, Sections 307(a) and 307(b) of the Clean Water Act and all other
applicable state and Federal regulations.
   Subd. 7.   Discharges Allowed by Permit Only. No person shall discharge or
cause to be discharged directly or indirectly the following described
substances to any public sewer unless a permit for the same has been obtained
from the city. Application may be made upon forms provided by the city. Such a
permit may be granted by the council only if, in the opinion of the city, such
discharge will not harm the wastewater facilities, nor cause obstruction to the
flow in sewers, nor otherwise endanger life, limb or public property, nor
constitute a nuisance. In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of these
wastes, the city may give consideration to such factors as the quantities of
the subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials
of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity
of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant, the city's NPDFS permit, and other pertinent factors. The city
may make such determinations either on a general basis or as to discharges from
individual users or specific discharges, and may prohibit certain discharges
from individual users because of unusual concentrations or combinations which
may occur. The substances prohibited are:
   (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F (65° C).
   (2)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of ten mg/1 or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32° and 150° F (0° and 65°
C). (Amended Ord. 07-05, May 8, 2007)
   (3)   Any garbage that has not been ground or comminuted to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely in suspension under flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particles greater than one-half
inch in any dimension.
   (4)   Any water or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or
concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
   (5)   Any water or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances which constitute a nuisance or hazard to the structures,
equipment or personnel of the sewage works, or which interfere with the
treatment required to meet the requirements of the state and Federal government
and any other public agency with proper authority to regulate the discharge
from the sewage treatment plant.
   (6)   Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration that
they are in non-compliance with regulations issued by the appropriate authority
having control over their use or which have caused or may cause damage or
hazards to the treatment works or personnel operating it.
   (7)   Any water or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.0. (Amended Ord. 07-05,
May 8, 2007)
   (8)   Materials which exert or cause:
      (a)   Unusual concentration of suspended solids (such as, but not limited
to, Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids
(such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
      (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions).
      (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the wastewater treatment
works.
      (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting a
slug.
      (e)   Water or water containing substances which are not amendable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of the NPDES permit or requirements of
other governmental agencies having jurisdiction over discharge from the sewage
treatment plant.
   Subd. 8.   City Authority. If any water or wastes are discharged, or are
proposed to be discharged, directly or indirectly to the public sewers, which
water or wastes do not meet the standards set out in or promulgated in this
chapter or which in the judgment of the city may have a deleterious effect upon
the treatment works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which
otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may
take any or all of the following steps: (Amended by Ordinance No. 03-02 passed
June 10, 2003)
   (1)   Refuse to accept the discharges, or
   (2)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, or
   (3)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable conditions for the discharge to
the public sewers, or
   (4)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treatment
wastes, or
   (5)   The discharge of any water from sump pumps into the City sewers will
be deemed a misdemeanor.
   (6)   Sump pumps must be installed and hard plumbed to the exterior of the
building on all new residential and commercial construction. Certificate of
occupancy will be issued after compliance.
The design and installation of the plant and equipment for pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows shall be subject to the review and approval of the
city and subject to the requirements of 40 CRF 403, entitled, “Pretreatment
Standards” and all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 93-04, passed April 13, 1993)
   Subd. 9.   Interceptors. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided
when they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing
ingredients. All interceptors required under this subdivision shall be of a
type and capacity approved by the city and shall be located as to be readily
and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall not
be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. Where preliminary
treatment, flow equalizing facilities, or interceptors are provided for any
water or wastes, they shall be effectively operated and maintained continuously
in satisfactory and effective condition by the owner at his expense, and shall
be available for inspection by the city at all reasonable times.
   Subd. 10.   Industrial Meters. When required by the city, the owner of any
property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install
a suitable control structure, together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and
measurement of the wastes. Such structures and equipment, when required, shall
be constructed at the owner's expenses in accordance with plans approved by the
city and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at
all times.
   Subd. 11.   Measurement Standards . All measurements, tests, and analyses of
the characteristics of water and wastes to which reference is made in this
chapter shall be determined in accordance with 40 CFR 136 (Guidelines
Establishing Test Procedures for analysis of Pollutants); the latest edition of
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, and shall be
determined at the control structure provided, or upon suitable samples taken at
said control structures. In the event that no special structure has been
required, the control structure shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer from the point at which the building
sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted
methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewerage works and to
determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular
analyses involved will determine whether a twenty-four hour composite of all
outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples
should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses
will be obtained from twenty-four hour composite of all outfalls whereas pH's
will be determined from periodic grab samples.)
   Subd. 12.   City Testing. The city may conduct such tests as are necessary
to enforce this chapter and employees of the city may enter upon any property
for the purpose of taking samples, obtaining information or conducting surveys
or investigations relating to such enforcement. Entry shall be made during
operating hours unless circumstances require otherwise. In all cases where
tests are conducted by the city for the purpose of checking to determine if a
previously found violation of this chapter has been corrected, the cost of such
tests shall be charged to the user and added to the user's sewer charge. In
those cases where the city determines that the nature of volume of a particular
user's sewage requires more frequent than normal testing, the city may charge
such user for the test, after giving the user ten days written notice of its
intention to do so, and the cost thereof shall be added to the user's sewer
charge. In any case where industrial wastes are discharged to a public sewer,
the city may require the user at his own expense to test his discharge on a
regular basis and to report the test results to the city within a reasonable
time. All such tests shall be ordered by the city and shall be conducted by
qualified personnel and in accordance with the standards set out in Subd. 11
above.
   Subd. 13.   Accidental Discharges. Accidental discharges of prohibited waste
in to the sewage works, directly or through another disposal system, or to any
place from which such waste may enter the treatment works, shall be reported to
the city by the persons responsible for the discharge, or by the owner or
occupant of the premises where the discharge occurred, immediately upon
obtaining knowledge of the fact of such discharge.
   Subd. 14.   Connections Prohibited. New connections to the sanitary sewer
system shall be prohibited unless sufficient capacity is available in all
downstream facilities, including capacity for flow, BOD, and suspended solids.
   Subd. 15.   Private Agreements. No statement contained in this section shall
be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the
city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual or
character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment
therefore, by the industrial concern, in accordance with applicable regulations
and any supplemental agreement with the city.
   Subd. 16.   City Inspections. The city may conduct inspections to enforce
this chapter and employees of the city may enter upon any property for the
purpose to inspect the pumping of any water into the city's sanitary sewer
system. Entry shall be made during operating hours unless circumstances require
otherwise. (Added by Ordinance No. 93-04, passed 4/13/93.)
401.03 Private Sewage Disposal.
   Subd. 1.   Regulations Adopted. The provision of Minnesota Rules Chapter
7080 are hereby adopted in their entirety with the following additional
regulations: (Added by Ordinance No. 97-06, passed March 31, 1997)
   (1)   Multiple Tanks will be required, minimum of two (2) tanks for all
systems.
   (2)   Minimum pump tank capacity will be 1,000 gallons.
   (3)   Two (2) soil treatment areas must be designated by proper testing for
all existing parcel or parcels to be created or platted and before any building
permits will be issued or platting approval given.
   (4)   All soil treatment areas must be properly protected at the time of
platting and/or before construction begins on any parcel or adjacent parcel.
   (5)   Failed systems must be upgraded, replaced or repaired within a minimum
of ten (10) months, or at the discretion of the inspector.
   Subd. 2.   Private Systems. Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not
available under the provision of Section
401.02, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the regulations adopted in Subdivision 1, above.
401.04 Building Sewers and Connections.
   Subd. 1.   License Required. It is unlawful for any persons to engage in the
work or business of installing private sewer service lines and appurtenances
for others without a license therefore from the city.
   Subd. 2.   License Application. Any person desiring to engage in such work
shall make application to the city on forms to be supplied by the city together
with a fee as set forth in
Chapter 212. Each application shall contain a form whereby the applicant agrees
to pay the city the actual cost of repair for any damage caused to the city
sewer system by the applicant or any of his employees or agents. All licenses
issued shall be for one year only and each renewal shall be made by
application. A plumber licensed by the State Board of Health shall pay no fee
to the city, but shall show evidence of the state license before the city
issues a license.
   Subd. 3.   License and Bond. Each applicant shall accompany his application
with a certificate of insurance showing public liability insurance coverage
with limits of at least $50,000 per person; $100,000 per occurrence and $25,000
for property damage, and a license bond in the amount of $5,000 with a company
and in a form acceptable to the city. The certificate shall specifically state
that such insurance covers underground operations and shall contain a provision
that the coverage afforded under the policies will not be cancelled or
materially changed until at least fifteen days prior written notice has been
given to the city. Failure to have such insurance or bond in effect is grounds
for denial or revocation of the license.
   Subd. 4.   Permit Required. No person, unless authorized, shall uncover,
make any connections with or openings into, use, alter, or disturb any public
sewer or appurtenance thereof, without first obtaining the written permit from
the city. Applications shall be on forms provided by the city and shall be
accompanied by a fee from time to time established by the city.
   Subd. 5.   Owner Indemnity. All costs and expenses incident to the
installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.
The owner shall indemnify and hold harmless the city from any loss or damage to
public sewer that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation
of the building sewer.
   Subd. 6.   Separate Sewers. A separate and independent building sewer shall
be provided for every building; except where two or more buildings are situated
on one parcel such that the parcel may not be subdivided; such a joint use
private sewer may be extended to the rear building or buildings and the whole
considered as one joint use private sewer. Special variances will be considered
by the council.
   Subd. 7.   Existing Sewer Connections. Old building sewers may be used in
connection with new buildings only when they are round, on examination and
tested by the city to meet all requirements of this chapter.
   Subd. 8.   Unused Cesspools. Unused septic tanks, cesspools, leaching pits
and similar devices and structures shall be backfilled or made safe and
unusable in a manner acceptable to the city.
   Subd. 9.   Size, Slope, Materials and Placement. The size, slope, alignment,
materials of construction of a building sewer, and the method to be used in
excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench,
shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or
other applicable rules and regulations. In the absence of code provisions or in
amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of Water Pollution Control Federation (WPCF) Manual of Practice
No. 9 and applicable American Society for Testing Materials (ASTM) Standards
shall apply. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, such
building drain shall be provided with a lifting device by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
   Subd. 10.   Construction Regulations. The construction of the building sewer
and its connection into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of
the building and plumbing code, the sewer specifications included herein or
other applicable rules and regulations and the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the Water Pollution Control Federation (WPCF)
Manual of Practice No. 9, and the American Society of Testing and Materials
(ASTM) all such construction shall be made gas tight and water tight. Any
deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the
city before installation.
Any new residential or commercial construction commenced after May 10, 1994, is
required to have installed a back flow prevention valve on the building's
sanitary sewer service line. (Subd. 10 amended by Ordinance 94-08, passed May
10, 1994.)
   Subd. 11.   City Inspection. Employees of the city shall be allowed to
inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant
for the permit shall notify the city when the work is ready for final
inspection and no underground portions shall be covered before the final
inspection is completed. The connection shall be made under the supervision of
the city or the plumbing inspector.
   Subd. 12.   Barriers and Restoration. All excavations for building sewer
installations shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to
protect the public from hazards. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public
property disturbed in the course of work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the city.
401.05 Main and Lateral Sewer Construction.
No sanitary or storm sewers shall be constructed in the city (except house or
building service sewers) except by the city or by others in accordance with
plans and specifications approved by a professional engineer. No such sewers
shall be considered to be a part of the public sewer system unless accepted by
the City.
401.06 Protection from Damage.
No unauthorized person shall break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper
with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the public
sewer.
401.07 Authority of Inspectors.
Duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter at reasonable times. Those employees shall have
no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical,
oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries except as is necessary to
determine the kind and source of the discharge to the public sewer. While
performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in this
section, the authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises.
401.08 User Charges.
It is the purpose of this section to recover from users of the city facilities,
on an equitable basis, the share of the city facilities' costs attributable to
such users, and to provide funds for the operation and maintenance, debt
service, replacement and improvements of the city.
   Subd. 1.   Charges Levied. The user charges provided for in this section are
hereby levied and assessed upon each lodge, parcel of land, building or
premises having any connection with, or discharging either directly or
indirectly into the sewer system.
   Subd. 2.   Computation and Notice. The council shall annually determine and
fix the unit costs for use of the city treatment facilities on the basis of
flow, BOD, TSS, PH and any other pollutants, taking into consideration the cost
of treatment of such sewage, and may increase or decrease such unit cost as
often and in such amounts as may reasonably be required to accomplish the
purposes of this section. The council shall also determine the costs per unit
for debt service involved with system wide sanitary sewer operations. The city
shall compute the amount due the city for sewer use charges and render a
statement thereof, at periodic intervals, as directed by the council to the
owner of any premises using the city facilities. All amounts due hereunder
shall be payable at the office of the clerk or other designated locations. The
clerk shall, in August of each year, provide to the council, an internal audit
report that will address specific areas of concern including: the need to
generate sufficient revenue through "user" charges to cover total 0 & M costs
and debt associated with system wide operations; the necessity of maintaining a
proportionate system of user charges; the need to review the replacement
account to determine its proper level of funding; and a review of industrial
users to ensure that each pays its share for the cost of city facilities and
industrial waste treatment. (Amended by Ordinance 90-09, passed June 26, 1990;
Ordinance 06-13, passed December 12, 2006; Ordinance 08-02, passed February 26,
2008)
   Subd. 3.   Charges, a Lien. Each charge levied pursuant to this section
shall be a lien against the property, and all such charges due on September 30
of each year, more than thirty days past due, and having been properly mailed
to the occupant or owner of the premises, shall be certified by the council to
the county auditor, shall specify the amount thereof, the description of the
premises, the name of the owner thereof, and the amount so certified shall be
expended upon the tax rolls against such premises in the same manner as other
taxes, and collected by the county treasurer and paid to the city along with
other taxes.
   Subd. 4.   Discontinued Service. The city may shut off sewer service when:
   (1)   the charge for such service, or any other financial obligation imposed
on the present or former owner or occupant of the premises served is unpaid for
60 days or two billing cycles and in default; or
   (2)   failure of the property owner or occupant to implement and maintain
within 30 days all sanitary sewer pretreatment requirements ordered by the
City’s Public Works Director following the discharge of 1) a prohibited
substance into the City’s sanitary sewer system, or 2) prohibited levels of
permitted substances such as PH, BOD, TSS in violation of City ordinance into
the City’s sanitary sewer system. (Amended 12-12-06 Ordinance 06-13)
   Subd. 5.   Civil Action. Any charges levied pursuant to this section, and
which have been properly sent to the occupant or owner and not paid, may, in
addition to all other remedies available to the city, be recovered in a civil
action by the city in any court of competent jurisdiction.
   Subd. 6.   Prohibited Discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged, directly or indirectly, any of the following described substances
to any public sewer:
   (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
   (2)   Any water or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the wastewater treatment works.
   (3)   Any water or wastes having a pH lower than 5 . 5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the wastewater treatment works.
   (4)   Solid or viscous substances, either whole or ground, in quantities or
of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper continuation of the wastewater facilities, but not
limited to, ashes, cinders, disposable diapers, glass grinding or polishing
wastes, stone cuttings or polishing wastes, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood,
paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and sanitary napkins, paper dishes,
cups, milk containers, and other paper products.
   (5)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or substances which either singly
or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance
or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their
maintenance and repair.
   (6)   Prohibited wastes shall be regulated in accordance with the city's
NPDES permit, Sections 307(a) and 307(b) of the Clean Water Act and all other
applicable state and Federal regulations.
   Subd. 7.   Discharges Allowed by Permit Only. No person shall discharge or
cause to be discharged directly or indirectly the following described
substances to any public sewer unless a permit for the same has been obtained
from the city. Application may be made upon forms provided by the city. Such a
permit may be granted by the council only if, in the opinion of the city, such
discharge will not harm the wastewater facilities, nor cause obstruction to the
flow in sewers, nor otherwise endanger life, limb or public property, nor
constitute a nuisance. In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of these
wastes, the city may give consideration to such factors as the quantities of
the subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials
of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity
of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant, the city's NPDFS permit, and other pertinent factors. The city
may make such determinations either on a general basis or as to discharges from
individual users or specific discharges, and may prohibit certain discharges
from individual users because of unusual concentrations or combinations which
may occur. The substances prohibited are:
   (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F (65° C).
   (2)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of twenty mg/1 or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32° and 150° F (0° and 65°
C).
   (3)   Any garbage that has not been ground or comminuted to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely in suspension under flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particles greater than one-half
inch in any dimension.
   (4)   Any water or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or
concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
   (5)   Any water or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances which constitute a nuisance or hazard to the structures,
equipment or personnel of the sewage works, or which interfere with the
treatment required to meet the requirements of the state and Federal government
and any other public agency with proper authority to regulate the discharge
from the sewage treatment plant.
   (6)   Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration that
they are in non-compliance with regulations issued by the appropriate authority
having control over their use or which have caused or may cause damage or
hazards to the treatment works or personnel operating it.
   (7)   Any water or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.0.
   (8)   Materials which exert or cause:
      (a)   Unusual concentration of suspended solids (such as, but not limited
to, Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids
(such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
      (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions).
      (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the wastewater treatment
works.
      (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting a
slug.
      (e)   Water or water containing substances which are not amendable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of the NPDES permit or requirements of
other governmental agencies having jurisdiction over discharge from the sewage
treatment plant.
   Subd. 8.   City Authority. If any water or wastes are discharged, or are
proposed to be discharged, directly or indirectly to the public sewers, which
water or wastes do not meet the standards set out in or promulgated in this
chapter or which in the judgment of the city may have a deleterious effect upon
the treatment works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which
otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may
take any or all of the following steps: (Amended by Ordinance No. 03-02 passed
June 10, 2003)
   (1)   Refuse to accept the discharges by plugging or otherwise blocking the
premises’ sewer discharge pipe at or before it connects with sanitary sewer
main, or within the sanitary sewer main, or
   (2)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, or
   (3)   Require payment to an acceptable conditions for the discharge to the
public sewer, or
   (4)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treatment
wastes, or
   (7)   The discharge of any water from sump pumps into the City sewers will
be deemed a misdemeanor.
   (8)   Sump pumps must be installed and hard plumbed to the exterior of the
building on all new residential and commercial construction. Certificate of
occupancy will be issued after compliance.
   (9)   The city shall have authority to immediately discontinue sewer service
to a customer who is found to be discharging wastes into the cities system
which are in violation of this ordinance. (Amended Dec. 12, 2006 06-13)
The design and installation of the plant and equipment for pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows shall be subject to the review and approval of the
city and subject to the requirements of 40 CRF 403, entitled, “Pretreatment
Standards” and all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 93-04, passed April 13, 1993)(Amended by Ordinance
06-13, passed 12-12-06)
   Subd. 9.   Liability for Fines Levied Upon the City. Any person or entity
which discharges prohibited substances into the City sanitary sewer system
which causes the wastewater treatment plant to violate its state discharge
permit requirements such that a fine is
Imposed upon the City by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency or other state
or federal agency, shall be liable to the City for the amount of such fine(s).
Any such fines shall be paid to the City within 30 days of billing by the City.
(Amended Ordinance 06-13, December 12, 2006)
   Subd. 10.   Charges for General Users - Domestic, Commercial, Institutional
and Governmental Users.
   (1)   The city will determine a user fee annually and a SAC fee annually to
maintain the operations, maintenance and debt service for wastewater treatment
facilities. The Sewer Access Connection (SAC) fee is to be paid at the time at
which a building permit or a sewer connection permit is issued for all
buildings to be constructed or connected to the sewer system on or after the
effective date of this chapter. No charge shall be due upon the issuance of a
connection permit if a charge was paid upon issuance of a building permit. The
sewer access connection charge for each building or structure shall be equal to
the number of units of sewage volume which will discharge multiplied by the
amount established by Resolution of the City Council. The sewer access
connection (SAC) charge shall increase as adopted in the CIP per unit of sewage
volume for buildings or structures connecting to the city wastewater collection
and treatment system. The equivalent units of sewage volume shall be, assigned
as follows:
(Ordinance 14-04, adopted June 10, 2014)
 
Standard Sewage Volume Units For Various Residential Dwellings
Single family houses, townhouses, and duplex units                    1.0 Unit
Condominiums and apartment units                                      0.8 Unit
Mobile homes                                                          0.8 Unit
Public housing units subsidized under any Federal Program for low and 0.8 Unit
moderate income housing
 
Standard Sewage Volume Units for Various Commercial, Public and Institutional
Facilities
SAC Criteria
FACILITY PARAMETER SAC
Standard Sewage Volume Units for Various Commercial, Public and Institutional Facilities
SAC Criteria
FACILITY                                                                       PARAMETER  SAC
Animal Clinic (humane societies, animal research, boarding, etc.)
   Animal holding areas                                                     17 f.u.    1
   Animal runs                                                              34 f.u.    1
Archery (6 feet lane)                                                          6 lanes    1
Arenas (bleachers 18 inches/person)                                            110 seats  1
Auditoriums (7 square feet/person)                                             110 seats  1
Automobile Service
   Fast service (less than 4 hours per car)                                 2 service  1
                                                                               bays
   Major service (more than 4 hours per car)                                14         1
                                                                               employees
   Car Dealership (charge for office, retail, etc. at established rates)
   Fast Service (# service bays x 30%)                                      2 service  1
                                                                               bay
   Major Service (# service bays @ 70% x 1 employee/bay)                    14         1
                                                                               employees
Ballroom (exclude dance floor)
   Facility without liquor service                                          825 square 1
                                                                               feet
   Facility with liquor service                                             590 square 1
                                                                               feet
                                                                               2,400
   Bank (exclude cash vault)                                                square     1
                                                                               feet
Banquet Room (15 square feet/person)
                                                                               2,060
   Food catered                                                             square     1
                                                                               feet
                                                                               1,180
   Food catered with dishwashing                                            square     1
                                                                               feet
                                                                               1,028
   Food catered with liquor                                                 square     1
                                                                               feet
   Food preparation and dishwashing                                         825 square 1
                                                                               feet
   Food catered with dishwashing and liquor                                 750 square 1
                                                                               feet
   Food preparation, dishwashing and liquor                                 590 square 1
                                                                               feet
Barber                                                                         4 chairs   1
Batting Cages (6 feet/lane)                                                    6 lanes    1
Beauty Salon                                                                   4 cutting  1
                                                                               stations
Bingo Hall (used only for bingo)                                               110 seats  1
Boarding House (dorm rooms)                                                    5 beds     1
Body Shop (major service - more than 4 hours per car no vehicle washing)       14         1
                                                                               employees
Bowling Alleys (does not include bar or dining area                            3 alleys   1
Camps (# gallons x occupant or site)
   Children's' Camps (central toilet and bath; overnight, primitive cabins)
      (# occupants x 50 gallons occupant)                                274        1
                                                                               gallons
   Day Camps (no meals)
      (# occupants x 10 gallons/occupant)                                274        1
                                                                               gallons
   Labor/Construction Camps
      (# occupants x 50 gallons/occupant)                                274        1
                                                                               gallons
   Resorts (housekeeping cabins)
      (# occupants x 60 gal./occupant)                                   274        1
                                                                               gallons
Travel Trailer Parks
   with water and sewer hookup
      (# sites x 100 gallons/site)                                       274        1
                                                                               gallons
   with central toilet and showers
      (# sites x 75 gallons/site)                                        274        1
                                                                               gallons
   sanitary dump (sites without hookup)
      (# sites x 10 gal./site)                                           274        1
                                                                               gallons
Car Wash (CONTACT COB FOR DETERMINATION)
Catering (CONTACT COB FOR DETERMINATION)
Churches (for sanctuary, nave, chancel)                                        275 seats  1
   (7 square feet/person - seating area)
   (remainder use other criteria)
   (sacristy, ambulatory - no charge)
Cocktail Lounge (no food service)                                              23 seat    1
Coffee Shop (no food service)                                                  23 seat    1
Correction Facility (prison)                                                   2.5        1
                                                                               inmates
                                                                               1,650
Court Rooms                                                                    square     1
                                                                               feet
Dorm Rooms: On/off campus students                                             5 students 1
   (charge additional for classrooms)
Daycare (number of children licensed for)                                      14         1
                                                                               children
Child/Adult Play Area (not licensed)                                           490 square 1
                                                                               feet
                                                                               3,000
Dry Cleaners (retail)                                                          square     1
                                                                               feet
Elderly Housing (100% of current SAC Rate)
   (no washer/dryer each unit)                                              3 people   1
   (washer/dryer each unit)                                                 2.5 people 1
      *Three bedroom unit with washer/dryer
      (separate from formula below)
         (# of one bedroom units x 1.5 people/unit)
         + of two bedroom units x 2.0 people/unit)
         + of three bedroom units x 3.0 people/unit)
         (total # of people)
Exercise Area/Gym (juice bars - no charge)
   (sauna, whirlpool included)                                              700 square 1
                                                                               feet
                                                                               2,060
   No showers                                                               square     1
                                                                               feet
Fire Station (charge for office, meeting rooms, etc. at established rates)
   Washing (hose tower, trunk)                                              274        1
                                                                               gallons
    Full time (overnight people)
      (75 gal/person)/274 gallons                                        274        1
                                                                               gallons
      Volunteer (occasional overnight)                                   14 people  1
Funeral Home                                                                   770 square 1
(charge viewing areas only - chapel, viewing areas, etc.)                      feet
Apartment (1 apartment)                                                                   1
Game Room (billiards, video and pinball games)
   With bar                                                                 590 square 1
                                                                               feet
                                                                               2,060
   Without bar                                                              square     1
                                                                               feet
Golf Course (if showers - use locker room criteria)
   18 hole                                                                             3
   9 hole - par 3                                                                      2
   Miniature                                                                           1
   Country club (private)
   Dining room (evenings and weekends)                                      15 seats   1
   Bar and grill (bar and grill separate)
   Bar                                                                      23 seats   1
   Grill                                                                    15 seats   1
   Golf Dome or Driving Range                                               6 driving  1
                                                                               stations
Greenhouse
   Area not open to public                                                  15,000 sq. 1
                                                                               feet
   Area open to public                                                      5,000 sq.  1
                                                                               feet
   General retail area                                                      3,000 sq.  1
                                                                               feet
Group Home
   Secondary treatment (residents leaving during the day)                   5 beds     1
   Primary treatment (residents stay all day)                               3 beds     1
                                                                               (charge
Guest Rooms (apartment or condominium)                                         SAC as
                                                                               apartment)
   Washer/dryer                                                             100% (of
                                                                               Current
   No washer/dryer                                                          80% SAC
                                                                               Rate)
   No kitchen                                                               50%
Handball and Racquetball Courts                                                1 court    2
Hospitals (licensed beds or baby cribs)                                        1 bed      1
(does not include outpatient clinic)
   Outpatient clinic (plumbing fixture units)                               17 f.u.    1
   Sterilizers (4 hours x gpm x 60 minutes)                                 274        1
                                                                               gallons
X-ray film processors                                                          274        1
                                                                               gallons
   (continuous operation 9 hours)
   (intermittent operation 4 hours)
   (operation time (hrs) x gpm x 60 minutes).
   Vacuum device (Dental office)                                            274        1
                                                                               gallons
   (9 hours x gpm x 60 minutes)
Ice Arena
   Showers (see LOCKER ROOMS)
   Team Rooms (plumbing fixture units)                                      17 f.u.    1
   Bleachers                                                                110 seats  1
Zamboni (if discharge going to sanitary sewer                                             4
Laundromat (requires water volume for cycle time, 8 cycles/day)                274        1
                                                                               gallons
Library (subtract book storage areas, file areas - charge common plumbing      17 f.u.    1
fixture units in public areas)
                                                                               2,400
Meeting rooms, board rooms, reception, book checkout offices                   square     1
                                                                               feet
                                                                               7,000
Loading Dock                                                                   square     1
                                                                               feet
Locker Rooms (if showers -20 gallons/person                                    14 lockers 1
Medical Clinic (See HOSPITALS, Outpatient Clinic)
                                                                               1,650
Meeting Rooms (conference rooms)                                               square     1
                                                                               feet
Mini-storage (storage area - no charge)
   Living area                                                                         1
   Public restroom (plumbing fixtures)                                      17 f.u.    1
Mobile Home                                                                               1
Motels and Hotels (assume 2 persons/room)                                      2 rooms    1
   (pools, saunas, Jacuzzis, game rooms, or exercise rooms exclusively used by
guests - no charge)
   Breakfast only (complimentary)                                           45 seats   1
   Cocktail hour (complimentary)                                            55 seats   1
   Kitchenettes
      (# kitchenettes x 10 gallons/day)                                  274        1
                                                                               gallons
                                                                               2,400
Museum                                                                         square     1
                                                                               feet
Nursing Home                                                                   3 beds     1
Office
   General office (deduct mechanical rooms, elevator shafts stairwells,     2,400
restroom and storage areas)                                                    square     1
                                                                               feet
   Dental, Doctors see hospital
   Police Station (charge as office)
   Cells (overnight jail)                                                   3 people
   (no overnight people - holding area)                                     14 people  1
                                                                               7,000
Recording/Filming Studios                                                      square     1
                                                                               feet
Restaurant (drive-in)                                                          9 parking  1
                                                                               spaces
Restaurant (fast food)                                                         22 seats   1
   (disposable paper plates, glasses, and silverware)
Restaurant (full service)                                                      8 seats    1
   (washable silverware, glasses, and dishes)
Retail Stores (deduct mechanical rooms, elevator shafts stairwells, restrooms  3,000
and unfinished storage areas)                                                  square     1
                                                                               feet
Rifle Ranges (handgun ranges - 6 feet/lane)                                    6 lanes    1
Roller Rink (skating area)                                                     825 square 1
                                                                               feet
Rooming Houses (no food service)                                               7 beds     1
RV Dumping Station (not in association with camp grounds)                                 1
Schools (Sunday - 30 square feet/student)                                      55         1
                                                                               students
Schools (elementary - 15 gallon/student - 30 square feet/student               18         1
                                                                               students
Schools (college, TV [ 30 square feet/student)                                 18         1
                                                                               students
   Lecture halls (15 square feet/student)                                   18         1
                                                                               students
   Labs (50 square feet/student)                                            18         1
                                                                               students
   Dorm rooms (on/off campus students)                                      5 students 1
Schools (nursery - number of children licensed for)                            14         1
                                                                               students
   Church (nursery - during worship service only - 30 sq. ft./child)        55         1
                                                                               students
                                                                               2,400
   Nursery (health clubs, bowling alleys, etc.)                             square     1
                                                                               feet
Schools (secondary - 30 sq. ft./student - 20 gallons/student)                  14         1
                                                                               students
   Labs (50 square feet/student)                                            14         1
                                                                               students
Service Station
   Gas pumping                                                                         1
                                                                               3,000
   Convenience center                                                       square     1
                                                                               feet
   Service bays                                                             2 bays     1
Car Wash (See CAR WASH)
Swimming Pools (public - pool area)                                            900 square 1
                                                                               feet
   (private residential, townhouse, condominiums, hotels, motels or apartments
- no charge)
                                                                               3,000
Tanning Rooms                                                                  square     1
                                                                               feet
Tennis Courts (public, shower facilities available)                            1 court    2
Theater                                                                        64 seats   1
Theater (drive-in - parking spaces)                                            55 spaces  1
Vehicle Garage
   Employees stationed in garage                                            14         1
                                                                               employees
      Vehicle drivers (per day)                                          28 drivers 1
   Vehicle washing                                                          274        1
   (# vehicles/day x gpm x minutes/vehicle)                                 gallons
                                                                               7,000
Warehouses (assembly areas)                                                    square     1
                                                                               feet
Office/Warehouse (speculative - must be reviewed on finishing permits)
                                                                               2,400
   Minimum 30% office                                                       square     1
                                                                               feet
                                                                               7,000
   Maximum 70% warehouse                                                    square     1
                                                                               feet
Whirlpool (doctors office/clinic, therapy - # gal./fill x 8 fills/day)         274        1
                                                                               gallons
Yard Storage Buildings
   (example: lumber storage)                                                15,000
   (customer pickup, no permanent employees)                                square     1
                                                                               feet
 
Plumbing Waste Fixture Units* (17 f.u. = 1 SAC)
Type of fixture Fixture unit value (f. u.)
Plumbing Waste Fixture Units* (17 f.u. = 1 SAC)
Type of fixture                                      Fixture unit value (f. u.)
Drinking fountain                                    1
Floor drain 2 inch waste (only if hose bib included) 2
   3 inch waste (only if hose bib included)       3
   4 inch waste (only if hose bib included)       4
   Trench drain: per 6 foot section               2
   Sinks lab in exam room, bathroom               1
   kitchen, and others                            2
   surgeon                                        3
   janitor                                        4
Water closet                                         6
* If not included in list, use plumbing code
 
The areas listed in the parameters include all interior areas utilized by the
public and the employees for the conduct of the facility.
The number of standard sewage volume units for a facility not included in the
above list shall be determined by the council. A request for determination
should be made prior to the issuance of a building permit.
      A.   All building permits issued by the city for alterations and/or
additions to existing buildings or structures will be subject to a sewer access
connection (SAC) charge if the addition or alteration will increase wastewater
discharge. The number of equivalent residential units will be determined in the
same manner as above described. (Ordinance No. 09-04, adopted November 24,
2009)
      B.   All sewer user charges shall be based either upon the amount of
water used per month as per the meter records, or based upon the average water
meter records from November 15th to April 15th applied per thousand. The
property owner may change their billing method in the month of December each
calendar year, with that method of billing being applied for the duration of
the following calendar year. Under the averaging method, the five months water
usage shall be divided by five to determine the average sewer user charge
applied per thousand gallons. All user charges and rates shall be established
by Resolution of the City Council. (Ordinance 14-06, adopted September 23,
2014)
   (2)   If a general user does not have a water meter, the user charge for
operation and maintenance, shall be based on the equivalent standard number of
sewage volume units. Therefore, a unit sewage volume shall be 100,000 gallons
per year. (Ordinance No. 09-04, adopted November 24, 2009)
401.09 Maintenance of Sanitary Sewer Laterals:
   Subd. 1.   Private Utility Lines. Maintenance of sewer laterals, consisting
of the service pipe from the structure located on the property that conveys
sewage from the structure to the sanitary sewer main, shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the property served by such sewer lateral.
Maintenance of such sewer lateral shall include, but shall not be limited to,
replacement, repair, unclogging, televising, and prevention of infiltration of
ground or surface water into such sewer lateral. The property owner may not
excavate in the right of way of any City Street without first obtaining the
written permission of the City’s Public Works Director, and may be required to
post a bond or cash surety with the City as may be required by the City’s
Public Works Director before beginning work in the City right of way and must
observe all conditions which the Public Works Directors places on such
excavation work. All such repair and replacement of the sewer lateral shall
conform to the City Engineer’s standards for such work, including the type of
materials used in the repair or replacement.
   Subd. 2.   Failure of Property Owner to Maintain Sanitary Sewer Laterals. In
the event the City Public Works Director identifies damage to or a defect in
the sanitary sewer lateral, the property owner whose property is served by such
sanitary sewer lateral shall repair such damage or defect to the sanitary sewer
lateral within the time period required by the City’s Public Works Director. In
the event the property owner fails to repair such damage or defect, the
property owner shall be subject to a monthly sewer service fee of $100 in
addition to the property owner’s normal sanitary sewer bill, and such $100
service fee shall continue until such damage or defect is properly repaired. In
addition, the City shall have the authority (but not the obligation) to repair
or replace such defective private sewer laterals and to assess the costs
incurred to the affected properties pursuant to Minn. Stat. 429.101.
   Subd. 3.   Televising of Sewer Laterals. Periodically, the City may desire
to televise the sanitary sewer lateral from the sewer main to the structure
which the sewer lateral serves to determine the condition of the sewer lateral
and whether the sewer lateral is allowing water to infiltrate into the City’s
sanitary sewer system. If a property owner refuses to let the City televise
that portion of the sewer lateral that is not located in the right of way, the
property owner shall be responsible for televising said sewer lateral in a
manner acceptable to the City and providing the City with a copy of such
televising within 20 days of request by the City. If the property owner fails
to provide the City with a copy of such televising, the property owner shall be
subject to a monthly sewer service fee of $100 in addition to the property
owner’s normal sanitary sewer bill, and such $100 service fee shall continue
until such time as acceptable televising results are provided to the City by
the property owner. (Ordinance 14-01, adopted February 11, 2014)
401.10. Penalties.
Any person found to be violating any provisions of this chapter shall be served
by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The
offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently
cease all violation. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the
time limit set in the notice shall be guilty of violating this code. In
addition to any penalty assessed for violation of this code, any person
violating regulations in this chapter shall become liable to the city for any
expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation.
(Ordinance No. 09-04, adopted November 24, 2009)
402. Water System
402.01 Connections.
No person shall make or cause to be made any connection to the municipal water
system, unless the property has been fully assessed for water service or there
has first been paid to the city for the improvement fund a connection charge
equal to the average full assessment, in the year prior to the time such
connection is made and the charge set in Section
402.12 has been paid.
402.02 Permit Required.
No person shall open, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter, or
disturb any public water line or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a
written permit from the utilities superintendent as follows:
   (1)   No person except a plumber duly licensed by the city or a duly
authorized employee of the city, will be permitted to do any work on service
pipe or water meters connected with the water system.
   (2)   Application for water service shall be made on printed forms, shall
state the legal description, the PID, and street and official house numbers of
the premises to be supplied, and the nature of the improvement to be done.
Application shall be signed by the owner of such premises or his authorized
agent or by the occupant or person in possession thereof. Each applicant, by
such application, shall subscribe to and be obliged to be bound by such rules
and regulations.
   (3)   The charge for tapping mains and the amount of the utility
installation fee hereinafter specified shall be paid at the time the
application is submitted and before the service is installed.
   (4)   The plumber requesting the tap shall give notice at least eight
business hours in advance of his need. The plumber must help uncover the rain
and locate the tap if requested by the superintendent.
   (5)   Only the city crews or the city's authorized contractor may tap into
the water lines, all others are prohibited from doing so.
   (6)   No water will be turned on until all charges and fees are paid,
including any unpaid usage charges and late payment penalties for the premises.
   (7)   The written permit must be on display at the site of the work at all
times.
   (8)   The permit and inspection fee for connecting to the water system is
assessed in
Chapter 212. (Amended Ord 09-05, 12-22-09)
402.03 Water Meters.
   Subd. 1.   Control and Regulation. The city shall exclusively own and
control the water meters to be used in the water system. All water meters shall
be installed in accordance with the following regulations:
   (1)   Water meters may be installed by the utilities superintendent.
(Amended Ord 09-05, 12-22-09)
   (2)   The service pipe from the city water main to the meter shall be 1" K
copper pipe, unless otherwise directed by the utilities superintendent.
(Amended by Ordinance 92-12, passed May 12, 1992.)
   (3)   The service pipe from the city water main to the meter, where the same
enters the building, shall be brought through the floor in a vertical position.
   (4)   The meter shall be so located that the bottom is from twelve to
eighteen inches above the finished floor line. The meter shall not be set more
than twelve inches, measured horizontally, from the inside line of the basement
wall. Deviation from these standards may be made only with written permission
of the utilities superintendent. An approved yoke or horn shall be provided to
support the meter in the proper vertical position. Meters larger than one inch
shall be set on a pedestal.
   (5)   All meter installations shall have a gate valve on the street side of
the meter. In no case shall there be more than twelve inches of pipe exposed
between the point of entrance through the floor and the gate valve. A gate
valve shall also be installed on the house side of the meter.
   (6)   The consumer is prohibited from obstructing the meter so as to
prohibit the reading, or repairing of the meter.
   (7)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to misread or to tamper with any meter
so as to avoid charges for water.
   (8)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to bypass a meter, or otherwise use
city water without making just compensation therefore, except as may be
specifically authorized in this Chapter.
   (9)   The service pipe from the city water main to the stop box, and the
stop box and cover at the main and boulevard are the property of the city and
all persons are forbidden to interfere with them. (Ordinance 09-05, adopted
December 22, 2009)
   Subd. 2.   Damage. If any meters are damaged by freezing, hot water, etc.,
either by carelessness or neglect of the owner or occupant of the premises or
other agents, the owner or occupants must pay for the repairs of such damages.
The cost of ordinary maintenance and repairs of all meters owned by the city
shall be borne by the city.
   Subd. 3.   Testing. At the written request of any user, the utilities
superintendent will test or cause to be tested the meter supplying the premises
of such owner or consumer. A deposit of $25.00 will be required before the
meter is disconnected which will be returned to the owner or consumer if the
meter is not found to be registered correctly within 3%, otherwise the deposit
so made shall be retained by the city to cover the cost of such tests. The
owner or consumer may, if he desires, be present at the time any such test is
made. The result of any such test shall be reported to such owner or consumer
in every case. If the testing of a meter, as hereinabove provided, indicates
that it registers in excess of 3% error, the charge to the consumer for water
consumed and used during the quarter within which such test is made shall be
adjusted in a fair and equitable manner.
   Subd. 4.   Installation Fee. A utility installation fee shall be paid by the
user when every water meter is installed. The fee will be as set forth in
Chapter 212 for a 3/4 inch meter and remote reader. The fees for larger meters
will be set according to their cost to the city. Fees paid are not refundable.
402.04 Service Pipe.
The service pipe from the stop box to the meter and the connections thereto
shall be the property of the user. The pipe must be protected and maintained by
him. In the event such user shall fail to make any necessary repairs to such
service connections or pipe within twenty-four hours after being notified to do
so by the utilities superintendent, the superintendent shall forthwith
disconnect the city water from the premises.
402.05 City Liability.
The city shall not be liable for any damages resulting from stoppage of the
supply or flow of water as the result of breaks in any mains, service pipes, or
fixtures, or by reason of the breaking of machinery or stoppage for necessary
repair, or any other interruption of service.
402.06 City Inspection.
The superintendent or any authorized employee of the city shall have free
access, at all reasonable hours, to premises to ascertain the location or
condition of all hose connections, pipes and plumbing fixtures.
402.07 Service Initiation.
   Subd. 1.   Written Authorization and Meter. No person shall turn on city
water to any premises without having written authorization from the plumbing
inspector and until a meter has been placed on the service and in such manner
that it will register all water consumed and all other parts of the plumbing
and pipe fitting in and about the premises are in full compliance with the
rules and regulations of this chapter and all other applicable regulations.
   Subd. 2.   Connection Prohibited. No person shall make any connection with
any service pipe which is not in use between the water mains and the meters,
without obtaining a written permit from the utilities superintendent for the
performance of such work. No person shall make any replacement tap or connect
any tap or connection theretofore made in any water main without shutting off
the water in such old tap or connection at the corporation in the water main.
402.08 Discontinued Service.
(Amended Ordinance 06-13, December 12, 2006)
   Subd. 1.   Voluntary. Any person desiring to discontinue the use of city
water shall notify the utilities superintendent to that effect, who shall have
the service at the curb stop box cut off by authorized personnel. No
unauthorized person shall cut off the water service. Where city water has been
turned off, it will be turned on only when:
   (1)   A fee as set forth in
Chapter 212 is paid; and
   (2)   All unpaid fees, usage charges and late payment penalties are paid.
   Subd. 2.   Involuntary. In addition to the provisions of
402.08, Subdivision 1, water service may be shut off at any stop box connection
whenever:
   (1)   The owner or occupant of the premises served, or any person working on
any pipes or equipment thereon which are connected with the watery system, has
violated or threatens to violate any of the provisions of this chapter.
   (2)   Any charge for water, service, meter, or any other financial
obligation imposed on the present or former owner or occupant of the premises
served is unpaid for 60 days or two billing cycles and in default. (Amended 12-
12-06 Ordinance 06-13)
   (3)   Fraud or misrepresentation by the owner or occupant of the premises
served in connection with any application for service.
   (4)   Failure of the property owner or occupant to implement and maintain
within 30 days all sanitary sewer pretreatment requirements ordered by the
City’s Public Works Director following the discharge of 1) a prohibited
substance into the City’s sanitary sewer system, or 2) prohibited levels of
permitted substances such as PH, BOD, TSS in violation of City ordinance into
the City’s sanitary sewer system.
   (5)   The owner or occupant of the premises serves, or any person under the
control of the owner or occupant of the premises, discharges a prohibited waste
into the City’s sanitary sewer system in such a manner as to constitute an
imminent public health threat, the City may, on an emergency basis, and without
notice to the owner or occupant, shut off water service to the premises until
such time as the imminent public health threat is alleviated.
   Subd. 3.   Procedure for Involuntary Termination. A. Except as provided in
Section
402.08, Subd. 2 (5) of the City Code, water shall not be shut off until notice
and an opportunity for a hearing has first been given the occupant of the
premises and, if different from the occupant, the application for water
service. Notice shall be served by leaving it at the premises served and, if
different than the address served, by mailing copy of the same to the address
shown on the application. The notice shall state the reasons for shut off of
water service and that the same will be shut off on a specified date not less
than ten days after the notice is served if the condition causing the shut off
is not rectified. The notice shall further state that a hearing before the City
Council on such shut off may be demanded in writing delivered to the City
Administrator within five business days after service of the notice of shut
off. If a hearing is requested, service shall not be discontinued until such
hearing has been held. If, as a result of the hearing, the City Council finds
that a violation has occurred which justifies shut off under this chapter, the
water service may be shut off.
402.09 Emergency Board.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 04-12, dated August 10, 2004)
   Subd. 1.   Board Established. Because critical shortages of water may result
from time to time and such shortage may come about suddenly, emergency
procedures are hereby established. These procedures must be followed at all
times, when the emergency board hereinafter establishes or the council
determines that any emergency exists. The emergency board shall consist of the
mayor and the utilities superintendent.
   Subd. 2.   Powers. Whenever, in the judgment of the emergency board, the
pressure or quantities of water in any part of the city water system have
become or are about to become inadequate for fire or other needs, the emergency
board shall declare a water emergency and shall impose necessary water use
restrictions to abate such emergency and shall post and publicize such
restrictions. Thereupon such of the restrictions as are found to be necessary
shall be in effect until the next following council meeting when such
restrictions shall be confirmed, removed or modified. Such restrictions shall
remain in effect until removed by action of the council. Notice of such
restrictions shall be published in the city's official and legal newspaper at
the first opportunity, and at such other times as the council deems reasonably
necessary. If necessary to preserve the public health, safety and welfare and/
or the water supply system during an emergency, the emergency board may
terminate water service to any or all users. Such termination if intended to
last beyond emergency duration shall be approved by the city council.
   Subd. 3.   Watering Ban. The City has an even/odd watering ban which is
determined by your address, for instance, if your address is an odd number, you
may water outdoors on odd numbered days of the month. City Staff and the Wright
County Sheriff’s Department will enforce the water ban. Any one found in
violation of this ban will be fined or prosecuted as a misdemeanor punishable
by a fine of up to $1,000.00. (Amended Ordinance 06-02, January 10, 2006)
402.10 Private Water Supplies.
No water pipe of the municipal water supply shall be connected with any pump,
well, pipe, tank or any device that is connected with any other source of water
supply and when such are found, the utilities superintendent shall notify the
owner or occupant to disconnect the same and, if not immediately, the water
supply shall be turned off. Before any new connection to the city system is
permitted, the utilities superintendent shall ascertain that no cross-
connections will exist when the new connection is made.
402.11 Water Rates.
   Subd. 1.   Rates. Water rates and base fees will be periodically established
by a duly adopted resolution adopted by the council. (Ordinance 14-04, adopted
June 10, 2014)
   Subd. 2.   Responsibility. The owner of the property which is being
furnished with water or sewer by the city shall be responsible for the payment
of the said water or sewer bills.
   Subd. 3.   Due Date and Penalty. The city shall compute the amount due the
city for water and sewer use charges on or about the 15th of each month and
render a statement of the charges due within 15 days, at periodic intervals as
directed by the council, to the owner of any premises using the city
facilities. There shall be added to all statements not paid when due a penalty
charge of 10% of all unpaid charges and penalties per month, or $1.00 per
month, whichever is greater for each month or fraction thereof, said statement
remains unpaid. It shall be the duty of the city to endeavor to promptly
collect delinquent accounts and in all cases where satisfactory arrangements
have not been made instructions shall be given to discontinue service by
shutting off the water and sewer at the stop box. All delinquent accounts shall
be certified to the clerk/treasurer, who shall prepare an assessment rule each
year providing for assessment of the delinquent amounts against the respective
property served. This assessment role shall be delivered to the council for
adoption on or before October 1 of each year, and upon approval thereof, the
clerk/treasurer shall certify to the county auditor the amount due, and the
county auditor shall thereupon enter such amount as part of the tax levy on
said premises to be collected during the ensuing year. Such action may be
optional or subsequent to taking legal action to collect delinquent accounts.
(Ordinance 09-05, adopted December 22, 2009)
402.12 Charges for General Users - Domestic, Commercial, Institutional and
Governmental Users.
   (1)   The city will determine a user fee annually and a SAC fee annually to
maintain the operations, maintenance and debt service for wastewater treatment
facilities. The Sewer Access Connection (SAC) fee is to be paid at the time at
which a building permit or a sewer connection permit is issued for all
buildings to be constructed or connected to the sewer system on or after the
effective date of this chapter. No charge shall be due upon the issuance of a
connection permit if a charge was paid upon issuance of a building permit. The
sewer access connection charge for each building or structure shall be equal to
the number of units of sewage volume which will discharge multiplied by the
amount established by Resolution of the City Council. The sewer access
connection (SAC) charge shall increase as adopted in the CIP per unit of sewage
volume for buildings or structures connecting to the city wastewater collection
and treatment system. The equivalent units of sewage volume shall be, assigned
as follows:
(Ordinance 14-04, adopted June 10, 2014)
 
Standard Sewage Volume Units For Various Residential Dwellings
Single family houses, townhouses, and duplex units                    1.0 Unit
Condominiums and apartment units                                      0.8 Unit
Mobile homes                                                          0.8 Unit
Public housing units subsidized under any Federal Program for low and 0.8 Unit
moderate income housing
 
Standard Sewage Volume Units for Various Commercial, Public and Institutional
Facilities
The areas listed in the parameters include all interior areas utilized by the
public and the employees for the conduct of the facility.
Exhibit A: SAC Criteria
FACILITY PARAMETER SAC
Standard Sewage Volume Units for Various Commercial, Public and Institutional Facilities
The areas listed in the parameters include all interior areas utilized by the public and the
employees for the conduct of the facility.
Exhibit A: SAC Criteria
FACILITY                                                                       PARAMETER  SAC
Animal Clinic (humane societies, animal research, boarding, etc.)
   Animal holding areas                                                     17 f.u.    1
   Animal runs                                                              34 f.u.    1
Archery (6 feet lane)                                                          6 lanes    1
Arenas (bleachers 18 inches/person)                                            110 seats  1
Auditoriums (7 square feet/person)                                             110 seats  1
Automobile Service
   Fast service (less than 4 hours per car)                                 2 service  1
                                                                               bays
   Major service (more than 4 hours per car)                                14         1
                                                                               employees
   Car Dealership (charge for office, retail, etc. at established rates)
   Fast Service (# service bays x 30%)                                      2 service  1
                                                                               bay
   Major Service (# service bays @ 70% x 1 employee/bay)                    14         1
                                                                               employees
Ballroom (exclude dance floor)
   Facility without liquor service                                          825 square 1
                                                                               feet
   Facility with liquor service                                             590 square 1
                                                                               feet
                                                                               2,400
   Bank (exclude cash vault)                                                square     1
                                                                               feet
Banquet Room (15 square feet/person)
                                                                               2,060
   Food catered                                                             square     1
                                                                               feet
                                                                               1,180
   Food catered with dishwashing                                            square     1
                                                                               feet
                                                                               1,028
   Food catered with liquor                                                 square     1
                                                                               feet
   Food preparation and dishwashing                                         825 square 1
                                                                               feet
   Food catered with dishwashing and liquor                                 750 square 1
                                                                               feet
   Food preparation, dishwashing and liquor                                 590 square 1
                                                                               feet
Barber                                                                         4 chairs   1
Batting Cages (6 feet/lane)                                                    6 lanes    1
Beauty Salon                                                                   4 cutting  1
                                                                               stations
Bingo Hall (used only for bingo)                                               110 seats  1
Boarding House (dorm rooms)                                                    5 beds     1
Body Shop (major service - more than 4 hours per car no vehicle washing)       14         1
                                                                               employees
Bowling Alleys (does not include bar or dining area                            3 alleys   1
Camps (# gallons x occupant or site)
   Children's' Camps (central toilet and bath; overnight, primitive cabins)
      (# occupants x 50 gallons occupant)                                274        1
                                                                               gallons
   Day Camps (no meals)
      (# occupants x 10 gallons/occupant)                                274        1
                                                                               gallons
   Labor/Construction Camps
      (# occupants x 50 gallons/occupant)                                274        1
                                                                               gallons
   Resorts (housekeeping cabins)
      (# occupants x 60 gal./occupant)                                   274        1
                                                                               gallons
Travel Trailer Parks
   with water and sewer hookup
      (# sites x 100 gallons/site)                                       274        1
                                                                               gallons
   with central toilet and showers
      (# sites x 75 gallons/site)                                        274        1
                                                                               gallons
   sanitary dump (sites without hookup)
      (# sites x 10 gal./site)                                           274        1
                                                                               gallons
Car Wash (CONTACT COB FOR DETERMINATION)
Catering (CONTACT COB FOR DETERMINATION)
Churches (for sanctuary, nave, chancel)                                        275 seats  1
   (7 square feet/person - seating area)
   (remainder use other criteria)
   (sacristy, ambulatory - no charge)
Cocktail Lounge (no food service)                                              23 seat    1
Coffee Shop (no food service)                                                  23 seat    1
Correction Facility (prison)                                                   2.5        1
                                                                               inmates
                                                                               1,650
Court Rooms                                                                    square     1
                                                                               feet
Dorm Rooms: On/off campus students                                             5 students 1
   (charge additional for classrooms)
Daycare (number of children licensed for)                                      14         1
                                                                               children
Child/Adult Play Area (not licensed)                                           490 square 1
                                                                               feet
                                                                               3,000
Dry Cleaners (retail)                                                          square     1
                                                                               feet
Elderly Housing (100% of current SAC Rate)
   (no washer/dryer each unit)                                              3 people   1
   (washer/dryer each unit)                                                 2.5 people 1
      *Three bedroom unit with washer/dryer
      (separate from formula below)
         (# of one bedroom units x 1.5 people/unit)
         + of two bedroom units x 2.0 people/unit)
         + of three bedroom units x 3.0 people/unit)
         (total # of people)
Exercise Area/Gym (juice bars - no charge)
   (sauna, whirlpool included)                                              700 square 1
                                                                               feet
                                                                               2,060
   No showers                                                               square     1
                                                                               feet
Fire Station (charge for office, meeting rooms, etc. at established rates)
   Washing (hose tower, trunk)                                              274        1
                                                                               gallons
    Full time (overnight people)
      (75 gal/person)/274 gallons                                        274        1
                                                                               gallons
      Volunteer (occasional overnight)                                   14 people  1
Funeral Home                                                                   770 square 1
(charge viewing areas only - chapel, viewing areas, etc.)                      feet
Apartment (1 apartment)                                                                   1
Game Room (billiards, video and pinball games)
   With bar                                                                 590 square 1
                                                                               feet
                                                                               2,060
   Without bar                                                              square     1
                                                                               feet
Golf Course (if showers - use locker room criteria)
   18 hole                                                                             3
   9 hole - par 3                                                                      2
   Miniature                                                                           1
   Country club (private)
   Dining room (evenings and weekends)                                      15 seats   1
   Bar and grill (bar and grill separate)
   Bar                                                                      23 seats   1
   Grill                                                                    15 seats   1
   Golf Dome or Driving Range                                               6 driving  1
                                                                               stations
Greenhouse
   Area not open to public                                                  15,000 sq. 1
                                                                               feet
   Area open to public                                                      5,000 sq.  1
                                                                               feet
   General retail area                                                      3,000 sq.  1
                                                                               feet
Group Home
   Secondary treatment (residents leaving during the day)                   5 beds     1
   Primary treatment (residents stay all day)                               3 beds     1
                                                                               (charge
Guest Rooms (apartment or condominium)                                         SAC as
                                                                               apartment)
   Washer/dryer                                                             100% (of
                                                                               Current
   No washer/dryer                                                          80% SAC
                                                                               Rate)
   No kitchen                                                               50%
Handball and Racquetball Courts                                                1 court    2
Hospitals (licensed beds or baby cribs)                                        1 bed      1
(does not include outpatient clinic)
   Outpatient clinic (plumbing fixture units)                               17 f.u.    1
   Sterilizers (4 hours x gpm x 60 minutes)                                 274        1
                                                                               gallons
X-ray film processors                                                          274        1
                                                                               gallons
   (continuous operation 9 hours)
   (intermittent operation 4 hours)
   (operation time (hrs) x gpm x 60 minutes).
   Vacuum device (Dental office)                                            274        1
                                                                               gallons
   (9 hours x gpm x 60 minutes)
Ice Arena
   Showers (see LOCKER ROOMS)
   Team Rooms (plumbing fixture units)                                      17 f.u.    1
   Bleachers                                                                110 seats  1
Zamboni (if discharge going to sanitary sewer                                             4
Laundromat (requires water volume for cycle time, 8 cycles/day)                274        1
                                                                               gallons
Library (subtract book storage areas, file areas - charge common plumbing      17 f.u.    1
fixture units in public areas)
                                                                               2,400
Meeting rooms, board rooms, reception, book checkout offices                   square     1
                                                                               feet
                                                                               7,000
Loading Dock                                                                   square     1
                                                                               feet
Locker Rooms (if showers -20 gallons/person                                    14 lockers 1
Medical Clinic (See HOSPITALS, Outpatient Clinic)
                                                                               1,650
Meeting Rooms (conference rooms)                                               square     1
                                                                               feet
Mini-storage (storage area - no charge)
   Living area                                                                         1
   Public restroom (plumbing fixtures)                                      17 f.u.    1
Mobile Home                                                                               1
Motels and Hotels (assume 2 persons/room)                                      2 rooms    1
   (pools, saunas, Jacuzzis, game rooms, or exercise rooms exclusively used by
guests - no charge)
   Breakfast only (complimentary)                                           45 seats   1
   Cocktail hour (complimentary)                                            55 seats   1
   Kitchenettes
      (# kitchenettes x 10 gallons/day)                                  274        1
                                                                               gallons
                                                                               2,400
Museum                                                                         square     1
                                                                               feet
Nursing Home                                                                   3 beds     1
Office
   General office (deduct mechanical rooms, elevator shafts stairwells,     2,400
restroom and storage areas)                                                    square     1
                                                                               feet
   Dental, Doctors see hospital
   Police Station (charge as office)
   Cells (overnight jail)                                                   3 people
   (no overnight people - holding area)                                     14 people  1
                                                                               7,000
Recording/Filming Studios                                                      square     1
                                                                               feet
Restaurant (drive-in)                                                          9 parking  1
                                                                               spaces
Restaurant (fast food)                                                         22 seats   1
   (disposable paper plates, glasses, and silverware)
Restaurant (full service)                                                      8 seats    1
   (washable silverware, glasses, and dishes)
Retail Stores (deduct mechanical rooms, elevator shafts stairwells, restrooms  3,000
and unfinished storage areas)                                                  square     1
                                                                               feet
Rifle Ranges (handgun ranges - 6 feet/lane)                                    6 lanes    1
Roller Rink (skating area)                                                     825 square 1
                                                                               feet
Rooming Houses (no food service)                                               7 beds     1
RV Dumping Station (not in association with camp grounds)                                 1
Schools (Sunday - 30 square feet/student)                                      55         1
                                                                               students
Schools (elementary - 15 gallon/student - 30 square feet/student               18         1
                                                                               students
Schools (college, TV [ 30 square feet/student)                                 18         1
                                                                               students
   Lecture halls (15 square feet/student)                                   18         1
                                                                               students
   Labs (50 square feet/student)                                            18         1
                                                                               students
   Dorm rooms (on/off campus students)                                      5 students 1
Schools (nursery - number of children licensed for)                            14         1
                                                                               students
   Church (nursery - during worship service only - 30 sq. ft./child)        55         1
                                                                               students
                                                                               2,400
   Nursery (health clubs, bowling alleys, etc.)                             square     1
                                                                               feet
Schools (secondary - 30 sq. ft./student - 20 gallons/student)                  14         1
                                                                               students
   Labs (50 square feet/student)                                            14         1
                                                                               students
Service Station
   Gas pumping                                                                         1
                                                                               3,000
   Convenience center                                                       square     1
                                                                               feet
   Service bays                                                             2 bays     1
Car Wash (See CAR WASH)
Swimming Pools (public - pool area)                                            900 square 1
                                                                               feet
   (private residential, townhouse, condominiums, hotels, motels or apartments
- no charge)
                                                                               3,000
Tanning Rooms                                                                  square     1
                                                                               feet
Tennis Courts (public, shower facilities available)                            1 court    2
Theater                                                                        64 seats   1
Theater (drive-in - parking spaces)                                            55 spaces  1
Vehicle Garage
   Employees stationed in garage                                            14         1
                                                                               employees
      Vehicle drivers (per day)                                          28 drivers 1
   Vehicle washing                                                          274        1
   (# vehicles/day x gpm x minutes/vehicle)                                 gallons
                                                                               7,000
Warehouses (assembly areas)                                                    square     1
                                                                               feet
Office/Warehouse (speculative - must be reviewed on finishing permits)
                                                                               2,400
   Minimum 30% office                                                       square     1
                                                                               feet
                                                                               7,000
   Maximum 70% warehouse                                                    square     1
                                                                               feet
Whirlpool (doctors office/clinic, therapy - # gal./fill x 8 fills/day)         274        1
                                                                               gallons
Yard Storage Buildings
   (example: lumber storage)                                                15,000
   (customer pickup, no permanent employees)                                square     1
                                                                               feet
 
Plumbing Waste Fixture Units* (17 f.u. = 1 SAC)
Type of fixture Fixture unit value (f. u.)
Plumbing Waste Fixture Units* (17 f.u. = 1 SAC)
Type of fixture                                      Fixture unit value (f. u.)
Drinking fountain                                    1
Floor drain 2 inch waste (only if hose bib included) 2
   3 inch waste (only if hose bib included)       3
   4 inch waste (only if hose bib included)       4
   Trench drain: per 6 foot section               2
   Sinks lab in exam room, bathroom               1
   kitchen, and others                            2
   surgeon                                        3
   janitor                                        4
Water closet                                         6
* If not included in list, use plumbing code
 
The number of standard volume units for a facility not included in the above
list shall be determined by the council. A request for determination should be
made prior to the issuance of a building permit.
   A.   All building permits issued by the city for alterations and/or
additions to existing buildings or structures will be subject to a water access
connection (WAC) charge if the addition or alteration will increase water use.
The number of equivalent residential units will be determined in the same
manner as above described.
   B.   All users shall incur a surcharge rate of $1.30 per connection in the
months of January, February, March and April in addition to the normal rate.
This fee is applied to the DNR connection permit that is due annually.
   C.   The city has a Roundup program that residents may participate in if
they choose. The participant’s monthly bill will be rounded up to the nearest
dollar. The Roundup money collected each month is distributed to the Park Fund
205 for the development of parks within the city.
402.13 Fire Hydrants.
No person, except a person authorized by the city, shall be allowed to open any
fire hydrant in the city for any purpose whatsoever, without first securing a
permit from the utilities superintendent. Payment for such water used, except
for fire fighting, shall be made in accordance with the rate schedule above
provided.
402.14 Service Outside of City Limits.
Water service shall not be extended to any users beyond the city limits.
402.15 Private Wells Prohibited.
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and terms
shall have the meaning set forth below:
   Subd. 1.   Definition. For purposes of this chapter, “private water supply
system” shall mean a system owned and operated by a person for collection and
delivery of piped water for human consumption into commercial, industrial, or
residential buildings or structures.
   Subd. 2.   Private Systems Prohibited. No person shall build, establish,
expand or maintain a private water supply system within the city unless there
shall be no municipal water supply system within one hundred feet from the
point on property of such person which is nearest the public water supply
system.
   Subd. 3.   Exception. Any private water supply system which is in place and
operational as of January 1, 1983, shall not be subject to this section.
500 General Regulations
501. Dogs
501.01. Definitions.
   Subd. 1.   At Large. A dog is at large when it is off the property of the
person owning, harboring or keeping said dog and it is not under restraint.
   Subd. 2.   Restraint. A dog is under restraint if it is at heel beside a
person having custody of it or obedient to that person's command; or is within
a private motor vehicle of a person owning, harboring or keeping the dog; or is
controlled by a leash not exceeding six feet in length.
   Subd. 3.   Commercial Kennel. A place where more than two dogs over six
months of age are kept for purposes of breeding, training, sale or boarding for
a profit.
   Subd. 4.   Hobby Kennel. A place where more than two dogs over six months of
age are kept for the purposes of breeding, training, sale or boarding not for a
profit.
   Subd. 5.   Altered. A dog is altered if it has been rendered incapable of
producing offspring. (Ordinance No. 92-19, adopted October 13, 1992)
501.02. Running at Large.
No dog shall be permitted to run at large at any time within the City. Any
female dog in heat or season shall be confined indoors or in a kennel run or
pen so constructed to keep other dogs out. (Ordinance No. 92-19, adopted
October 13, 1992)
501.03. Abandoning Dogs.
No person shall abandon any dog or other animal within the city. (Ordinance No.
92-19, adopted October 13, 1992)
501.04. Dogs Which Damage Property.
No owner of a dog shall permit the dog to damage any lawn, garden or other
private or public property, or to urinate or defecate on public property or
private property, without the consent of the owner or possessor of the
property. It shall be the duty of each owner of a dog to remove any feces left
by such dog and to dispose of such feces in a sanitary manner. It shall also be
the duty of each owner of a dog when such dog is off the owner's premises to
have in possession a device or equipment for the picking up and removal of dog
feces. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a guide dog
accompanying a blind person or to a dog when used in police or rescue
activities by or with the permission of the City. (Ordinance No. 92-19, adopted
October 13, 1992)
501.05. License Required.
No person shall own, harbor or keep a dog over six months of age within the
city unless a current dog license for such dog has been obtained. Licenses
shall be issued every two years and must be renewed by July 1st of every other
calendar year. (Amended by Ordinance No. 96-01, adopted May 20, 1996.)
501.06. Fee and Issuance.
The license fee shall be established by council resolution pursuant to
Chapter 212. Each application for a dog license shall be accompanied by a
certificate of inoculation for rabies which is no more than six months old.
Upon receipt of the license fee and certificate of inoculation, the clerk/
treasurer shall execute a receipt to the person who pays the fee, with a copy
retained in the records of the city. The receipt shall describe the dog as to
color, breed, age, sex, and weight. The owner shall produce the receipt for
inspection upon the request of the dog warden or any peace officer. (Ordinance
No. 92-19, adopted October 13, 1992)
501.07. Tags.
The clerk/treasurer shall procure a sufficient number of metallic tags, the
shape of which shall be different for each year and he shall deliver one such
tag to the person paying the license fee. It shall be the responsibility of the
owner of the dog for which such tag was obtained to permanently attach the tag
to the collar of the dog in a manner so that the tag may be readily seen. The
tag is not transferable to any other dog or to a new owner of the dog. If a tag
is lost or stolen the owner may obtain a new tag by surrendering the receipt
for the first tag and by paying an additional fee established by council
resolution pursuant to
Chapter 212. (Ordinance No. 92-19, adopted October 13, 1992)
501.08. Pound.
The council shall designate a place as city dog pound for keeping and
maintaining any dogs which may be seized or impounded pursuant to this chapter.
The council may contract for dog pound services. (Ordinance No. 92-19, adopted
October 13, 1992)
501.09. Dog Warden.
   Subd. 1.   Authorization. The dog warden or the peace officer of the city
may seize and impound any dogs found in the city without the tag provided for
by this chapter, or dogs running at large in violation of
501.02. To enforce this chapter, said dog warden or peace officer may enter
upon any private premises in pursuit of a dog running at large. During regular
working hours 7 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. a public works employee will impound a stray
dog that is restrained or in custody by a leash and not running loose. A public
works employee will deliver the dog to the humane society. After regular
working hours, on weekends or holidays the public works staff will not be
required to come into the city to impound a stray dog. (Ordinance 2012-05,
adopted June 26, 2012)
   Subd. 2.   Notice. Upon the impounding of any dog, the clerk/treasurer,
peace officer, or dog warden shall without delay notify the owner personally or
by mail if the owner is known. If the owner is unknown, a written notice shall
be posted at city hall. In either case, the notice shall describe the dog,
state where it is impounded, and state that it may be redeemed by the owner
within five regular business days after impounding by payment of the impounding
fee plus the cost of boarding the dog.
   Subd. 3.   Redemption. Any impounded dog may be redeemed by the owner within
five regular business days after impounding, upon payment of the impounding fee
and boarding costs; provided that no dog may be redeemed unless the current
license fee has been paid. If the license is obtained after a dog has been
impounded then there shall be a penalty fee added to the regular license fee
equal to the regular license amount. This fee shall be paid in addition to any
dog licensing, impounding or boarding fees which shall be required prior to
release of the dog. Impounding fees and boarding charges shall be established
by council resolution, pursuant to
Chapter 212. If the council has contracted for dog pound services, boarding
charges shall be actual charges pursuant to the contract.
   Subd. 4.   Disposal. If after five regular business days the dog has not
been redeemed by the owner, it may be sold for an amount sufficient to pay the
impounding fee and the cost of the boarding. Any person purchasing a dog under
this subdivision shall procure a license pursuant to
501.06 and
501.07 if the person intends to keep the dog within the city. Any dog not
redeemed or sold may be destroyed in a proper and humane manner, or may be
disposed of pursuant to the terms of Minnesota Statutes 35.71. (Ordinance No.
92-19, adopted October 13, 1992)
501.10. Dangerous Animals.
Any dog which is diseased, vicious, dangerous, rabid, or exposed to rabies and
which cannot be taken up and impounded without serious risk to the person or
persons attempting to take up the dog, may be killed by, or upon the written
direction of, the dog warden or a peace officer. (Ordinance No. 92-19, adopted
October 13, 1992)
501.11. Rabid or Biting Dogs.
Any dog suspected of rabies and any dog that has bitten any person may, at the
discretion of the dog warden or peace officer, be seized on the premises of the
owner or elsewhere, and confined in a veterinary hospital for ten days. The dog
may be released at the end of the ten day period if it is healthy and free from
symptoms of rabies, upon payment of costs by the owner. (Ordinance No. 92-19,
adopted October 13, 1992)
501.12. Reporting Bites.
Any person bitten by a dog, where the bite requires the services of a
physician, shall report the incident to the Wright County Sheriff. (Ordinance
No. 92-19, adopted October 13, 1992)
501.13. Kennel.
   Subd. 1.   Kennel Licenses. No person shall own, harbor, keep, or have
custody of more than two dogs over the age of six months old on their property
without having first secured a private kennel license as required herein.
   Subd. 2.   Issuance. Kennel licenses may only be issued in conjunction with
a conditional use permit. Associated zoning administration fees shall be paid
by the applicant prior to Planning Commission consideration of the conditional
use permit and license. The original kennel application shall be required to
pay the Conditional Use Permit fees as established by council in
Chapter 212 and the kennel permit fee as established shall not be required for
the first year of operation. The application shall contain information
concerning the proximity of the applicant's property to surrounding neighbors,
the number and type of dogs to be kept on the property, the proposed housing of
the dogs, and such other information as the council may require. The
application shall first be referred to the Planning Commission for conditional
use permit proceedings. Upon recommendation from the Planning commission for
issuance of a conditional use permit, the clerk/treasurer shall refer the
application to the council, which may grant or deny the kennel permit. The
permit shall state the number of dogs which may be kept pursuant to the permit
and any other conditions the Planning Commission may deem necessary. If a
permit holder wishes to increase the number of dogs he shall apply for a new
permit.
   Subd. 3.   Renewal. Each kennel permit shall be reviewed annually and an
application shall be submitted to the Clerk/Treasurer and the kennel permit fee
as set up in
Chapter 212 shall be paid to the City. Upon review, consideration for renewal
of the permit shall be based on complaints, neighborhood changes which may have
occurred, or changes within the kennel itself.
   Subd. 4.   Regulations. Each kennel shall be kept in a clean and healthful
condition at all times, and shall be open for inspection by the city
authorities at any reasonable time. A kennel permit may be revoked by the
council for violation of this chapter or any health, nuisance, or other
applicable ordinance, law, or regulation. (Ordinance No. 92-19, adopted October
13, 1992)
501.14. Nuisance.
The following shall be deemed to be a nuisance and may be abated as provided by
Chapter 901.
   (1)   The keeping of any dog which habitually barks, howls, or bays so as to
annoy other persons, upon written complaint of two or more neighbors.
   (2)   The keeping of more than two dogs over the age of six months, without
a kennel permit having been issued.
   (3)   The provisions of this section are in addition to any other remedy
provided for violation of this code. (Ordinance No. 92-19, adopted October 13,
1992)
502. Animals
502.01. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ANIMAL.  Any mammal, reptile, amphibian, fish, bird (including all fowl and
poultry) or other member commonly accepted as a part of the animal kingdom.
ANIMALS shall be further classified as follows:
   (1)   DOMESTIC. Those animals commonly accepted as domesticated household
pets. Unless otherwise defined, such animals shall include dogs, cats, caged
birds, gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, domesticated rabbits, fish, non-
poisonous, non-venomous and non-constricting reptiles or amphibians, and other
similar animals.
   (2)   NON-DOMESTIC. Those animals commonly considered to be naturally wild
and not naturally trained or domesticated, or which are commonly considered to
be inherently dangerous to the health, safety, and welfare of people. Unless
otherwise defined, such animals shall include:
      (a)   Any member of the large cat family (family felidae) including
lions, tigers, cougars, bobcats, leopards and jaguars, but excluding commonly
accepted domesticated house cats.
      (b)   Any naturally wild member of the canine family (family canidae)
including wolves, foxes, coyotes, dingoes, and jackals, but excluding commonly
accepted domesticated dogs.
      (c)   Any crossbreeds such as the crossbreed between a wolf and a dog,
unless the crossbreed is commonly accepted as a domesticated house pet.
      (d)   Any member or relative of the rodent family including any skunk
(whether or not de-scented), raccoon, squirrel, but excluding those members
otherwise defined or commonly accepted as domesticated pets.
      (e)   Any poisonous, venomous, constricting, or inherently dangerous
member of the reptile or amphibian families including rattlesnakes, boa
constrictors, pit vipers, crocodiles and alligators.
      (f)   Any other animal which is not explicitly listed above but which can
be reasonably defined by the terms of this subpart, including but not limited
to bears, deer, monkeys and game fish.
   (3)   FARM.  Those animals commonly associated with a farm or performing
work in an agricultural setting. Unless otherwise defined, such animals shall
include members of the equestrian family (horses, mules), bovine family (cows,
bulls), sheep, poultry (chickens, turkeys), fowl (ducks, geese, pheasants),
swine (including Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs), goats, bees, and other animals
associated with a farm, ranch, or stables or agricultural purposes. This also
includes Cervidae, Ratitae and Llama animal groups as defined by Minnesota
state statute. (These animals include, but are not limited to elks, ostriches,
emus, rheas and llamas and under state law all are considered to be livestock
and raised for agricultural pursuits).
OWNER.  Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning,
keeping, or harboring an animal.
VETERINARY CLINIC.  Any establishment maintained and operated by a Minnesota
licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of diseases and
injuries of animals. (Ordinance 13-03, adopted May 28, 2013)
502.02. Non-Domestic Animals.   
It shall be illegal for any person or business to own, possess, harbor, or
offer for sale, any non-domestic animal within the city limits. Any owner of
such an animal at the time of adoption of this code shall have 30 days in which
to remove the animal from the city after which time the city may impound the
animal as provided for in this chapter. An exception shall be made to this
prohibition for animals specifically trained for and actually providing
assistance to the handicapped or disabled, and for those animals brought into
the city as part of a parade, operating zoo, veterinary clinic, or scientific
research lab. This exception includes any parade, licensed show or exhibition
not to exceed a total of 14 days during any 12-month period. (Ordinance 13-03,
adopted May 28, 2013)
502.03. Farm Animals.
Farm animals shall only be kept in an agricultural district established by the
Zoning Ordinance and subject to any additional requirements or conditions. Any
owner of such an animal at the time of adoption of this code shall have 30 days
in which to remove the animal from the city after which time the city may
impound the animal as provided for in this chapter. An exception shall be made
subject to approval by the City Administrator for those animals brought into
the city as part of a parade, operating zoo, veterinary clinic, or scientific
research laboratory. This exception includes any licensed show or exhibition
not to exceed a total of 14 days during any 12-month period. (Ordinance 13-03,
adopted May 28, 2013)
502.04. Nuisances.
   Subd. 1.   Dangerous Animals. Adoption by reference. M.S. §§ 343.40, 346.57,
347.50, 347.51, 347.52, 347.53, 347.54, 347.55, 347.56 and 347.515, as they may
be amended from time to time, as they pertain to domestic animals, are adopted
by reference and are as much part of this code as if fully set forth herein.
Any violation of the statutes herein adopted by reference is a violation of
this code. If an animal is diseased, vicious, dangerous, rabid or exposed to
rabies and the animal cannot be impounded after a reasonable effort or cannot
be impounded without serious risk to persons attempting to impound it, or if an
animal has made more than one attack on a person or persons, the animal may be
immediately killed by or under direction of an officer authorized to enforce
the provisions of this Section.
   Subd. 2.   Diseased Animals.
   (A)   Running at large. No person shall keep or allow to be kept on his or
her premises, or on premises occupied by them, nor permit to run at large in
the city, any animal which is diseased so as to be a danger to the health and
safety of any person, even though the animal be properly licensed under this
Chapter.
   (B)   Confinement. Any animal reasonably suspected of being diseased and
presenting a threat to the health and safety of the public, may be apprehended
and confined in the pound by any person or officer. The officer shall have a
licensed veterinarian examine the animal. If the animal is found to be diseased
in such a manner so as to be a danger to the health and safety of the city, the
officer shall cause such animal to be painlessly killed and shall properly
dispose of the remains. The owner or keeper of the animal killed under this
section shall be liable for a time to cover the cost of disposing of the
animal, and a per day maintenance charge and the costs of any veterinarian
examinations. The amount of the fine and charges shall be as set by City
Council.
   (C)   Release. If the animal, upon examination, is not found to be diseased
the animal shall be released to the owner or keeper free of charge.
   Subd. 3.   Other. Any animals kept contrary to this chapter are hereby
declared a public nuisance and may be abated according to the law. (Ordinance
13-03, adopted May 28, 2013)
502.05. Basic Care.  
All animals shall receive from their owners or keepers a kind treatment, clean
and sanitary shelter from the elements and sufficient food and water for the
animal’s comfort. Any person not treating their pet in such a humane manner
will be subject to the penalties provided in this chapter. (Ordinance 13-03,
adopted May 28, 2013)
503. Peddlers and Solicitors
503.01. Green River Ordinance.
No solicitor, peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant or transient vendor of
merchandise shall go in or upon private residences or residential properties
for the purpose of selling or soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares,
merchandise or services if such property has been posted with a sign forbidding
solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants or transient vendors of
merchandise. Such signs shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the property.
A sign posted on the door or entrance to a residence or residential property
shall be deemed conspicuous for purposes of this ordinance. (Ordinance No. 89-
4, adopted March 13, 1989)
503.02. Registration.
   Subd. 1.   Any solicitor, peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant or transient
vendor of merchandise who intends to sell or solicit orders for the sale of
wares, merchandise, or services at the private residences or on residential
properties shall register with the City Clerk. Such registration shall include
the following information:
   (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the solicitor, peddler,
hawker, itinerant merchant or transient vendor.
   (2)   The name, address and telephone number of his/her employer.
   (3)   A description of the goods, merchandise, wares or services being
offered, including brand names if any.
   Subd. 2.   If any nonprofit corporation intends to sell or solicit orders
for goods, wares, merchandise or services at residences or on residential
properties, it shall provide the following information:
   (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the nonprofit corporation.
   (2)   A description of the goods, merchandise, wares or services being
offered.
   (3)   The name, address and telephone number of a person who may be
contacted for information concerning the organization and the selling or
soliciting.
   Subd. 3.   Any person who provides false information on any such
registration or who fails to register shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ordinance No. 89-4, adopted March 13, 1989)
503.03. Exceptions.
The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to any person who has been
invited to the residence or residential property by the resident thereof.
(Ordinance No. 89-4, adopted March 13, 1989)
504 Curfew
(Ordinance No. 85-11, adopted November 26, 1985)
504.01. Curfew Imposed.
   Subd. 1.   Age and Time. No person under the age of 18 years except as
provided in Subd. 2, shall be on any public street or alley or in any park or
other public grounds or building, place of amusement, entertainment, or
refreshment, vacant lot, or any other unsupervised place between the hours of
10:00 P.M. and 5:00 A.M. of the following day.
   Subd. 2.   Exceptions. The restrictions of Subdivision 1 do not apply:
   (1)   On Friday and Saturday nights between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 12:
00 P.M. where the minor has attained the age of 16.
   (2)   If the minor is accompanied. by the minor's parent, guardian, or other
adult if the minor or adult has, in his or her possession, written consent of
the parent or guardian for the minor being in public places during such hours.
   (3)   If the minor is returning home by a direct route from, and within
thirty (30) minutes after, a school activity or an activity of a religious or
other voluntary association when prior notice of the activity and its place and
probable time of termination has been given to the designated law enforcement
agency by an adult person authorized by the school or the religious or
voluntary association to do so.
   (4)   If the minor is carrying a certified card of employment and is on his
way to or from his place of employment by a direct route.
   (5)   If the minor is upon an emergency errand or other legitimate business
directed by the minor's parent, guardian or other adult having the lawful
custody of the minor.
   (6)   If there exists a reasonable necessity therefore. (Ordinance No. 85-
11, adopted November 26, 1985)
504.02. Responsibility of Parent.
No parent, guardian, or other adult having custody and control of a minor under
18 years of age shall knowingly permit the minor to violate the provisions of
504.01 (Ordinance No. 85-11, adopted November 26, 1985)
504.03. Loitering.
It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to loiter, loaf or idle on or
near any structure, vehicle, private grounds or public place without the
consent of the owner. (Ordinance No. 85-11, adopted November 26, 1985)
504.04. Enforcement.
Any person under the age of 18 years of age on a street or other place in
violation of
504.01 shall be ordered to go home immediately. After investigation, if
responsible city authorities determine that court action should be initiated,
the minor shall be dealt with in accordance with juvenile court law and
procedure. Any such minor who is convicted of a violation of this chapter after
the case has been referred for prosecution in the trial court under Minnesota
Statutes §260.15, shall be punished in accordance with this code. (Ordinance
No. 85-11, adopted November 26, 1985)
505. Burning
505.01. Definition.
“Open Burning” means the burning of any matter whereby the resultant combustion
products are emitted directly to the atmosphere without passing through an
adequate stack, duct, or chimney. (Ordinance No. 93-12, adopted November 23,
1993)
505.02. Regulations.
   Subd. 1.   Burning is permitted subject to the provisions of Minnesota
Statutes No. 88.16 and 88.22 stating the open burning of brush between April
15th and May 15th and October 1st and October 31st or for a two-week period
after a major storm is permitted. (Ordinance No. 95-17, adopted November 14,
1995)
505.03. Limits and Conditions.
   Subd. 1.   Such burning shall be limited to the area of the city zoned for
residential purposes only.
   Subd. 2.   No burning is permitted in the city streets.
   Subd. 3.   No burning will be allowed within 50 feet from a structure.
   Subd. 4.   No burning will be conducted before the hours of 10:00 a.m. or
after 10:00 p.m.
   Subd. 5.   All such fires shall be attended at all times by a person of
suitable age discretion.
   Subd. 6.   No burning shall take place during an air pollution alert,
warning or emergency declared by the Pollution Control Agency or Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources. (Ordinance No. 93-12, adopted November 23,
1993)
505.04. Copy to State Agencies.
A copy of this section or any amendment thereof shall be submitted to the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency and the Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources. (Ordinance No. 93-12, adopted November 23, 1993)
505.05. Permits.
It is unlawful to burn brush under this section without a permit from the Fire
Chief or his designee. No such permit shall be issued without a finding by the
Fire Chief or his designee that there is no danger of fire to adjacent
structures of combustible material. The permit may include such conditions as
are reasonable under the circumstances. (Amended by Ordinance No. 95-17, passed
November 14, 1995)
506. Weapons
506.01. Dangerous Weapons.
No person shall do any of the following:
   (1)   Recklessly handle or use a gun or other dangerous weapon or explosive
so as to endanger the safety of another.
   (2)   Intentionally point a gun of any kind, capable of injuring or killing
a human being and whether loaded or unloaded, at or toward another.
   (3)   Manufacture, or sell for any unlawful purpose, any weapon known as a
sling-shot or sand club.
   (4)   Manufacture, transfer or possess metal knuckles or a switchblade knife
opening automatically.
   (5)   Possess any other dangerous article or substance for the purpose of
being used unlawfully as a weapon against another.
   (6)   Sell or have in his possession any device designated to silence or
muffle the discharge of a firearm.
506.02. Minors.
   Subd. 1.   Under 14. No person shall without the parent's or guardian's
consent, furnish a child under 14 years of age a firearm or air gun of any kind
or any ammunition or explosive. No parent or guardian shall permit a child
under 14 years of age to handle or use, outside of the parent's or guardian's
presence, a firearm or air gun of any kind or any ammunition or explosive.
   Subd. 2.   Under 18. No person shall furnish a minor under 18 years of age
with a firearm, air gun, ammunition, or explosive without the written consent
of his parent or guardian or of the chief of police.
506.03. Discharge of Firearms.
No person shall shoot or discharge any firearm, air rifle, pellet gun, or any
other weapon within the city, nor shall any person cause any projectile to be
fired from outside the city into the city, except as follows:
   (1)   Persons duly authorized to act as law enforcement officers or members
of the military forces of the United States or the State of Minnesota in the
discharge of their duties.
   (2)   Persons engaged in target, trap or skeet shooting at a target, trap,
or skeet range for which a permit has been issued by the council. Prior to
issuing a permit, the council shall direct the designated law enforcement
agency to investigate and report to the council on the safety of the proposed
range.
507. Abandoned Property
507.01. Procedure.
Except as set forth in
Chapter 804 of this code and except as otherwise provided for by law, all
abandoned, lost or unclaimed property lawfully coming into possession of the
city shall be disposed of as provided in this section. (Ordinance 89-9, adopted
July 10, 1989)
507.02. Storage.
All property subject to this section shall be turned over to the city police
department which shall arrange for storage of such property. The police
department shall arrange for storage of such property on or within city
facilities except that if city facilities for storage are unavailable or
inadequate, the police department may arrange for storage at privately owned
facilities. (Ordinance 89-9, adopted July 10, 1989)
507.03. Claim by Owner.
The owner may claim the property by exhibiting satisfactory proof of ownership
and paying the city any storage or maintenance cost incurred by it. A receipt
for the property shall be obtained upon release to the owner. The city may
charge the owner reasonable storage charges for property stored on or in city
facilities. (Ordinance 89-9, adopted July 10, 1989)
507.04. Sale.
If the property remains unclaimed in possession of the city for sixty (60)
days, the property shall be sold to the highest bidder at a public auction
conducted by the chief of police and the city after two weeks published notice
setting for the time and place of the sale of the property to be sold.
(Ordinance 89-9, adopted July 10, 1989)
507.05. Disposition of Proceeds.
The proceeds of the sale shall be placed in the general fund of the city. If
the former owner makes application and furnishes satisfactory proof of
ownership within six (6) months of the sale, he shall be paid the proceeds of
the sale of his property less the cost of storage and the proportionate part of
the cost of published notice and other costs of sale. (Ordinance 89-9, adopted
July 10, 1989)
508. Prohibiting Unfair or Discriminatory Housing Practices
508.01. Declaration of Fair Housing Policy.
Discrimination with regard to housing on the basis of race, sex, creed,
religion, marital status, and disability affects the health, welfare, peace,
and safety of the community. Persons subject to such discriminations suffer
depressed living conditions, and create conditions which endanger the public
peace and order. The public policy of the City is declared to be to foster
equal opportunity for all to obtain decent, safe, and sanitary housing without
regard to their race, creed, color, national origin, marital status, disability
status, sex, and strictly in accord with their individual merits as human
beings. It is also the policy of the City to protect all persons from all
founded charges of discrimination. (Ordinance 02-16, adopted November 12, 2002)
508.02. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations, shall have the meaning given herein unless the context
otherwise indicates:
   (1)   “Discriminate or Discrimination” – includes segregate or separate.
   (2)   “Disability” – A mental or physical condition which constitutes a
handicap. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit any program,
service, facility or privilege afforded to a person with a disability which is
intended to habilitate, rehabilitate standing, state or condition of one as
single or married person. (Ordinance 02-16, adopted November 12, 2002)
508.03. Prohibited Acts in Regard to Housing.
It is an unlawful discriminatory practice:
   (1)   For any person to discriminate on grounds of race, creed, religion,
color, sex, marital status, status with regard to public assistance, national
origin, age or disability, in the sale, lease, or rental of any housing unit or
units.
   (2)   For any broker, salesman or other person acting on behalf of another
to so discriminate in the sale, lease, or rental of any housing unit or units
belonging to such other person.
   (3)   For any person engaged in the business of financing the purchase,
rehabilitation, remodeling or repair of housing units or in the business of
selling insurance with respect to housing units to refuse to provide such
financing or insurance or to discriminate with regard to the terms or
conditions thereof by reason of the race, color, sex, religion, creed, national
origin, marital status, status with regard to public assistance, age or
disability of the applicant or because of the location of the unit or units in
areas of the City occupied by persons of a particular race, color, sex,
religion, creed, national origin, marital status, status with regard to public
assistance, age or disability, or to discriminate by treating differently any
person or group of person who desire to purchase, lease, acquire, construct,
rehabilitate, repair or maintain real property in a specific urban area in the
granting, withholding, extending, modifying or renewing, or in the rates,
terms, conditions, or privileges of any such financial assistance or in the
extension of services in connection therewith. The bona fide programs of
Federal, State or local governmental units or agencies, however structured or
authorized to upgrade or improve in any manner a specific urban area shall not
be deemed to be a violation of this Section.
   (4)   For any person, having sold, leased, or rented a housing unit or units
to any person, to discriminate with respect to facilities, services, or
privileges of occupancy by reason of race, color, sex, creed, religion,
national origin, age or disability, marital status or status with regard to
public assistance.
   (5)   For any person to make or publish any statement evidencing an intent
to discriminate, on grounds of race, creed, religion, color, sex, national
origin or ancestry, marital status, status with regard to public assistance,
age or disability, in the sale, lease, or rental of a housing unit or units.
   (6)   For any person to make any inquiry regarding race, color, sex, creed,
religion, national origin, marital status, status with regard to public
assistance, age or disability to keep any record or use any form of
application, designed to elicit such information, in connection with the sale,
lease, rental, or financing of a housing unit or units, unless such information
is used only for statistical purposes to affirmatively further fair housing.
   (7)   For any person, for the purpose of inducing a real estate transaction
from which he may benefit financially:
      A.   To represent that a change has occurred or will or may occur in the
composition of the block, neighborhood, or area in which the property is
located, in respect of the race, color, sex, creed, religion, national origin,
marital status, with regard to public assistance, age or disability of those
living there; or,
      B.   To represent that a change will or may result in the lowering of
property values, an increase in crime, or anti-social behavior, or a decline in
the quality of schools in the block, neighborhood, or area concerned.
   (8)   Nothing in this Section shall be construed to require any person or
group of persons selling, renting or leasing property to modify the property in
any way, or exercise a higher degree of care for a person having a disability
than for a person who does not have a disability; nor shall this Section be
construed to relieve any person or person regardless of any disability; nor
shall this Section be construed to relieve any person or persons regardless of
any disability in a written lease, rental agreement, or contract or purchase or
sale, or to forbid distinctions based on the inability to fulfill the terms and
conditions, including financial obligations of such lease, agreement or
contract.
   (9)   The provisions of this Section shall not apply to:
      A.   The rental of a portion of a dwelling containing accommodations for
two (2) families, one of which is occupied by the owner; or
      B.   The rental by an owner or occupier of a one-family accommodation in
which he resides in a room or rooms in such accommodations to another person or
persons if the discrimination is by sex, marital status, status with regard to
public assistance or disability. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to
require any person or group of persons selling, renting, or leasing property to
modify the property in any way, or exercise a higher degree of care for a
person having a disability than for a person who does not have a disability,
nor shall this Section be construed to relieve any person or persons of any
obligations generally imposed on all persons regardless of any disability in a
written lease, rental agreement, or contract of purchase or sale, or to forbid
distinctions based on the inability to fulfill the terms and conditions,
including financial obligations, of such lease, agreement or contract.
(Ordinance 02-16, adopted November 12, 2002)
508.04. Enforcement Procedures.
The City is designated as the enforcement agency for this Section and shall
have the power to receive, hear and determine complaints as provided herein.
The City shall promptly investigate, upon complaint or upon its own motion, any
violations of this ordinance. If after investigation, it shall have reason to
believe a violation has occurred, it may refer the matter to the City Attorney
for criminal prosecution, initiate civil enforcement procedures as herein
provided, or enter into a settlement agreement which, when approved by the
City, shall have the same force as a City order. (Ordinance 02-16, adopted
November 12, 2002)
508.05. Statute of Limitations.
No action may be brought for civil enforcement or criminal prosecution unless
the change of alleged discriminatory practice was filed with the City within
one hundred eighty (180) days from the occurrence of the practice. (Ordinance
02-16, adopted November 12, 2002)
508.06. Civil Enforcement Procedure.
Civil enforcement procedures shall be prosecuted by the City before the Council
in the following manner:
   (1)   The City shall serve upon respondent by certified mail, a complaint,
signed by it, which shall set forth a clear and concise statement of the facts
constituting the violation, set a time and place for hearing, and advise the
respondent of his right to file an answer or appear in person or by any
attorney and to examine and cross-examine witnesses.
   (2)   The hearing shall not be less than twenty (20) days after service of
the complaint. At any time prior to the hearing, the respondent may file an
answer. Facts not denied by answer shall be deemed admitted. If the answer sets
out new matter, it shall be deemed denied by the City.
   (3)   The complaint or answer may be amended at any given time prior to the
hearing with the consent of the opposing party.
   (4)   Hearings shall be before the City Council.
   (5)   The City may obtain subpoenas from the District Court to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of documents at any hearing.
   (6)   If, after the hearing, the Council shall conclude that a violation has
occurred, it shall prepare an order which may contain any provision deemed
desirable to do justice to the complainant or to prevent further violations. It
may include provisions which require the respondent to rent, sell, or lease
particular housing to the complainant or to do any other thing as may be just.
The Council’s findings of fact and order shall be served on the respondent by
mail, and shall become the findings and order of the City unless, within ten
(10) days after mailing of the findings of order. Any order of the City may be
modified by the City at any time. (Ordinance 02-16, adopted November 12, 2002)
508.07. Force and Effect.
This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and
publication. (Ordinance 02-16, adopted November 12, 2002)
509. Address Display Required
509.01. Display.
All principal buildings in the City of shall display those address numbers
assigned to them by the City. (Ordinance 07-02, adopted April 10, 2007)
509.02. Location and Size.
   Subd. 1.   Numbers shall be displayed on the principal building in numerals
not less than four (4) inches high and of contrasting color to the background.
   Subd. 2.   The area of the address sign shall comply with the provisions of
Section
1001.08 of the Rockford Zoning Ordinance. (Ordinance 07-02, adopted April 10,
2007)
509.03. Clearly Visible.    
Numbers shall be affixed to the principal building so as to be clearly visible
from the nearest public street.
   Subd. 1   Mail Boxes. In those cases where the principal building is
obscured from the view from the public street of address by accessory
buildings, trees, shrubbery or other visual obstruction, the numbers shall also
be displayed on the mail box in numerals not less than two (2) inches high, of
a light reflective material, and of contrasting color to the background.
   Subd. 2.   Posted Signs. In those cases where the principal building is
obscured from the view from the street address by accessory buildings, trees,
shrubbery or other visual obstruction, and the residence does not have a mail
box adjacent to the public street, the numbers shall be displayed from a
permanent mounting on the property, clearly visible from the street, displayed
prominently in numerals not less than four (2) inches high of light reflective
material of contrasting color to the background at a height not less than three
(3) feet above grade. (Ordinance 07-02, adopted April 10, 2007)
509.04. Penalties. 
Violation of this section shall a misdemeanor subject to the provisions of
Section
101.06 of the City Code. (Ordinance 07-02, adopted April 10, 2007)
510. Alcohol Consumption
The purpose of this ordinance is to protect the city’s liability when people
choose to bring alcohol into city buildings by establishing additional
regulations that adhere to the Minnesota State Statutes.
510.01. Prohibited Areas.
The consumption of alcohol is prohibited at the fire hall, the public works
facility, the wastewater treatment plant and on any of the property on which
those facilities are located unless the city has issued a permit for such
consumption pursuant to section
510.02. (Ordinance 10-07, adopted October 12, 2010)
510.02. Permit To Consume.
The city, in its discretion, may issue a permit to consume alcohol on city
property to a club or charitable, religious, or other non-profit organization
which has been in existence for at least three (3) years. (Ordinance 10-07,
adopted October 12, 2010)
510.03. Insurance Required.
Any permit to consumer alcohol on city property issued pursuant to section
510.02 of this section shall be conditioned upon the applicant providing proof
of liability insurance coverage acceptable to the city which includes the city
as a named insured and meeting any other reasonable conditions required by the
city. (Ordinance 10-07, adopted October 12, 2010)
510.04. Consumption Of Alcohol At The Chuck Francis Memorial Center and Gazebo
in Riverside Park a Rented Facility.
   Subd. 1.   Consumption of alcohol at the Chuck Francis Memorial Center and
Gazebo rented by a person or organization shall be permitted if such alcohol is
provided by an organization meeting the requirements of section
510.02 and such alcohol is not sold on the premises.
   Subd. 2.   Consumption of alcohol at the Chuck Francis Memorial Center and
Gazebo rented by a person or organization shall be permitted if such alcohol is
not sold on the premises, and the person or organization renting the facilities
names the city as an additional insured on a general liability insurance policy
(such as a homeowners’ policy) in the minimum amount of five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000) acceptable to the city by endorsement of host liquor
liability to the rented premises.
   Subd. 3.   The sale and consumption of alcohol at the Chuck Francis Memorial
Center and Gazebo rented by a person or organization shall be permitted only if
such alcohol is provided by a caterer licensed under Minnesota Statutes
340A.404, subdivision 12, to sell alcohol in the State of Minnesota and who
carries dram shop insurance in the minimum amount of one million dollars
($1,000,000) under which the city is named as an additional insured party.
(Ordinance 10-07, adopted October 12, 2010)
510.05.    Hold Harmless and Indemnification Agreement.
Any party leasing any portion of the Chuck Francis Memorial Center or Gazebo
where alcohol will be sold or served pursuant to Section
510.04 must first agree to and sign an agreement to hold the city harmless from
claims arising from such rental and to defend and indemnify the city from all
costs incurred as a result of such claims. The hold harmless and
indemnification agreement must meet the approval of the city attorney.
(Ordinance 10-07, adopted October 12, 2010)
511. Sexual Predator Residency Restrictions
511.01. Findings and Intent.
   Subd. 1.   Repeat sexual offenders, sexual offenders who use physical
violence, and sexual offenders who prey on children or vulnerable adults are
considered sexual predators who present an extreme threat to public safety.
Sexual predators are extremely likely to use physical force and / or violence
and repeat their prior offenses. The majority of sexual predators and offenders
commit numerous offenses, many of which are never reported, and are ultimately
prosecuted for only a small fraction of their crimes. This exponentially
increases the danger, harm, impact and cost of sexual predator victimization to
children, vulnerable adults, persons, families, communities and society at
large.
   Subd. 2.   Level III sex offenders are sex offenders who, based upon their
prior convictions, behaviors and violations, present the highest risk to
reoffend and represent the greatest risk to children, vulnerable adults and
other residents in the City of Rockford. It is therefore the intent of this
ordinance to serve the city’s compelling interest to promote, protect,
safeguard and improve the health, safety and welfare of its children,
vulnerable adults and citizens by establishing the proximity to areas and
locations where children and / or vulnerable adults regularly congregate in
concentrated numbers, wherein the most dangerous sexual offenders are
prohibited from establishing temporary or permanent residence. The distances
and radiuses established herein are deemed to be the minimum acceptable and
least restrictive distances allowable for Designated Offenders based upon the
city’s size and design, layout of neighborhoods, lot sizes and locations where
children or vulnerable adults regularly congregate. (Ordinance 17-04, adopted
February 28, 2017)
511.02. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this ordinance, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
Bus Stop: A location established by a Daycare Center, School, group, other
business or organization for the scheduled pick-up and drop-off of students or
vulnerable adults for transportation to and from a Day Care Center, School or
place where children and / or vulnerable adults congregate.
Day Care Center: A facility licensed by the City of Rockford, Wright County,
Hennepin County or the State of Minnesota in which care, supervision, therapy
or training for vulnerable adults or individuals under the age of eighteen (18)
is provided for any part of a twenty four (24) hour period.
Designated Offender: Any person who has been categorized as a Level III sex
offender under Minn. Stat. §244.052 or successor statute as may be amended from
time to time. “Designated Offender” shall also include any person who has been
convicted under the laws of another State, whether adjudication has been
withheld or imposition stayed, and on that basis, either is or would be
categorized as a Level III sex offender under Minn. Stat. §244.052.
Park or Playground: Any land, including improvements, but excluding trails and
sidewalks, either owned or operated by the city, county, state or the Three
Rivers Park District for use by the general public as a recreational area.
Permanent Residence: A person’s domicile, apartment, house, trailer, structure
or part thereof, or place where a person abides, lodges or resides for fourteen
(14) or more consecutive days in a calendar year.
Place where Children or Vulnerable Adults Congregate: Includes, but is not
limited to, any public buildings including libraries, amusement parks, youth
centers, athletic fields, places where regular applicable educational programs
are provided, and specialized schools such as martial arts, gymnastics or dance
academies.
Rental Property: A domicile, place, structure or part thereof, trailer or other
conveyance, owned by a person, which is then rented or let for use as a
Permanent Residence or Temporary Residence by another person.
School: Any public or non-public educational institution that offers
educational instruction to individuals under the age of eighteen (18) or
vulnerable adults.
Temporary Residence: A domicile, apartment, house, trailer, structure or part
thereof, or place, other than a person’s Permanent Residence, where a person
abides, lodges, or resides for a period of fourteen (14) or more days in the
aggregate during any calendar year, or four (4) or more consecutive or non-
consecutive days during any month.
Vulnerable Adult: A person meeting the definitions provided in Minn. Stat.
§626.5572, Subd. 21. (Ordinance 17-04, adopted February 28, 2017)
511.03. Residency Prohibition.
   Subd. 1.   It is unlawful for any Designated Offender to establish a
Permanent Residence or Temporary Residence within one thousand five hundred
(1,500) feet of any school, day care center, park or playground, or place where
children or vulnerable adults congregate. It is also unlawful for any
Designated Offender to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence
within three hundred fifty (350) feet of any bus stop.
   Subd. 2.   For purposes of determining the minimum distance of separation,
the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer
property line of the permanent residence or temporary residence of the
Designated Offender to the nearest outer property line of a school, day care
center, park or playground, place where children and / or vulnerable adults
congregate, or bus stop if a property address is used for the Bus Stop
Location. If an intersection is used as the designated bus stop, the minimum
distance of separation requirement shall be measured by following a straight
line from the outer property line of the permanent residence or temporary
residence of the Designated Offender to the center of the intersection
designated as location of the bus stop.
   Subd. 3.   The City Deputy Clerk or City Clerk shall maintain an official
map showing prohibited locations as defined by this Section. The City Clerk
shall periodically update the map to reflect any changes in the location of
prohibited areas, which shall occur annually or upon request from law
enforcement for potential placement of a Designated Offender. This map is
established to serve as a general guide to areas in which Designated Offenders
are prohibited. If a conflict exists between the map and the measured minimum
distance of separation, the actual measured minimum distance of separation as
provided herein shall control. (Ordinance 17-04, adopted February 28, 2017)
511.04. Rental Property Prohibition.
   Subd. 1.   It is unlawful for a property owner to let or rent any Rental
Property with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent residence or
temporary residence by a Designated Offender if such place, structure, or part
thereof, trailer or other conveyance, is located within one thousand five
hundred (1,500) feet of any school, day care center, park or playground, or
place where children or vulnerable adults congregate. It is also unlawful for a
property owner to let or rent any place, structure or part thereof, trailer or
other conveyance, with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent
residence or temporary residence by a Designated Offender if such place,
structure, or part thereof, trailer or other conveyance, is located within
three hundred fifty (350) feet of any bus stop.
   Subd. 2.   For purposes of determining the minimum distance of separation,
the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer
property line of the Rental Property of the Designated Offender to the nearest
outer property line of a school, day care center, park or playground, place
where children and / or vulnerable adults congregate or bus stop, if a property
address is used for the bus stop Location. If an intersection is used as the
designated bus stop, the minimum distance of separation requirement shall be
measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the
rental property of the Designated Offender to the center of the intersection
designated as location of the bus stop.
   Subd. 3.   The City Deputy Clerk or City Clerk shall maintain an official
map showing prohibited locations as defined by this Section. The City Clerk
shall periodically update the map to reflect any changes in the location of
prohibited areas, which shall occur annually or upon request from law
enforcement for potential placement of a Designated Offender. This map is
established to serve as a general guide to areas in which Designated Offenders
are prohibited. If a conflict exists between the map and the measured minimum
distance of separation, the actual measured minimum distance of separation as
provided herein shall control. (Ordinance 17-04, adopted February 28, 2017)
511.05. Exceptions.
A designated offender residing within a prohibited area as described in
subsection (a) does not commit a violation of this chapter if any of the
following apply:
   Subd. 1.   The designated offender established the permanent residence or
temporary residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to Minn.
Stat. §243.166, or Minn. Stat. §243.167, or successor statute as may be amended
from time to time, prior to the effective date of this Section.
   Subd. 2.   The Designated Offender was a minor when he or she committed the
offense and was not convicted as an adult.
   Subd. 3.   The Designated Offender is a minor.
   Subd. 4.   The school, day care center, park or playground, place where
children and / or vulnerable adults congregate, or bus stop within the minimum
distance allowed herein of the Designated Offender’s permanent residence or
temporary residence was designated or opened after the Designated Offender
established the permanent residence or temporary residence and reported and
registered the residence pursuant to Minn. Stat. §243.166, or Minn. Stat.
§243.167, or successor statute or as may be amended from time to time.
   Subd. 5.   The residence is also the primary residence of the Designated
Offenders parents, grandparents, siblings, spouse or adult children.
   Subd. 6.   The residence is a property owned by the Minnesota Department of
Corrections. (Ordinance 17-04, adopted February 28, 2017)
511.06. Penalties.
A person who violates the requirements of this chapter, who does not meet one
of the exceptions as provided herein, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor offense
punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand ($1,000) dollars, or by
confinement for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and
confinement. Each calendar day that a person violates the requirements of this
chapter shall constitute a new, separate and distinct offense. (Ordinance 17-
04, adopted February 28, 2017)
511.07. Severability.
Should any section, subdivision, clause or other provision of this Section be
held to be invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the Section as a whole, or any part thereof, other
than the part held to be invalid. (Ordinance 17-04, adopted February 28, 2017)
511.08. Enactment.
This Section shall be in full force and effect after adoption and publication
in summary from in the official newspaper of the City of Rockford in accordance
with applicable law. The Deputy Clerk is directed to prepare a summary form of
the ordinance for publication and submit the same to the City’s designated
newspaper. (Ordinance 17-04, adopted February 28, 2017)
600 Licensing
601. Reserved
602. Amusement Centers and Amusement Devices
602.01. Definitions.
   Subd. 1.   Machine. “Machine” means a mechanical amusement device of any of
the following types:
   (1)   A machine or contrivance, including electric games, "pinball"
machines, mechanical pool tables, foosball, bowling machines, shuffle boards,
electric rifle or gun ranges, miniature mechanical devices and games or
amusements patterned after baseball, basketball, hockey, and similar games and
like devices, machines, or games which may be played solely for amusement and
not as a gambling device and which devices or games are played by the insertion
of a coin or coins or at a fee fixed and charged by the establishment in which
such devices or machines are located, and which contain no automatic payoff
devices for the return of coins, merchandise, checks, tokens or any other thing
or item of value; provided, however, that such machine may be equipped to
permit a free play or game.
   (2)   Amusement devices designed for and used exclusively as rides by
children, such as; but not limited to, kiddie cars, miniature airplane rides,
mechanical horses, and other miniature mechanical devices not operated as a
part of or in connection with any carnival, circus, show, or other
entertainment or exhibition.
   Subd. 2.   Amusement Center. “Amusement Center” means any place wherein any
person operates thirteen or more machines for public use upon premises solely
within one enclosure. Video games of chance (as defined in Minn. Stat. §349.50,
Subd. 8, or any similar statute enacted hereafter), located and operated in
accordance with applicable Minn. Statutes (including but not limited to Minn.
Stat. §349.50 et. seq.) shall not be considered in determining if any premises
is an amusement center. (Amended by Ordinance No. 86-10, passed September 23,
1986, and Ordinance No. 91-05, passed July 7, 1991)
602.02. Licenses Required.
   Subd. 1.   Amusement Center and Machine License. No person shall own,
operate or permit operation of a machine and/or an amusement center on premises
owned, leased or operated by him, or engage in the business of operating an
amusement center, in the City unless an amusement center or machine license has
been obtained.
   Subd. 2.   Exceptions. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require
licensing of coin-operated music boxes, more commonly known as "juke-boxes".
Nothing in this chapter shall be held to apply to any machine held or kept for
sale or storage and which is not actually in use or displayed for use.
602.03. Application.
The application for such licenses shall contain the following information:
   (1)   Name and address of the applicant, age, date and place of birth.
   (2)   Prior convictions for violation of law of applicant, if any.
   (3)   Place where machine or device is to be displayed or operated and the
business conducted at that place.
   (4)   If the interest of the applicant be that of a corporation or other
business entity, the names of any persons having a five percent (5%) or more
interest in said business entity shall be listed.
   (5)   For all amusement centers, the applicant shall provide proof of
general liability insurance in a form acceptable to the City. Said insurance
shall provide minimum coverage of $300,000 per occurrence and $100,000 per
individual and $50,000 property damage.
602.04. Issuance.
A copy of each application for license shall be referred to the designated law
enforcement agency. The designated law enforcement agency or its designee shall
investigate the location wherein it is proposed to operate the amusement center
and shall ascertain if the applicant is of good moral character. On the basis
of his investigation, the police chief shall recommend either approval or
denial of the license. The completed application, together with the police
chief's report and recommendation, shall be presented to the council which
shall in its discretion grant or refuse the license.
602.05. Term and Fee.
Licenses for amusement centers and machines shall cover an annual period from
July 1 to June 30. The license fee shall be established pursuant to
Chapter 212. The initial license fee for each applicant shall be prorated as of
the date of the application.
602.06. Display of License.
The license shall be posted permanently and conspicuously at the location of
the machine in the premises wherein the device is to be operated or maintained
to be operated.
602.07. Location of Machine.
No machine shall be located, placed, maintained or operated on any public
street, avenue, boulevard, lane, alley or other public ground within the City.
No machine shall be so located that its operation will create a nuisance.
602.08. Gambling Restrictions.
   Subd. 1.   Multiple Machines. No such machine shall be so constructed,
maintained or operated as to be capable of taking more than one coin, token or
slug per player for any one game.
   Subd. 2.   Use for Gambling. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any such
machine, or for the owner or operator of any establishment where it is located,
to permit the same to be used for gambling or for the making of bets or wagers.
   Subd. 3.   Pay-offs. It shall be unlawful for the licensee or for the owner
or operator of the establishment where such machine is located to give any
money, token, merchandise or any other thing of value or any reward or prize in
lieu of free games registered on such machine, and all free games so registered
shall be played on the machine registering such free games, and there shall be
no device on the machine whereby the operator can cancel registered free games.
   Subd. 4.   Automatic Pay-offs. No person shall keep, maintain, sell or
permit to be operated in his place of business any machine which has been
converted into an automatic pay-off device which shall automatically award
money, prizes, tokens, merchandise, gifts or anything of value, other than free
games to the operator or player of such machine. No person shall convert any
machine into an automatic pay-off device.
   Subd. 5.   Destruction of Illegally Operated Machines. Any machine which
shall have been made use of in violation of Section
602.08, Subd. 2, Subd. 3 or Subd. 4 of this chapter may be seized and destroyed
in compliance with the provisions of the Statutes of the State of Minnesota
relating to gambling devices.
602.09. Amusement Centers Restrictions.
   Subd. 1.   Hours. Amusement centers shall be closed at 10:00 P.M. each day
and shall not open until 9:00 A.M. on weekdays or until 12:00 noon on Sundays.
   Subd. 2.   Nuisance. No amusement center nor any coin-operated amusement
device or coin-operated musical device therein shall be operated so as to
constitute a public nuisance.
   Subd. 3.   Order. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to maintain
order on the licensed premises at all times.
   Subd. 4.   Fire Regulations. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee
to see that the licensed premises do not become overcrowded so as to constitute
a hazard to the health or safety of persons therein. The City fire chief may
designate the maximum number of persons to be permitted on the licensed
premises.
   Subd. 5.   Attendant. The licensee shall provide reasonable adult
supervision, with a minimum of one, taking into consideration the number of
machines and patrons, and the number, nature, type and proximity of other
businesses in the premises or in the vicinity.
   Subd. 6.   Alcohol and Drugs. It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in
the business of operating an amusement center to sell, offer for sale, or
knowingly permit to be sold or offered for sale or to be dispensed or consumed
or knowingly brought on the licensed premises any alcoholic beverages,
controlled substances, or to knowingly allow any illegal activity upon the
licensed premises.
   Subd. 7.   Food. (Subd. 7, Food, repealed in its entirety by Ordinance 88--
13, passed December 14, 1988.)
   Subd. 8.   Intoxicated Persons. The licensee of an amusement center shall
not permit intoxicated persons to remain on the premises.
   Subd. 9.   Building Codes. The amusement center and the premises in which
amusement devices are located shall conform to all building and fire prevention
codes of the City. The building inspector or fire inspector may enter said
premises at any time during normal business hours, for the purpose of
inspecting said premises for fire hazards. All law enforcement personnel of the
City shall have the right to enter said premises at any time during normal
business hours, for the purpose of enforcement of the terms of this chapter.
   Subd. 10.   Curfew. The licensee and his employees and agents shall adhere
to the provisions of this code relating to minors. No licensee, nor his
employees, or agents, shall knowingly permit a minor to be present on the
premises in violation of curfew laws, nor knowingly permit a person under the
age of seventeen (17) years to be present on the premises when school is in
session unless on a valid excused absence.
   Subd. 11.   Smoking Material. No smoking material of any type is to be sold
upon licensed premises.
   Subd. 12.   Lighting. The interior of an amusement center shall be
illuminated as to insure proper and complete observation of patrons at all
times. The building inspector may require conformance with his recommended
standards for lighting levels to carry out the intent of this subdivision.
   Subd. 13.   Owner Responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
partnership, or corporation engaged in the business of operating an amusement
center to knowingly allow any illegal activity upon the licensed premises.
602.10. Transfer.
An amusement center license is purely a personal privilege arid shall not
constitute property. It is not transferable in any manner.
602.11. Suspension and Revocation.
The council may suspend for a period not to exceed sixty days or revoke any
license for violation of any provision of this chapter or state law. No license
shall be suspended or revoked unless the licensee has been given written notice
and a public hearing. The notice shall give at least ten days notice of the
time and place of the hearing, and shall state the nature of the charges
against the licensee. The council may, without any advance notice or hearing,
suspend any license pending a hearing on revocation for a period of not
exceeding fifteen days, for violations of this chapter or state law.
603. Reserved
604. Bingo and Gambling
604.01. Statutes Incorporated by Reference.
Minnesota Statutes §349.11 to §349.60 are hereby incorporated by reference.
(Chapter. 604 Amended by Ordinance No. 86-2, passed February 25, 198.)
604.06. Raffles.
   Subd. 1.   Where Located. A raffle shall be deemed to occur within the City
only if the winners are determined within the City. Raffles shall be deemed to
occur only on the premises on which the winners are determined.
   Subd. 2.   When Occurring. A raffle shall be deemed to occur on the day the
winners are determined.
604.07. Inspection and Investigation.
The City administrator, the City attorney, the City’s auditors, any police
officer and any City official or employee having a duty to perform with
reference to this chapter may inspect and examine the records concerning lawful
gambling of any licensed organization upon 24 hours notice.
604.08. Reports.
All licensed organizations shall submit to the City clerk a copy of any reports
it is required to make to the state of Minnesota. Any applicant for a license
shall submit a copy of its application to the City.
604.09. Disapproval of Licenses.
   Subd. 1.   Receipt of Notice. Notice that an application for a license is
pending before the Charitable Gambling Control Board shall be effective only
when the City receives notice from the Board, even though the applicant or
other person notifies the City prior to that time.
   Subd. 2.   Notice Submitted to Council. The City clerk shall submit any
application for a gambling license he or she receives to the City council at
the first regular council meeting after his or her receipt of the notice.
   Subd. 3.   Causes for Disapproval. The City council may disapprove an
application, by resolution adopted by a majority vote, for a gambling license
for the following reasons:
   (1)   Failure to provide a copy of the license application to the City.
   (2)   Failure of the application to specify the 72 hour period for which the
license is sought.
   (3)   Ten licenses have already been issued in the City during the current
calendar year.
   (4)   The applicant has already been granted three licenses for the current
calendar year.
   (5)   The applicant is in possession of a gambling license for which the 72
hour period referred to in section 604.04, Subd. 2, has not yet expired.
   (6)   Any reason which would justify the Minnesota Charitable Gambling
Control Board in denying a license.
   (7)   Other good cause shown, upon a four-fifths vote of the council.
   Subd. 4.   Reasons to be Stated. A resolution disapproving an application
for a gambling license shall state the reason or reasons for the disapproval.
(Chapter 604 amended by Ordinance 85-3, Passed May 13, 1985. Former Chapter
604. Bingo, repealed in its entirety by Ordinance 85-3, Passed May 13, 1985.)
605. Proceeds for Lawful Gambling
(Chapter 605 added by Ordinance No. 87-20, passed December 22, 1987)
605.01. Definitions.
   Subd. 1.   The terms contained in this section shall have the meaning
described to them by the Minnesota Statutes §349.11 et. seq. and any successor
statutes dealing with regulation of gambling.
   Subd. 2.   Net Profit. Net profits are profits less allowable expenses under
the laws and regulations of the State of Minnesota relating to lawful gambling.
   Subd. 3.   Rockford Trade Area. For purposes of this code the Rockford Trade
area shall mean the City of Rockford, the City of Greenfield, and that portion
of the Rockford Township protected by the Rockford Fire Department pursuant to
fire protection agreements between the City of Rockford and the Township of
Rockford. (Added by Ordinance No. 90-13 passed November 13, 1990)
605.02. Donation Required.
   Subd. 1.   Any organization licensed to conduct lawful gambling within the
City shall donate ten-percent (10%) of its net profits derived from lawful
gambling in the City to a fund administered and regulated by the city without
cost to the fund. The City shall then disburse the funds for charitable
contributions as defined by Minnesota Statue 349.12, Subd. 7a, as it may be
amended from time to time. Such donations shall be made by the end of the month
following the end of each calendar quarter. For purposes of this section a
calendar quarter shall be deemed to end at 11:59 p.m. on the last day of March,
June September and December.
   Subd. 2.   Reserved. (Ordinance 17-02, adopted February 14, 2017)
   Subd. 3.   For purposes of this section, a raffle shall be deemed to have
occurred within the City if the drawing for any of the prizes awarded pursuant
to the raffle is held within the City.
   Subd. 4.   In addition to, and separate from, the donation required by
Subdivision 1 of this section, organizations conducting lawful gambling within
the City of Rockford shall spend 50% of its net proceeds on lawful purposes, as
defined by Minnesota Statue, within the Rockford Trade Area. These expenditures
shall occur within the same calendar year that such proceeds are received by
the organization conducting the charitable gambling. Any expenditures made
during January of any year may, at the option of the charitable organization,
be deemed to have been made in the prior calendar year to the extent necessary
to meet the requirements of the subdivision. (Added by Ord. 90-13, passed
November 13, 1990; Ord. 23-02, passed April 25, 2023)
   Subd. 5.   The contribution requirements to the City gambling fund as
provided herein shall not apply to lawful gambling conducted by nonprofits or
other qualified entities that engage in two or fewer gambling events or
occurrences in a calendar year within the Rockford city limits.
(Added by Ord. 23-02, passed April 25, 2023)
605.03. Reports.
All organizations conducting lawful gambling within the City shall provide the
City clerk with copies of all reports it provides to the Charitable Gambling
Control Board. Payment under this section shall be made quarterly with payment
due within 30 days of the end of the quarter. Trade area reports are required
to be submitted annually in advance of the application for renewal of license
with the board. Annually, each organization must file with the city a report
prepared by an independent certified public accountant documenting compliance
with this section. In addition, each organization must submit a report to the
city each January listing all lawful purpose expenditures from January 1
through December 31 of the preceding year. The report shall identify the name
of the entity to whom the check was written, the city location of the recipient
and the amount of the donation.
(Amended by Ord. 90-13 passed November 13, 1990; Ord. 23-02, passed April 25,
2023)
605.04. Suspension, Revocation, Non-renewal of Licenses.
If any organization shall fail to make the payments required by this chapter or
fail to provide the City clerk with reports as required by this section, such
failure shall be grounds for the City to recommend to the Charitable Gambling
Control Board that the gambling license for such organization be suspended,
revoked, or not renewed.
605.05. Effective Date.
This section shall apply to all lawful gambling conducted in the City on and
after January 1, 1988. The provisions of Section
605.02, Subd. 4, shall apply, to all lawful gambling conducted in the City on
and after January 1, 1991. (Amended by Ordinance No. 90-13, passed November 13,
1990)
606 Tobacco
(Chapter 606 added by Ordinance No. 90-08, passed June 26, 1990)
(Amended Section 606 by Ordinance No. 02-04, passed May 28, 2002)
606.01. Definition.
As used in this chapter, the term "tobacco" means and includes tobacco in any
form, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, bagged, canned or
package product, smokeless tobacco or tobacco in any other form.
606.02. License Required.
The sale, possession, and use of tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related
devices in the City of Rockford, County of Hennepin and County of Wright, shall
be regulated and administered by the respective county in which the licensee is
located as set forth in M.S. Section 461.12, pertaining to municipal tobacco
licenses.
606.03 (reserved)
606.04 (reserved)
606.05 (reserved)
607 Taxicabs
(Chapter 607 added by Ordinance No. 92-04, passed March 24, 1992)
607.01. Definition.
“Taxicab” means a motor vehicle engaged in the business of carrying persons for
hire, having a seating capaCity of less than ten persons and not operated on a
fixed route.
607.02. License Required.
No person shall engage in the taxicab business in the City without first having
applied for and been granted a license to do so by the Council, except that any
taxicab licensed to operate in any other municipality may carry passengers from
said municipality to any place or point within the City and may receive
passengers in the City for carriage to such municipality where so licensed.
However, no operator or driver of such taxicab may solicit business in the City
without being licensed under the provisions of this ordinance.
607.03. Application.
In addition to such information as the City Clerk may require, the application
shall include the following:
   (1)   A statement covering each vehicle to be licensed, giving the full name
and address of the owner, the make of the car, State license number and holder
of legal title.
   (2)   The name and address of the applicant.
   (3)   The location from which such taxicab business shall be operated.
   (4)   The employment history of the applicant.
   (5)   Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony.
607.04. Police Investigation.
Prior to submitting an application for a taxicab license to the Council, the
City Clerk shall request an investigation and report from the Sheriff's
Department as to the facts stated in the application and as to the applicant's
traffic and police record.
607.05. Council Procedure.
The City Clerk shall submit to the Council at a regular meeting thereof the
application together with a copy of the police report, and the applicant and
any member of the public shall have an opportunity to be heard on the granting
or refusal to grant a license.
607.06. License Fee.
The annual fees for a licensee to operate a taxicab business shall be as set
forth in
Chapter 212. The license shall be issued for a period of one year and will
expire on the last day of December.
607.07. Inspection of Vehicles and Equipment.
Prior to the use and operation of any vehicle under the provisions of this
chapter said vehicles shall be thoroughly examined and inspected per Council
direction.
607.08. Designation of Taxicabs.
Each taxicab shall bear on the exterior surface of the body in letters not less
than two inches nor more than four inches in height the name of the owner or
the company name under which he operates, and in addition may bear an
identifying design approved by Council.
607.09. Taxi Meter Required.
All taxicabs operated under the authority of this chapter shall be equipped
with taxi meters fastened in front of the passenger, visible to the passenger
at all times, day and night, and after sundown the faces of taxi meters shall
be illuminated. Such taxi meters shall be operated mechanically by a mechanism
of standard design and construction, driven either from the transmission or
from one of the front wheels by a flexible and permanently attached driving
mechanism. They shall be sealed at all points and connections which, if
manipulated, would affect their correct reading and recording. Each taxi meter
shall have thereon a flag to denote when the vehicle is employed and when it is
not employed, and it shall be the duty of the driver to throw the flag of such
taxi meter into a non-recording position at the termination of each trip. The
said taxi meters shall be subject to inspection from time to time by the
Sheriff’s Department. Any inspector or other officer of said department is
hereby authorized either on complaint of any person or without such complaint,
to inspect any taxi meter and, upon discovery of any inaccuracy therein, to
notify the person operating said taxicab to cease operation. Thereupon said
taxicab shall be kept off the highways until the taxi meter is repaired and in
the required working condition.
607.10. Rates.
Every taxicab operated under this Chapter shall have a rate card setting forth
the authorized rates of fare displayed in such a place as to be in view of all
passengers.
607.11. Failure to Pay Fare.
No person shall refuse or neglect to pay for the services, rent, or hire of any
licensed taxicab upon discharging or renting the same with the intention to
defraud the owner or licensee of the taxicab, or obtain the services, hire,
possession, or use of any taxicab by color or aid of any false representation,
pretense, token or writing, or obtain credit for such services, hire possession
or use by color or aid of any false fraudulent representation, pretense, token
or writing, or having hired any taxicab, shall willfully, recklessly, wantonly,
or by gross negligence, injure or destroy, or allow or permit the same or any
part thereof to be injured or destroyed, unless the owner or licensee of the
taxicab has voluntarily extended credit to the person hiring, renting, or using
such vehicle.
607.12. Deceiving Passengers.
No person owning or driving a taxicab shall deceive any passenger who may ride
in such vehicle, or who may desire to ride in such vehicle, as to his
destination or the price authorized to be charged for such person, or shall
convey such passenger or cause him to be conveyed to a place other than that
directed by him.
607.13. Solicitation of Passengers.
No person shall solicit passengers for a taxicab upon the streets of this City,
except the driver of a taxicab when sitting upon the driver's seat of his
vehicle. The driver of any taxicab shall remain on the driver's seat or inside
his vehicle at all times when such vehicle is standing upon the taxicab stands
or when actually engaged in carrying passengers; provided that nothing in this
section shall be held to prohibit such driver from alighting to the street or
sidewalk for the purpose of assisting passengers into or out of such vehicle or
for any other reasonable purpose.
607.14. Trip Sheets.
Every driver shall keep a trip sheet upon which he shall note the starting
point and time: and the termination point and time of each trip of such
taxicab, and the place of discharge of each passenger from such taxicab, the
amount of the fare charged, whether upon the meter, hours, or trip basis, and
the driver's name and number. Such sheet shall be filed with and kept as part
of the records of the licensee. Trip sheets shall be filed not later than 24
hours after the termination of any single day's work by the driver, and the
trip sheets shall be open to investigation by the Sheriff's Department at all
times. Each licensee shall preserve for a period of one year and submit upon
request of the City Council or Sheriff's Department any information contained
in the drivers' trip sheets, together with the: true and correct information as
to the orders or calls for taxis and the disposition of same.
607.15. Articles Left in Taxicabs.
If an article is left by a passenger in a taxicab, it shall be delivered if
possible to the claimant. If such article is not claimed within 24 hours of
such discovery, it shall be delivered to the principal office: or place of
business of the licensee; otherwise to the Sheriff's Department.
607.16. Drivers of Taxicabs.
No person shall drive a taxicab licensed under this chapter upon the streets of
the City without having a valid Minnesota Driver's License of the proper class
or kind issued to him and in his possession. Each driver shall display an
identification card, including a photograph of the driver, visible to all
passengers at all times that he is driving a taxicab.
607.17. Liability Insurance Required.
No license to operate a taxicab shall be issued by the City until a certificate
of insurance has been filed with the City Clerk establishing that there is in
full force and effect a liability insurance policy issued by an insurance
company authorized to do business in the State of Minnesota for each vehicle
authorized to be operated by the applicant in the amount of $50,000.00 for
bodily injury to any one person, and the amount of $100,000.00 for injuries to
more than one person which are sustained in the same accident, and $10,000.00
for property damage resulting from any one accident. Each such policy will
provide that the City shall receive ten (10) days written notice prior to
cancellation of such policy.
607.18. Drivers’ Hours.
No employer of a taxicab driver shall require or permit such driver to be or
remain on duty for a longer period than 12 consecutive hours. Whenever any such
driver shall have been continuously on duty for 12 hours, he shall be relieved
and not be required or permitted to go on duty until he has had at least ten
(10) consecutive hours off duty. No driver who has been on duty 12 hours in the
aggregate in any 24-hour period shall be required or permitted to go on duty
without having at least ten (10) consecutive hours off duty. The provisions of
this subdivision shall not apply in cases of emergency in which the safety,
health, morals, or welfare of the public may be affected.
607.19. Unlawful Acts.
No taxicab driver shall: smoke while a passenger is in the cab; sell or offer
to sell alcohol or drugs; or solicit business for houses of ill repute.
607.20. Central Office and Hours of Service.
Holders of certificates of public convenience and necessity shall maintain a
central place of business and keep the same open for such hours of each day as
the City Council may direct for the purpose of receiving calls and dispatching
cabs. They shall answer all calls received by them for services inside the
corporate limits of the City as soon as they can do so and if said services
cannot be rendered within a reasonable time they shall notify the prospective
passengers how long it will be before the call can be answered and give the
reason therefore. Any holder who shall refuse to accept a call anywhere in the
corporate limits of the City at any time when such holder has available cabs,
shall be deemed a violator of this Chapter.
608 Pawn Shops, Pawnbrokers and Secondhand Goods Dealer
608.01. Definitions.
The following terms, as used in this ordinance, have the meanings stated:
   Subd. 1.   Pawnbroker means a person who loans money on deposit or pledge of
personal property, or other valuable thing, or who deals in the purchasing of
personal property or other valuable thing on condition of selling the same back
again at a stipulated price, or who loans money secured by chattel mortgage on
personal property, taking possession of the property or any part thereof so
mortgaged.
   Subd. 2.   Secondhand Goods Dealer means a person whose regular business
includes selling or receiving tangible personal property (excluding motor
vehicles) previously used, rented, owned or leased.
608.02. Exemptions.
This ordinance does not apply to or include the following:
   Subd. 1.   The sale of secondhand goods where all of the following
conditions are present:
   (1)   The sale is held on property occupied as a. dwelling by the seller, or
owner, rented or leased by a charitable or political organization;
   (2)   The items offered for sale are owned by the occupant;
   (3)   The sale does not exceed a period of 72 consecutive hours;
   (4)   Not more than three sales are held either by the same person or on the
same property, as defined in (A) above, in any twelve month period; and, (Ord.
08-10, December 9, 2008)
   (5)   None of the items offered for sale have been purchased for resale or
received on consignment for purpose of resale. (Ord. #11-07, adopted July 11,
2011)
   Subd. 2.   Sales by a person licensed as a motor vehicle dealer.
   Subd. 3.   The sale of secondhand books, magazines, sound or video
recordings or films.
   Subd. 4.   The sale of goods at an auction held by a licensed auctioneer.
   Subd. 5.   The business of buying or selling only those secondhand goods
taken as part or full payment for new goods, and where such business is
incidental to and not the primary business of a person.
   Subd. 6.   A bulk sale of property from a merchant, manufacturer, or
wholesaler having an established place of business or of goods sold at open
sale from bankrupt stock.
   Subd. 7.   Goods sold at a public market.
   Subd. 8.   Goods sold at an exhibition. (Ord. 08-10, December 9, 2008)
   Subd. 9.   Goods sold that have been hand made by local artisans. (Ord. #11-
07, adopted July 26, 2011)
608.03. License Required.
   Subd. 1.   Secondhand Goods Dealer. Except as herein otherwise provided, it
is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of secondhand goods dealer
without first obtaining a secondhand goods dealer license therefore from the
City.
   Subd. 2.   Pawnbroker. It is unlawful for any person to conduct, operate, or
engage in the business of pawnbroker without first having obtained a license
therefore from the City.
   Subd. 3.   Separate Licenses Required. A pawnbroker may not conduct, operate
or engage in the business of secondhand goods dealer without having obtained a
secondhand goods dealer license in addition to a pawnbroker license. A
secondhand goods dealer may not conduct, operate or engage in the business of
pawnbroker without having obtained a pawnbroker license in addition to a
secondhand goods dealer license.
608.04. Multiple Dealers.
   Subd. 1.   Multiple Licenses. The owner of a business at which two or more
secondhand goods dealers are engaged in business by maintaining separate sales
space and identifying themselves to the public as individual dealers may obtain
a multiple secondhand goods dealer license for the location. A multiple license
may not be issued unless the following requirements are met:
   (1)   The businesses must have a single name and address;
   (2)   The businesses must operate in a compact and contiguous space;
   (3)   The businesses must be under the unified control and supervision of
the one person who holds the license; and
   (4)   Sale must be consummated at a central point or register operated by
the owner of the business, and the owner must maintain a comprehensive account
of all sales.
   Subd. 2.   Compliance. The holder of a secondhand goods dealer license under
this ordinance for a business with more than one dealer at the same location
must comply with all of the requirements of this ordinance, including the
responsibility for reporting to the Wright County Sheriff and record-keeping in
the same manner as any other dealer licensed under this ordinance.
608.05. License Fee.
The annual fee for Secondhand Goods, Multiple Sales and Pawnbroker shall be as
set forth in
Chapter 212.
608.06. Application.
   Subd. 1.   Contents. A license applicant must complete an application form
provided by the City Clerk.
   Subd. 2.   Execution. If the applicant is a natural person, the application
must be signed and sworn to by the person; if a corporation, by an agent
authorized to sign; if a partnership, by a partner.
   Subd. 3.   Fees. The application must be accompanied by the required license
fee, bond and investigation fee. Seventy-five percent (75%) of the license fee
will be returned to the applicant if the application is rejected. The
investigation fee is not refundable. (Ord. 08-10, December 9, 2008)
   Subd. 4.   False Statements. It is unlawful to knowingly make a false
statement in the license application. In addition to all other penalties, the
license may be subsequently revoked by the Council for a violation of this
Section.
608.07.
(Ord. 08-10, December 9, 2008)
608.08. Site Plan.
The application for a pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer license must be
accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale. The site plan must contain:
   (1)   A legal description, including PID#, of the property upon which the
proposed licensed premises is situated;
   (2)   A plot plan;
   (3)   The exact location of the licensed premises on the property, customer
and employee parking areas; accesses onto the property, and entrance into the
premises; and
   (4)   A floor plan of the licensed premises.
608.09. Investigations.
   Subd. 1.   Conduct. The City, prior to the. granting of an initial
pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer license, must conduct a preliminary
background and financial investigation of the applicant. Any person having a
beneficial interest in the license must be investigated. The applicants
(individual, each member of partnership and each officer of a corporation] must
sign a release that contains the full name, date of birth and current address.
The investigation shall be conducted by the Wright County Sheriff or designated
agent to the Council and the results reported to the Council. The Wright County
Sheriff must verify the facts stated in the application, and must report all
convicted violations of State law, Federal law, or City code provisions
involving the applicant, interested persons, or the licensed premises while
under that applicant's proprietorship.
   Subd. 2.   Fee. The fee charged by the City to an applicant for the costs of
investigation shall be established pursuant to
Chapter 212. (Ord. 08-10, December 9, 2008)
608.10. Public Hearing.
A pawnbroker license will not be issued or renewed without a public hearing.
Any person having an interest in or who will be affected by the proposed
license will be permitted to testify at the hearing. The public hearing must be
preceded by at least ten days published notice specifying the location of the
proposed licensed business premises. (Ord. #11-07, adopted July 26, 2011)
608.11. Granting of License.
After review of the license application, investigation report and public
hearing, the Council may grant or refuse the application for a new or renewed
pawnbroker. The secondhand goods dealer license shall be exempt from the public
hearing requirement. A license will not be effective unless the investigation
fee, and application fee have been filed with the City Clerk's office. (Ord.
#11-07, adopted July 26, 2011)
608.12. Persons Ineligible For License.
A pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer license will not be issued to:
   (1)   A person not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien;
   (2)   A person under 18 years of age;
   (3)   Subject to the provision of law, a person who within five years of the
license application date has been convicted of receiving stolen property, sale
of stolen property or controlled substance, burglary, robbery, damage or
trespass to property, or any law of City Code provision regulating the business
of pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer;
   (4)   A person who within five years of the license application date had a
pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer license revoked;
   (5)   When the Council determines after investigation and public hearing,
that issuance or renewal of the license would adversely affect the public
health, safety or welfare.
608.13. Partnerships or Corporations Ineligible for License.
Partnerships, whose partners include any of the above ineligible persons, or
corporations whose officers or board members include any of the above
ineligible persons shall not be eligible for a pawnbroker or secondhand goods
dealer’s license.
608.14. Places Ineligible for License.
A license will not be issued or renewed under this Section for any place or for
any business:
   (1)   If taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the City or the
State of Minnesota on the licensee's business premises are delinquent and
unpaid;
   (2)   Where operation of a licensed premises would violate the zoning
provisions of the City Code; or,
   (3)   Where the applicant's present license was issued conditioned upon the
applicant making specified improvements to the licensed premises or the
property of the licensed premises which improvements have not been completed.
608.15. Conditional Licenses.
The Council may grant an application for a new or renewed pawnbroker or
secondhand goods dealer license conditioned upon the applicant making
reasonable improvements to the proposed business premises or the property upon
which the business premises is situated. Such improvements shall be required by
City Zoning or Building Code requirements, or other improvements related to the
health, safety, welfare, or Wright County Sheriff power functions. The Council,
in granting a conditional license, will specify when the modifications must be
completed. Failure to comply with the conditions of the license are grounds for
the Council to revoke or refuse to renew the license.
608.16. License Limitations.
A license will be issued to the applicant only, and only for the business
premises as described in the application. The license is effective only for the
premises specified in the approved license application, and may not be
transferred to any other person, partnership, corporation, or premises.
608.17. Term; Expiration;, Pro Rata Fee.
The license is issued for a period of one year beginning on June 1 except that
if the application is made during the license year a license may be issued for
the remainder of the license year for a monthly pro rata license fee. An
unexpired fraction of a month will be counted as a complete month. The full
investigation fee will be required. The license expires on June 30.
608.18. Refunds.
The City Clerk will refund a pro rata share of the license fee for a license,
upon written request, to the licensee or the licensees estate if:
   (1)   The business ceases to operate because of destruction or damage;
   (2)   The licensee dies;
   (3)   The business ceases to be lawful for a reason other than a license
revocation; or,
   (4)   The licensee ceases to carry on the licensed business under the
license.
608.19. Death of the Licensee.
In the case of death of a licensee, the personal representative of the licensee
may continue operation of the business for not more than 90 days after the
licensee’s death.
608.20. Records.
A licensed secondhand goods dealer and pawnbroker, at the time of receipt of an
item, must immediately record, in ink or other indelible medium in a book or
word processing unit, the following information:
   (1)   An accurate description of the item including, but not limited to, any
trademark, identification number, serial number, model number, brand name, or
other identifying mark on such item;
   (2)   The purchase price;
   (3)   Date, time and place of receipt;
   (4)   Name, address, telephone number and date of birth of the person from
whom the item was received;
   (5)   An imprint of either of the forms of identification of the seller:
      A.   Valid picture driver's licenses;
      B.   Picture identification; (Ordinance 97-13, passed July 28, 1997)
   (6)   The books as well as the goods received must be open for inspection by
the appropriate law enforcement agency at reasonable times. Records required by
this Section 806.20 must be stored and maintained by the licensee for a period
of at least three years.
608.21. Daily Reports.
For the following items, regardless of resale price, a secondhand goods dealer
or pawnbroker shall make out, on forms approved by the Wright County Sheriff,
and submitted daily by mail to the Wright County Sheriff, a legible description
of the goods received during the preceding day, together with the time received
and a description of the person from whom the goods were received:
   (1)   Items with a serial number identification, or “operation
identification” symbol;
   (2)   Cameras;
   (3)   Electronic audio or video equipment;
   (4)   Precious jewelry or gems, and precious metals;
   (5)   Artist signed or artist attributed works of art;
   (6)   Guns and firearms.
608.22. Other Daily Reports.
A similar daily report shall be filed for any other item which the dealer
intends to sell for more than $200.00, except for furniture and kitchen or
laundry appliances which shall not require a daily report regardless of resale
price.
608.23. Stolen Goods.
A licensed pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer must report immediately to the
Wright County Sheriff any article pledged or received, or sought to be pledged
or received, if the licensee has reason to believe that the article was stolen
or lost.
608.24. Holding.
An item received by a secondhand goods dealer or pawnbroker, for which a report
to the Wright County Sheriff is required, may not be sold or otherwise
transferred for a period of 30 days after the date of such report to the Wright
County Sheriff, in addition to the 30 days redemption period. The Wright County
Sheriff may waive, in writing, any part of the 30 day holding period at its
discretion, but the redemption period may not be so waived. However, an
individual may redeem an item pawned 72 hours after the item was received on
deposit, excluding Sundays and legal holidays.
608.25. Receipt.
A licensed secondhand goods dealer or pawnbroker must provide a receipt to the
seller or consignor of any items which includes:
   (1)   The address and phone number of the business;
   (2)   The date;
   (3)   A description of the item purchased; and
   (4)   The purchaser’s signature.
608.26. Police Orders.
If an authorized law enforcement agency notifies a dealer not to sell an item,
the item may not be sold or removed from the licensed premises until authorized
to be released by the appropriate law enforcement agency. Such release shall be
requested by the licensee, and must be approved or denied by the law
enforcement agency.
608.27. Weapons.
A licensed pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer may not receive as a pledge or
otherwise accept for consignment or sale any revolver, pistol, sawed-off
shotgun, automatic rifle, blackjack, switchblade, knife, or other similar
weapons or firearms, unless the licensee is in possession of a current valid
Federal Firearms License or Federal Firearms Pawnbrokers License. Section
608.27 is not intended to restrict the legitimate retailing of firearms under a
Federal Firearms License.
608.28. Prohibited Acts.
It is unlawful for any:
   (1)   Minor to sell or consign, or attempt to sell or consign, goods with a
secondhand goods dealer or pawnbroker. It is also unlawful for any secondhand
goods dealer or pawnbroker to receive goods from a minor.
   (2)   Secondhand goods dealer or pawnbroker to receive any goods from a
person of unsound mind or an intoxicated person.
   (3)   Secondhand goods dealer or pawnbroker to receive goods unless the
seller presents identification in the form of a driver's license or other
pictured identification.
608.29. License Denial, Suspension or Revocation.
A license under this Ordinance may be denied, suspended, or revoked by the
Council after a public hearing where the licensee is granted the opportunity to
be heard, for one or more of the following reasons:
   (1)   The operation of the business is in conflict with any provision of the
City Ordinance/Code;
   (2)   The operation of the business is in conflict with any health,
building, building maintenance, zoning, or any other provision of the City
Ordinance or other law;
   (3)   The licensee or the business premises fails to conform with the
standards for license application contained in Ordinance 608;
   (4)   The licensee has failed to comply with one or more provision of
Ordinance 608 or any statute, rule or City Ordinance provision pertaining to
the businesses of pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer;
   (5)   Fraud, misrepresentation or bribery in securing a license;
   (6)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the course of the
applicant's business; and,
   (7)   Subject to the provisions of law, violation within the preceding five
years of any State or Federal law relating to theft, damage, or trespass to
property, sale of a controlled substance or stolen goods, or operation of a
business.
608.30. Redemption Period.
A person who pawns an item shall have at least thirty days to redeem the item
before it may be sold, subject to the additional holding requirement provided
for herein.
608.31. Payments by Check.
When a secondhand goods dealer buys or otherwise receives an item at the
licensed place of business, payment must be made by check made payable to the
named payee who is the actual intended seller. This section does not apply to
pawnbrokers.
608.32. Inspections.
A peace officer or any properly designated employee of the City, the County or
the State of Minnesota may enter, inspect and search business premises licensed
under Ordinance 608 during business hours, without a warrant.
608.33. County License.
Secondhand goods dealers and pawnbrokers dealing in precious metals and gems
must also be licensed in Wright or Hennepin County, as required by Minnesota
Statutes 325F.73. (Amended by Ordinance No. 95-05, passed April 11, 1995)
609 Temporary Special Event License
609.01. Purpose.
This ordinance regulates those temporary events which are not otherwise
licensed; events which by their nature could be expected to significantly
affect the public health, safety or welfare in any of the following ways:
increased traffic volume or congestion, a need for additional sanitary waste
facilities, a need for additional police or fire protection, or disruption to
the character of any business or residential neighborhood. These events
include, but are not limited to: parade, race, procession, carnival, festival,
residential block event, street dance or fundraiser.
609.02. Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
given to them in this section:
   Subd. 1 Person. “Person” means a natural person, association, organization,
club, group formed for a common purpose, partnership of any kind, limited
liability company, corporation or any other legal entity.
   Subd. 2 Temporary Special Event. “Temporary Special Event” means an outdoor
gathering of at least fifty (50) individuals, whether on public or private
property, assembled with a common purpose for a period of one (1) hour or
longer. Special events include, but are not limited to, concerts, fairs,
carnivals, circuses, parades, flea markets, marathons, walkathons, festivals,
races, bicycle events, celebrations or any other gathering or event of similar
nature.
(Added by Ord. 2025-03, passed April 22, 2025)
609.03. Licenses.
   (1)   License Required. No person shall engage in a temporary special event
unless a license shall have been obtained from the City as herein provided.
   (2)   License Limits:
      A.   A license shall not be issued for a temporary special event lasting
for more than five (5) consecutive days at one time. If an event lasts for
longer than seven (7) consecutive days, the applicant shall file for another
license.
      B.   Not more than two (2) licenses shall be issued for each applicant
and/or property during a calendar year.
   (3)   Exceptions. This chapter shall not apply to:
      A.   Any regularly established permanent place of worship, stadium,
athletic field, arena, auditorium, coliseum, or other similar permanently
established place of assembly for assemblies which do not exceed by more than
fifty (50) percent the maximum seating capacity of the structure where the show
or exhibition is held.
      B.   Noncommercial events held on private property such as graduation
parties or social parties.
      C.   Activities sponsored by the City or conducted upon City ground or
other public property with the prior approval of the city council, provided,
however, that the City shall make appropriate conditions on the use of public
property to assure compliance with the intent of this chapter.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 2025-03, passed April 22, 2025)
609.04. Application.
   (1)   Application. The application for a license provided for in this
section shall be made to the City Clerk by filing a completed application form
provided by the city and paying the license fee to be received at least thirty
(30) days prior to event date.
   (2)   Information Required. In addition to additional information as the
City Clerk may require, the application shall include:
      A.   The name of the applicant and property owner along with signatures
for agreement to terms and conditions of the special event permit application.
      B.   The permanent home address and full local address of the applicant
and property owner, and the permanent and local telephone numbers of the
applicant and property owner.
      C.   Proof of an Insurance policy for the special event.
      D.   If intoxicating liquor is sold on site, the applicant shall follow
all regulations set forth in Title 700 of this Code.
      E.   If signs for special event are needed, plans shall be submitted for
city staff review and shall follow all regulations set forth in Title 1001 of
this Code.
      F.   A form of public notice such as a flyer or door tag that shall be
distributed to surrounding properties a minimum of three hundred fifty feet
(350') from the property upon which the special event is to occur a minimum of
ten (10) days prior to the event.
      G.   If outdoor seasonal sales are included in the special event, a brief
description of what is being sold and the location of the merchant on site
shall be provided and which shall comply with the provisions ofTitle 1001 of
this Code.
      H.   A brief written description depicting the following:
         1.   The nature or purpose of the special event, what the event will
be titled, estimated amount of people attending, and the applicant's method of
operation.
         2.   The location of the special event including address or PID
number.
         3.   Request for closure or obstruction of public streets, trails,
and/or sidewalks.
         4.   Noise mitigation techniques on site.
         5.   The location of where on site intoxicating liquor will be sold
and consumed and at what time of the day.
         6.   Dates for when the set up and take down of materials will occur.
         7.   Fire protection and prevention methods including locations of
portable fire extinguishers, site and floor plans of the event showing seating
arrangement, and fire exit plans.
         8.   The location and type of fencing used for the special event.
         9.   Food services provided for the event and vendor names.
         10.   Exterior lighting plans, including location of light sources.
         11.   Medical facilities provided on site.
         12.   Event parking areas, street closures, traffic circulation
routes, and pedestrian paths provided for the special event.
         13.   Crowd control and security methods, including number of security
guards, during event and location of security.
         14.   Solid waste disposal including portable toilets, trash
containers, or other facilities and location.
         15.   The number, size and, location of tents or other temporary
structures.
         16.   The precise timing of the event including calendar dates and
time of day the special event begins and ends.
         17.   Plans for signs advertising the special event including area,
height, and location.
   (3)   Site Plan. A site plan drawn to scale or survey of property is
required indicating the location of:
      A.   Buildings.
      B.   Parking areas and circulation routes.
      C.   Tents.
      D.   Displays.
      E.   Stages.
      F.   Security.
      G.   Medical facilities.
      H.   Fire hydrants, fire key boxes, and fire department connections.
      I.   Lighting.
      J.   Food/drink areas.
      K.   Fencing.
      L.   Solid waste disposal areas.
   (4)   Approval:
      A.   The City Administrator shall instruct the appropriate staff persons
to review the application and provide recommendations for approval of the
license and any conditions thereof.
      B.   All applications for a license pursuant to this chapter shall be
subject to approval by the City Administrator.
      C.   The City Administrator may impose such actions or conditions
relating to approval of the application as they deem necessary to carry out the
intent and purpose of this chapter.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 2025-03, passed April 22, 2025)
609.05. License Conditions.
   (1)   Indemnification and Insurance:
      A.   Applicant agrees to defend and hold the City harmless from all
claims, demand, actions or causes of action, of whatsoever nature or character,
arising out of or by reason of conduct of the event for which the license is
granted.
      B.    Applicant will indemnify the City for all damages that may result
to City property, including any portion of public streets, as a result of the
event.
      C.   Insurance is required for all applicants seeking an outdoor special
event permit and shall name the City as an additional insured.
   (2)   Temporary special events occurring outdoors shall only be allowed
between April 1 through November 1 of each calendar year.
   (3)   Outdoor special events shall not operate between the hours of ten
o'clock P.M. (10:00 P.M.) and seven o'clock A.M. (7:00 A.M.) unless extended
hours are approved by the City Administrator, but no later than twelve o'clock
A.M. (12:00) A.M. midnight.
   (4)   Consumption of intoxicating liquor may be required to be confined
within a fenced area as a condition of approval.
   (5)   Public events shall provide security for crowd control as determined
necessary by the applicable Sheriff's Office based on the type of event and
anticipated attendance.
   (6)   Public events shall provide available toilet facilities on site as
determined necessary by the Public Works Director.
   (7)   Public events shall provide adequate parking spaces, either on-site or
utilizing on-street or off-site spaces to prevent congestion of public streets
as determined necessary by the City Planner and/or Public Works Director.
   (8)   Exterior lighting shall be directed as to deflect light away from any
adjoining residential uses or from public streets.
   (9)   Noise emanating from any event shall be directed away from any
adjoining residential uses and shall comply with and be regulated by the State
of Minnesota Pollution Control Agency in accordance with Minnesota Rules.
   (10)   Applicant will, without expense to the City, immediately clean up,
remove and dispose of all litter or material of any kind which is placed or
left on City streets or City property because of the event and that if the
applicant neglects or fails to proceed with the cleanup within the two-hour
period immediately following the end of the event, or if cleanup is done in an
inadequate manner, the City public works department is authorized to do the
cleanup and the applicant shall be charged for said cost.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 2025-03, passed April 22, 2025)
609.06. Violation.
Violation of this ordinance shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable as
prescribed by State law. (Added by Ordinance No. 95-09, passed May 23, 1995)
610 Telecommunications Permit Ordinance
610.01. Definitions.
The terms defined in this section have the meanings given them.
   Subd. 1.   Company. A natural or corporate person, business association,
political subdivision, public or, private agency of any kind, its successors
and assigns, who or which seeks or is required to construct, install, operate,
repair, maintain, remove or relocate facilities in the City.
   Subd. 2.   Director. The supervisor of the public works department or City
engineer.
   Subd. 3.   Facilities. Telecommunications equipment of any kind, including
but not limited to audio, video, paging, facsimile or similar service, not
governed by Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 238, including all trunks, lines,
circuits, physical connections, switching equipment, wireless communication
equipment of all kinds, and any necessary appurtenance owned, leased or
operated by a company on, over, in, under, across or along public ground.
   Subd. 4.   Public Ground. Highways, roads, streets, alleys, public ways,
utility easements and public grounds in the City.
610.02. Permit Procedure.
   Subd. 1.   Permit Required. A company may not construct, install, repair,
remove or relocate facilities, or any part thereof, in, on, over, under or
along public ground without first obtaining a permit from the City.
   Subd. 2.   Application. Application for a permit is made to the director.
   Subd. 3.   Issuance of Permit. If the director determines that the applicant
has satisfied the requirements of this ordinance the director may issue a
permit to the company. An applicant may contest a permit denial or the
conditions of approval by written notice to the clerk requesting a City council
review within fourteen (14) days of the director's action. The council shall
hear any contest of the director's action under this ordinance within forty-
five (45) days of the City clerk's receipt: of the contest notice. Nothing in
this ordinance precludes the City from requiring a franchise agreement with the
applicant, as allowed by law, in addition to the issuance of a permit set forth
herein.
   Subd. 4.   Permit Fee. The application must be accompanied by the permit fee
set forth in section
212 of the ordinance.
   Subd. 5.   Security for Completion of Work. Prior to commencement of work,
the company must deposit with the City security in the form of certified check,
letter of credit or construction bond, in a sufficient amount as determined by
the director for the completion of the work. The securities will be held until
the work is completed plus a period of six months thereafter to guarantee that
restoration work has been satisfactorily completed. Upon application of the
company, providing such information as the director may require, if two or more
work projects are to be constructed during a calendar year, the director may
accept, in lieu of separate security for each project, a single security for
multiple projects in such form and amount as determined, in the discretion of
the director, to be sufficient to assure completion of all projects which may
be in progress at any one time during that calendar year and to guaranty that
restoration work will be satisfactorily completed. The security will then be
returned to the company with interest as required by law and then interest at
the applicable statutory rate.
   Subd. 6.   Inspection of Work. When the work is completed the company must
request an inspection by the director. The director will determine if the work
has been satisfactorily completed and provide the company with a written report
of the inspection and approval.
610.03. Restoration and Relocation.
   Subd. 1.   Restoration. Upon completion of the work, the company must
restore the general area of the work, including paving and its foundations, to
the same condition that existed prior to commencement of the work and must
exercise reasonable care to maintain the same condition for two years
thereafter. The work must be completed as promptly as weather permits. If the
company does not promptly perform and complete the work, remove all dirt,
rubbish, equipment and material, and restore the public ground to the same
condition, the City may put it in the same condition at the expense of the
company. The company must, upon demand, pay to the City the direct and indirect
cost of the work done for or performed by the City, including but not limited
to the City's administrative costs. To recover its costs, the City will first
draw on the security posted by the company and then recover the balance of the
costs incurred from the company directly by written demand. This remedy is in
addition to any other remedies available to the City.
   Subd. 2.   Company Initiated Relocation. The company must give the City
written notice prior to a company initiated relocation of facilities. A company
initiated relocation must be at the company's expense and must be approved by
the City, such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld.
   Subd. 3.   City Required Relocation. The company must promptly and at its
own expense, with due regard for seasonal working conditions, permanently
relocate its facilities whenever the City requires such relocation.
   Subd. 4.   Relocation Where Public Ground Vacated. The vacation of public
ground does not deprive the company of the right to operate and maintain its
facilities in the City. If the vacation proceedings are initiated by the
company, the company must pay the relocation costs. If the vacation proceedings
are initiated by the City or other persons, the company must pay the relocation
costs unless otherwise agreed to by the City, company and other persons.
610.04. Company Default.
   Subd. 1.   Notice. If the company is in default in the performance of the
work authorized by the permit, including but not limited to restoration
requirements, for more than 30 days after receiving written notice from the
City of the default, the City may terminate the rights of the company under the
permit. The notice of default must be in writing and specify the provisions of
the permit under which the default is claimed and state the grounds of the
claim. The notice must be served on the company by personally delivering it to
an officer thereof at its principal place of business in Minnesota or by
certified mail to that address.
   Subd. 2.   City Action On Default. If the company is in default in the
performance of the work authorized by the permit, the City may, after the above
notice to the company and failure of the company to cure the default, take such
action as may be reasonably necessary to abate the condition caused by the
default. The company must reimburse the City for the City's reasonable costs,
including costs of collection and attorney fees incurred as a result of the
company default. The security posted under. section
610.02, subdivision 5 will be applied by the City first toward payment for such
reimbursement.
610.05. Indemnification.
   Subd. 1.   Scope. The company will indemnify, keep and hold the City, its
elected officials, officers, employees, and agents free and harmless from any
and all claims and actions on account of injury or death of persons or damage
to property occasioned by the construction, installation, maintenance, repair,
removal, relocation or operation of the facilities affecting public ground,
unless such injury or damage is the result of the negligence of the City, its
elected officials, employees, officers, or agents. The City will notify the
company of claims or actions and provide a reasonable opportunity for the
company to accept and undertake the defense.
   Subd. 2.   Claim Defense. If a claim or action is brought against the City
under circumstances where indemnification applies, the company, at its sole
expense, shall defend the City if written notice of the claim or action is
given to the company within a period wherein the company is not prejudiced in
the defense of such claim or action by lack of such notice. If the company
undertakes the defense, the company shall have complete control of such claim
or action, but it may not settle without the consent of the City, which shall
not be unreasonably withheld. This section is not, as to third parties, a
waiver of any defense or immunity otherwise available to the City. In defending
any action on behalf of the City, the company is entitled to assert every
defense or immunity that the City could assert in its own behalf .
610.06. Other Conditions of Use.
   Subd. 1.   Use of Public Ground. Facilities must be located, constructed,
installed, maintained or relocated so as not to endanger or unnecessarily
interfere with the usual and customary traffic, travel, and use of public
ground. The facilities are subject to additional conditions of the permit as
established by the director including but not limited to (i) the right of
inspection by the City at reasonable times and places; (ii) the obligation to
relocate the facilities pursuant to section
610.03, subdivisions 3 and 4; and (iii) compliance with all applicable
regulations imposed by the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission and other
state and federal law, including prompt compliance with the requirements of the
Gopher State One Call program, Minnesota Statutes Chapter 216D.
   Subd. 2.   Location. The facilities must be placed in a location agreed to
by the City. The company shall give the City forty-five (45) days advanced
written notice of the company's proposed location of facilities within public
ground. No later than 45 days after the City's receipt of the company's written
notice the City will notify the company in writing of the City's acceptance or
rejection of the proposed location. If the City rejects the company's proposed
location, the City shall propose alternative locations. The City does not waive
or forfeit its right to reject the location of facilities by failure to respond
within the 45 days.
   Subd. 3.   Emergency Work. A company may open and disturb the surface of
public ground without a permit where an emergency exists requiring the
immediate repair of its facilities. In such event the company must request a
permit not later than the second working day thereafter and comply with the
applicable conditions of the permit. In no event, may the company undertake
such an activity which will result in the closing of a street or alley without
prior notification to the City.
   Subd. 4    Street Improvements, Paving or Resurfacing. The City will give
the company written notice of plans for street improvements where permanent
paving or resurfacing is involved. The notice must contain (i) the nature and
character of the improvements; (ii) the streets upon which the improvements are
to be made; (iii) the extent of the improvements, the time when the City will
start the work; and, (iv) if more than one street is involved, the sequence in
which the work is to proceed.
   Subd. 5.   Company Protection of Facilities. The company must take
reasonable measures to prevent the facilities from causing damage to persons or
property. The company must take reasonable measures to protect its facilities
from damage that could be inflicted on the facilities by persons, property, or
the elements. The company must take specific protective measures when the City
performs work near the facilities.
   Subd. 6.   Prior Service Connections. In cases where the City is undertaking
the paving or resurfacing of streets and the facilities are located under such
street, the company may be required to install service connections prior to the
paving or resurfacing, if it is apparent that service will be required during
the five year period following the paving or resurfacing.
610.07. Effective Date and Applicability to Existing Facilities.
Companies with facilities, in, on, over, under or along public ground on the
effective date of this ordinance must take prompt action to comply with this
ordinance and the permits authorized by this ordinance. A company, however, is
not required to reapply for a permit obtained from the City prior to the
effective date of this ordinance. A company is not required to pay the
difference between the permit fee of a previously obtained permit and the
equivalent newly obtained permit under this ordinance. All other provisions of
this ordinance apply to existing facilities.
610.08. Acceptance of Requirements.
By receiving a permit pursuant to this ordinance, the company accepts and
agrees to comply with all of the requirements of this ordinance.
610.09. Public Ground Other Than Right-Of-Way.
Nothing in this ordinance is intended to grant to the company authority beyond
that given by Minnesota Statutes Section 222.37 for use of the public rights-
of-way for construction and operation of facilities. If the City allows the
company to use its non-right-of-way public ground, the terms of this ordinance
apply to the extent they are consistent with the contract, statutory and common
law rights the City owns in such property.
610.10. Regulations; Permit Schedules.
The director is authorized and directed to prepare suitable regulations and
schedules for the administration of permits issued under this ordinance.
610.11. Severability.
If any provision of this ordinance is contrary to law and therefore
unenforceable, such provision will be severed and will not affect the other
provisions of this ordinance. (Added by Ordinance No. 95-12, passed July 25,
1995)
611 Fireworks
611.01. Sale of Fireworks.
It is unlawful to sell fireworks in the City of Rockford in violation of
Minnesota Statutes, § 624.20 through 624.25, inclusive, which are adopted by
reference. Legal fireworks as defined in this Section may, however, be sold
upon issuance of a license issued by the City.
611.02. Definition.
For the purposes of this Section legal fireworks is defined to mean:
Wire or wood sparklers of not more than 100 grams of mixture per item. Other
sparkling items which are non-explosive and non-aerial and contain 75 grams or
less of chemical mixture per tube or a total of 200 grams or less for multiple
tubes, snakes and glow worms, smoke devices, or trick noisemakers which include
paper streamers, party poppers, string poppers, snappers, and drop pops, each
consisting of not more than twenty-five hundredths grains of explosive mixture.
611.03. Application.
The application for a license shall contain the following information: name,
address, and telephone number of applicant; the address of the location where
fireworks will be sold; the type of legal fireworks to be sold; the estimated
quantity of legal fireworks that will be stored on the licensed premises.
611.04. Processing Application
The application must be filed with the City Administrator together with the
permit fee. Following an inspection of the premises proposed to be licensed,
the City Administrator shall issue the permit if conditions for license
approval are satisfied and the location is properly zoned. If the City
Administrator denies the permit application, the permit applicant may, within
ten (10) days, appeal the decision to the City Council.
611.05. Conditions of License.
The license shall be issued subject to the following conditions:
   (1)   The license is non-transferable, either to a different person or
location. (Ordinance 02-08, passed May 28, 2002)
   (2)   Fire suppression:
      (a)   If the licensed premises is a permanent structure, it must contain
an automatic sprinkler system.
      (b)   Fire suppression equipment shall be provided as required by the
Fire Chief if the licensed sales are conducted from a temporary structure.
(Ordinance 12-02, adopted June 12, 2012)
   (3)   The license must be publicly displayed on the licensed premises.
   (4)   The premises are subject to inspection by City employees including law
enforcement officers during normal business hours.
   (5)   The sale of legal fireworks must be in an allowed use of the premises.
   (6)   The premises must be in compliance with the State Building Code and
State Fire Code. (Ordinance 02-08, passed May 28, 2002)
611.06. License Period and License Fee.
Licenses shall be issued for a calendar year. The license fee is established in
Chapter 212 of the Rockford City Code. License fees shall not be prorated.
(Ordinance 02-08, passed May 28, 2002)
611.07. Revocation of License.
Following written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, the City
Administrator may revoke a license for violation of this Section or state law
concerning the sale, use or possession of fireworks. If a license is revoked,
neither the applicant nor the licensed premises may obtain a license for twelve
(12) months. (Ordinance 02-08, passed May 28, 2002)
612 Housing Code
   PURPOSE. There exist in the City of Rockford structures that are now or that
may in the future become substandard. Such conditions, together with inadequate
provision for light and air, insufficient protection against fire hazards, lack
of proper heating, and unsanitary conditions, constitute a menace to public
health, safety and welfare of its citizens. It is further found and declared
that the existence of such conditions adversely affects public health and
safety and leads to continuation, extension and aggravation of urban blight. It
is further found that adequate protection of public health, safety and welfare,
therefore requires the establishment and enforcement of minimum property
standards for the exterior of owner and Non-owner occupied residential
dwellings and interior standards for Non-owner occupied residential dwellings.
(Ordinance 05-06, adopted May 24, 2005)
   Subd. 1.   Exterior Property Standards for Owner Occupied and Non-owner
occupied residential Dwellings. The owner of any owner and Non-owner occupied
residential dwelling shall comply with the following requirements:
   (1)   Ground Cover. Every residential premise shall be maintained in a
condition to control erosion, dust and mud by suitable landscaping with grass,
trees, shrubs, or other planted ground cover or by paving with asphalt,
concrete or by such other suitable means as shall be approved by the
enforcement officer.
   (2)   Insect and Rodent Infestations. It shall be the responsibility of the
owner to control and/or eliminate any infestation of insects, rodents or other
pests in all exterior areas, and accessory structures on the premises.
   (3)   Accessory Structures. All accessory structures including, but not
limited to, detached garages, sheds, and fences shall be maintained
structurally sound and in good repair. All exterior wood surfaces, other than
decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay or by
other protective covering or treatment. Any new paint applied shall not be lead
base. Service doors to residential garages shall be provided with securing
locks.
   (4)   Exterior Sidewalks, Walkways and Stairs. All sidewalks, walkways and
exterior stairs shall be maintained in safe sound conditions free of defects
and hazards.
(Ordinance 05-06, adopted May 24, 2005) (Amended by Ordinance 2025-04, adopted
July 8, 2025)
   Subd. 2.   Exterior Structure for Owner Occupied and Non-owner occupied
residential Dwellings. The owner of any owner occupied and non-owner occupied
residential dwelling shall comply with the following requirements:
   (1)   Foundations, walls, roof and other exterior surfaces. Every
foundation, exterior wall, roof and all other exterior surfaces shall be
maintained in a professional state of maintenance and repair.
      A.   The foundation elements shall adequately support the building at all
points.
      B.   All exterior wood, vinyl and metal surfaces shall be protected from
the elements and decay by maintained paint, stain or other protective covering
or treatment. Joints in siding materials and between siding and other feature
shall be maintained weather-resistant. Metal surfaces subject to rust or
corrosion shall be stabilized and treated to inhibit future rust or corrosion.
For purposes of this Section, if forty percent (40%) or more of a wall or other
surface area, such as: fascia, soffits, rake, has the protective coating
deteriorated, then the wall or surface shall be restored to a protected
condition.
      C.   The roof shall be impervious to water and have no defects that admit
water or dampness to the interior of the building. No building roof shall be
used for storage of any materials or objects unless approved by the enforcement
officer.
   (2)   Stairs, Porches, Decks and Railing.
      A.   Every outside stair, every porch and deck shall be constructed
safely and capable of support a load as determined by the Building Code and
shall be kept in sound conditions and good repair. Every stairway, porch, deck
or step that is more than thirty (30) inches above grade shall have guardrails
and intermediate rails so that a 4” sphere can not pass trough in accordance
with the Minnesota State building code or maintained in accordance with the
Building code in effect when originally constructed. If repairs include
replacing more than fifty (50) percent it must be brought up to current code
standards.
      B.   Every flight of stairs that is more than three (3) risers high shall
have handrails in accordance with the Building Code or maintained in accordance
with the building code under which it was originally constructed.
      C.   Stairs, steps, porches, decks, handrails, balustrades and guardrails
deemed hazardous by the enforcement officer shall be corrected so as to be in
compliance with the Building Code.
   (3)   Windows, doors and hatchways. Every window, exterior door and basement
hatchway shall be substantially tight and shall be kept in sound conditions and
repair.
      A.   Windows shall be fully supplied with window panes that are without
open cracks or holes.
      B.   Every window required for ventilation, or other outside opening used
for ventilation purposes, shall be supplied with a screen of not less than
sixteen (16) mesh per inch. (Ordinance 05-06, adopted May 24, 2005)
   Subd. 3.   Completion of Exterior for Owner Occupied and Non-owner Occupied
Residential Dwellings. The roof and all exterior surfaces of all residential
owner occupied and Non-owner occupied residential dwelling units, buildings and
accessory structures, shall be completed with exterior finish materials within
12 months after the date of issuance of a building permit for the new
construction alteration, remodeling or relocation of such building or
structure. All such exterior surfaces of the structure issued a building permit
before the effective date of this ordinance for the new construction;
alteration, remodeling or relocation of such structure shall be completed
twelve months after the date of issuing of such permit. Term “finish materials”
as used in this section shall mean stucco, brick, stone, shingles, or shakes,
redwood, cedar, vinyl, steel, fibrous cement and masonite siding materials, and
shall include windows and doors. (Ordinance 05-06, adopted May 24, 2005)
   Subd. 4.   Interior Structure for Non-owner occupied residential Rental
Residential Dwellings. Non-owner occupied residential dwellings shall comply
with at least the following interior standards:
   (1)   Walls and ceilings. All interior walls and ceilings must be in good
general repair (i.e. No falling or loose plaster, gypsum, or ceiling tiles.
   (2)   All bathrooms shall have an operable window or exhaust fan.
   (3)   Ground fault protected outlets will be required in bathrooms, outlets
within three (3) feet of kitchen sink, and all exterior outlets.
   (4)   Rooms must be capable of maintaining sixty-sight (68) degrees
temperature three (3) feet from floor level.
   (5)   Hot water is required at kitchen sink, bathroom sink and tub/shower.
   (6)   Smoke detectors shall be required in all bedrooms and in the immediate
vicinity outside of the bedroom.
   (7)   Every fixture, facility or piece of equipment requiring sewer
connection shall have a functioning connection, free from defects, leaks, or
obstructions, and shall possess sufficient capaCity to drain all other
fixtures, facilities, or pieces of equipment which fee into it. The sewer
system must be capable of conveying all sewage into the municipal sanitary
sewer system.
   (8)   Every fixture, facility, or piece of equipment requiring a water
connection shall have a functioning connection, free from defects, leaks, or
obstructions. Each water connection shall possess sufficient capaCity to
adequately supply all fixtures, facilities, or pieces of equipment to which
connected with an uncontaminated, controllable flow of water. (Ordinance 05-06,
adopted May 24, 2005)
   Subd. 5.   License Requirement for Non-owner occupied residential Dwellings.
No person shall operate a Non-owner occupied residential dwelling without first
having obtained a license to do so from the City of Rockford as hereinafter
provided. Each such operating license shall be issued annually and shall expire
on the anniversary date of issuance. License renewals shall be filed at least
30 days prior to license expiration date.
   LICENSE FEES. License fees, as set forth by City Council resolution, shall
be due 30 days prior to the license application date; in the cases of new,
unlicensed dwellings, license fees shall be due upon issuance of the
certificate of occupancy.
   (1)   A delinquency penalty of 5% of the license fee for each day of
operation without a valid license shall be charged operators of rental dwelling
after written notification has been given by the City. Once issued a license is
nontransferable and the licensee shall not be entitled to a refund of any
license fee upon revocation or suspension; however, the licensee shall be
entitled to a license fee refund, prorated monthly, upon proof of transfer of
legal control or ownership.
   (2)   No operating license shall be issued or renewed for a non-owner
occupied residential dwelling unit unless such owner designates in writing to
the compliance official the name of his resident agent who is responsible for
maintenance and upkeep and who is legally constituted and empowered to receive
service of notice of violation of the provisions of the City ordinances, to
receive orders and to institute remedial action to effect such orders and to
accept all service or process pursuant to law. The compliance official shall be
notified in writing of any change of resident agent.
   (3)   Every licensee of a multiple dwelling shall cause to be conspicuously
posted in the main entryway or other conspicuous location therein the current
license for the respective multiple dwelling.
   (4)   No operating license shall be transferable to another person or to
another Non-owner occupied residential dwelling. Every person holding an
operating license shall give notice in writing to the compliance official
within five business days after having legally transferred or otherwise
disposed of the legal control of any licensed rental dwelling. Such notice
shall include the name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or
control of such Non-owner occupied residential dwelling or dwellings.
(Ordinance 05-06, adopted May 24, 2005)
   Subd. 6.   Enforcement. The provisions of this ordinance shall be construed
to be directory only, and shall not be construed to create a duty on the part
of the City or its officers or employees to enforce. The City and its officers
and employees shall not be liable for any failure to enforce the provisions of
this code. (Ordinance 05-06, adopted May 24, 2005)
   COMPLAINTS. The compliance officer or designee shall enforce the provisions
of this chapter when a complaint is filed by one of the following: an occupant
of the dwelling, a member of the Rockford Fire Department, a member of the
Wright County Sheriff’s Department, a visitor or a City staff member. Once a
complaint has been filed with the City an inspection of the property shall be
scheduled. A fee, as set forth by City Council resolution, shall be charged for
all inspections necessary based upon a complaint filed with the City. The
inspection fee(s) will be payable to the City within 30 days after the
inspection. (Ordinance 05-06, adopted May 24, 2005)
   COMPLIANCE ORDER. After an inspection of the dwelling triggered by a
complaint and the compliance officer determines that any building or portion
thereof, or the premises surrounding any of these, fails to meet the provisions
of this ordinance, a compliance order setting forth the violations of the
ordinance and ordering the owner, occupant, operator, or agent to correct such
violations shall be issued. This compliance order shall:
   (1)   Be in writing.
   (2)   Describe the location and nature of the violations of this ordinance.
   (3)   Establish a reasonable time for the correction of such violation and
notify of appeal recourse.
   (4)   Be served upon the owner or agent or occupant, as the case may
require. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner or
agent, or upon any such occupant, if a copy thereof is:
      A.   Served upon owner, agent or occupant personally; or
      B.   Sent by registered mail to his last known address; or
      C.   Upon failure to effect notice through (a) and (b) as set out in this
section, posted at a conspicuous place in or about the building, or portion
thereof, which is affected by the notice. (Ordinance 05-06, adopted May 24,
2005)
   RIGHT OF APPEAL. When it is alleged by any person to whom a compliance order
is directed that such compliance order is based upon erroneous interpretation
of this ordinance, such person may appeal the compliance order to the City
Council sitting as a Board of Appeals. Such appeals must be in writing, must
specify the grounds for the appeal, must be accompanied by a filing fee set
forth per council resolution, in cash or cashier's check, and must be filed
with the City clerk within five (5) business days after service of the
compliance order. The filing of an appeal shall stay all proceedings in the
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless such a stay would cause
imminent peril to life, health, or property. (Ordinance 05-06, adopted May 24,
2005)
   BOARD OF APPEALS DECISION.  Upon at least five (5) business days notice to
the appellant of the time and place for hearing the appeal, and within thirty
(30) days after said appeal is filed, the board of appeals shall hold a hearing
thereon, taking into consideration any advice and recommendation from the
compliance officer. The board of appeals may reverse, modify, or affirm in
whole or in part, the compliance order and may order return of all or part of
the filing fee if the appeal is upheld. (Ordinance 05-06, adopted May 24, 2005)
   RESTRICTIONS ON TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP. It shall be unlawful for the owner of
any building, or portion thereof, upon whom a pending compliance order has been
served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose thereof to
another person until the provisions of the tag or compliance order have been
complied with, unless such owner shall furnish to the grantee, lessee, or
mortgage a true copy of any notice of violation or compliance order and shall
obtain and possess a receipt of acknowledging. Anyone securing an interest in
the building, or portion thereof, who has received notice of the existence of a
violation tag or compliance order shall be bound by same without further
service of notice and shall be liable to all penalties and procedures provided
by this ordinance. (Ordinance 05-06, adopted May 24, 2005)
   EXECUTION OF COMPLIANCE ORDERS BY PUBLIC AUTHORITY.  Upon failure to comply
with a compliance order within the time set therein and no appeal having been
taken, or upon failure to comply with a modified compliance order within the
time set therein, the criminal penalty established hereunder notwithstanding,
the City Council may, by resolution, cause the cited deficiency to be remedied
as set forth in the compliance order. The cost of such remedy shall be a lien
against the subject real estate and may be levied and collected as a special
assessment in the manner provided by Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 429, but the
assessment shall be payable in a single installment. (Ordinance 05-06, adopted
May 24, 2005)
   PENALTIES. Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance by
doing any act or omitting to do any act which constitutes a breach of any
section of this ordinance, shall, upon conviction thereof by lawful authority,
be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000) or by
imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days or both, together with the costs of
prosecution. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
punishable offense. No provision of this ordinance designating the duties of
any official or employee of the City shall be so construed as to make such
official or employee liable for the penalty provided in this section because of
failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the City Council to
impose such penalty on such official or employee is specifically and clearly
expressed in the section creating the duty.
Every operating license issued under the provisions of this ordinance is
subject to suspension or revocation by the City Council should the licensed
owner or his duly authorized resident agent fail to operate or maintain
licensed rental dwellings and units therein consistent with the provisions of
the ordinance of the City of Rockford and the laws of the State of Minnesota.
In the event that an operating license is suspended or revoked by the City
Council for just cause, it shall be unlawful for the owner or his duly
authorized agent to thereafter permit any new occupancy of vacant or thereafter
vacated rental units until such time as a valid operating license may be
restored by the City Council. Any person violating this provision shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a
fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or by imprisonment not to
exceed ninety (90) days, or both, together with the costs of prosecution. Each
day of each violation shall constitute a separate punishable offense.
The Zoning Administrator or Building Official or his designated agents shall be
the compliance official who shall administer and enforce the provisions of this
ordinance and who is hereby authorized to inspect Non-owner occupied
residential dwelling units and other buildings when complaints are filed with
the City that a violation of this ordinance has been or is being committed.
Inspections shall be conducted during reasonable daylight hours, and the
compliance official shall present evidence of official capaCity to the occupant
in charge of a respective dwelling unit.
Any owner, occupant, or other person in charge of a building may refuse to
permit free access and entry to the structure or premises under his control for
inspection pursuant to this ordinance, whereupon the compliance official may
seek a court order authorizing such inspection.
   UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION.  
   (1)   Any building or portion thereof, which is damaged, decayed,
dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, vermin or rodent infested, or which lacks
provision for basic illumination, ventilation or sanitary facilities to the
extent that the defects create a hazard to the health, safety or welfare of the
occupants or of the public may be declared unfit for human habitation, the
compliance official shall order same vacated within a reasonable time and shall
post a placard on same indicating that it is unfit for human habitation, and
any operating license previously issued for such dwelling shall be revoked.
   (2)   It shall be unlawful for such building or portion thereof to be used
for human habitation until the defective conditions have been corrected and
written approval has been issued by the compliance official. It shall be
unlawful for any person to deface or remove the declaration from any such
building.
   SECURE UNFIT AND VACATED BUILDINGS.  The owner of any building or portion
thereof, which has been declared unfit for human habitation, or which is
otherwise vacant for a period of 60 days or more, shall make same safe and
secure so that it is not hazardous to the health, safety and welfare of the
public and does not constitute a public nuisance. Any vacant building open at
doors or windows, if unguarded, shall be deemed to be a hazard to the health,
safety and welfare of the public and a public nuisance within the meaning of
this ordinance and shall be made safe and secure immediately.
   HAZARDOUS BUILDING DECLARATION. In the event that a building has been
declared unfit for human habitation and the owner has not remedied the defects
within a prescribed reasonable time, the building may be declared a hazardous
building and treated consistent with the provisions of Minnesota Statutes.
(Ordinance 05-06, adopted May 24, 2005)
   Subd. 7.   Enforcement and Inspection Authority. The Zoning Administrator
shall be the designated agent for administering and enforcing the provisions of
this Ordinance and who is hereby authorized to cause inspections for
residential dwellings units when reason exists to believe that a violation of
this Ordinance has been or is being committed. The Zoning Administrator may
delegate to his or her authorized designee authority to take any action
authorized under this Ordinance.
Non-Owner Occupied Dwelling is defined as follows: A home that is occupied by a
person or persons that do not have title to the property. Non–owner occupied
shall not apply to fewer than two units per dwelling. (Ordinance 05-06, adopted
May 24, 2005)
613 Vacant Building Registration
   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety
and welfare, by establishing a program to identify and register vacant
buildings and by determining what actions the City will take and what actions
the owners of the buildings must take. (Ordinance 11-04, adopted July 11, 2011)
   Subd. 1.   Findings. The City Council finds that buildings which remain
vacant and unoccupied for any significant period of time become an attractive
nuisance to children, a harborage for rodents, an invitation as a temporary
abode, an increased fire hazard, an increased risk of explosion due to the
theft of internal piping, and that the unkempt grounds surrounding such
property invite the dumping of garbage and rubbishes; that such buildings are
often permitted to become dilapidated; that such buildings contribute to the
growth of blight within the City, depress the market values of surrounding
properties to the detriment of the various taxing districts and require
additional governmental services; that the use and maintenance of property in
such condition and manner endangers the public safety and health, constitutes
an unreasonable use and conditions to the annoyance, discomfort and repose of a
considerable number of the public, is detrimental to the public good and to the
common welfare; and renders a considerable number of the public insecure in the
use and enjoyment of their property, and thus may constitute a nuisance
condition. Adequate protection of public health, safety and welfare, therefore,
requires the establishment and enforcement of the means by which such nuisance
conditions may be abated. (Ordinance 11-04, adopted July 11, 2011)
   Subd. 2   Definitions.
DANGEROUS STRUCTURE: A structure that is potentially hazardous to persons or
property, including, but not limited to: a) a structure that is in danger of
partial or complete collapse; b) a structure with any exterior parts that are
loose or in danger of falling; or c) a structure with any parts, such as
floors, porches, railings, ramps, balconies, or roofs, that are accessible and
that are either collapsed, or in danger of collapsing or unable to support the
weight of normally imposed loads.
SECURE BY OTHER THAN NORMAL MEANS:  Refers to a buildings secured by means
other than those used in the design of the building.
UNOCCUPIED: A building which is not being used for legal occupancy.
UNSECURED: A building or portion of a building that is open to entry by
unauthorized persons without the use of tools.
VACANT BUILDNG: A building or portion of a building that is:
   A.   Unoccupied and unsecured for five (5) days or more;
   B.   Unoccupied and secured by other than normal means for fifteen (15) days
or more;
   C.   Unoccupied and in any phase of an active foreclosure proceeding under
Minnesota Statutes;
   D.   Unoccupied and dangerous structure;
   E.   Unoccupied and posted for no occupancy or unfit for human habitation;
   F.   Unoccupied and has a City Code violation existing for five (5) days or
more;
   G.   Condemned and illegally occupied; or
   H.   Vacant building does not mean any building being constructed pursuant
to a valid unexpired building permit issued pursuant to City Building Code
regulations. (Ordinance 11-04, adopted July 11, 2011)
   Subd. 3   Registration.
   A.   The owner of a vacant building shall register the building with the
City no later than seven (7) days after the building becomes a vacant building
as defined in this chapter.
   B.   The City may register an unoccupied building as a vacant building when
the City takes ordinance enforcement action or action to abate an ordinance
violation against the unoccupied building or the grounds upon with it is
located. In such case, the City shall complete all forms required by this
section and may special assess all registration costs against such property.
   C.   A registration shall be completed on a form provided by the City. Such
completed registration may be sent to the owner and all other parties holding
an ownership or security interest in the property. The completed form shall
include the following:
      1.   A description of the premises including address.
      2.   The names and addresses of the owners of the property.
      3.   The names and addresses of all known lien holders.
      4.   The period of time the building is expected to remain vacant.
      5.   A plan or timetable for returning the building to appropriate
occupancy.
   D.   The owner shall notify the City in writing of any changes in the
information supplied as part of the vacant building registration within seven
(7) days of such change.
   E.   The owner of the building shall keep the vacant building secured and
safe and the building grounds maintained.
   F.   The owner shall disconnect utilities to the vacant building when
required by the City Building Official.
   G.   Any new owner of a “vacant building” as defined by this chapter must
notify the City in writing of the change of ownership within seven (7) days of
the change of ownership.
   H.   The owner of a vacant building must allow the City access for
inspections. The City will provide the owner with five (5) days notice for any
inspection request except where a hazardous unsafe conditions exists, in which
case the City may access the vacant building for inspection purposes after
making a reasonable effort to contact the owner via telephone. (Ordinance 11-
04, adopted July 11, 2011)
   Subd. 4   Fee.
   A.   The owner of a vacant building shall pay an annual registration fee of
one hundred dollars ($100.00). Said fee may be modified by City council
resolution from time to time. Subsequent annual fees shall be paid on the
anniversary of the initial registration. This fee is imposed to defray the
costs of registering and monitoring the vacant building.
   B.   The first annual fee shall be paid not later than ten (10) days after
the building has become “vacant building” as defined by this chapter.
(Ordinance 11-04, adopted July 11, 2011)
   Subd. 5   City Action. The City may take the following actions in relation
to a vacant building. The building owner shall reimburse the City for all costs
incurred by the City pursuant to this chapter.
   A.   The City may shut off water service to the vacant building, unless the
owner can show good cause why water service should remain on.
   B.   The City may inspect the premises of the vacant building each month.
   C.   The City may take any other action required to secure the building. Any
additional cost shall be charged back to the owner of the property.
   D.   The City may mow the lawn, landscape or grounds of any vacant building
as needed if the plant growth violates the City ordinance and the owner fails
to timely cut the lawn. The owner shall pay the City for the costs incurred.
   E.   The City may plow sidewalks and driveways located on the vacant
property, remove garbage from vacant property, and take any other actions
authorized by the law to remedy an ordinance violation.
   F.   The City may conduct site inspections of the property upon which the
vacant building is located as needed to ensure that the building is secure, the
grounds are maintained and compliance with the terms of this chapter is
achieved. (Ordinance 11-04, adopted July 11, 2011)
   Subd. 6.   Certification of Unpaid Service Charges. In the event the
building owner fails to reimburse the City within thirty (30) days of mailing
of a bill by the City for costs incurred by the City pursuant to enforcement of
this chapter against a vacant property, or in the event the building owner
fails to pay the registration fee required by the chapter, the City may certify
such unpaid charges to the County auditor for collection with the next year’s
property taxes after ten (10) days’ mailed notice to the property owner sent
via first class U.S. mail to the owner’s address as listed on the tax records
at the Wright or Hennepin County recorder’s office. (Ordinance 11-04, adopted
July 11, 2011)
   Subd. 7.   Penalty. Any owner who fails to register a vacant building under
this chapter or who provides inaccurate or false information shall face an
administrative fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each month that the
building remains unregistered. (Ordinance 11-04, adopted July 11, 2011)
   Subd. 8.   Appeal. Any owner of a vacant building who believes that an order
or penalty issued under this chapter is based on an erroneous interpretation of
this chapter or misstatement of facts may appeal to the City Council. Such
appeal must be in writing and must specify the grounds for the appeal. Any
appeal must be filed within ten (10) days of the action taken with which the
owner disagrees. (Ordinance 11-04, adopted July 11, 2011)
614. Massage Business and Services
614.01. Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is: 1) to establish standards and regulations
for massage businesses and services commercially available to the public that
protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public; and 2) to
provide standards and mechanisms protecting against exploitative and illicit
conduct including but not limited to human trafficking and forced labor.
(Ordinance 2024-01, passed March 12, 2024)
614.02. Definition.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
ACCREDITED INSTITUTION: An educational institution holding accredited status
with the United States Department of Education or Minnesota Office of Higher
Education or similar agency of another state or a regional accrediting agency
approved by the United States Department of Education.
ACCREDITED PROGRAM: A professional massage program or educational institution
Accredited by the Commission on Massage Therapy Accreditation (COMTA).
CITY: City of Rockford, Minnesota.
CLEAN: The absence of dirt, grease, rubbish, garbage and other offensive,
unsightly or extraneous matter.
GOOD REPAIR: Free of corrosion, breaks, cracks, chips, pitting, excessive wear
and tear, leaks, obstructions and similar defects so as to constitute a good
and sound condition.
HEALTHCARE FACILITY OR PROVIDER: Any person providing medical, surgical,
dental, chiropractic or osteopathic services, or physical therapy services
pursuant to a prescription therefor, wherein practitioners licensed by the
State, such as, but not limited to, a hospital, sanitarium, hospice, nursing
home or other institution for the hospitalization and care of human beings duly
licensed under the provisions of Minn. Stat. §§ 144.50 to 144.69.
MASSAGE: Any method of applying pressure on or friction against the external
parts of the human body- including but not limited to rubbing, stroking,
kneading, tapping, pounding, vibrating, stimulating, and/or rolling- with the
hands or arms or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus, or
other appliances or devices, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing
alcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil, powder, cream, lotion, ointment, or other
similar preparations.
MASSAGE BUSINESS: The offering of massage services to the general public,
regardless of whether the offer is limited to only select invitees or
organizational members, including massage services conducted as a home
occupation, but excluding services conducted exclusively in the home of the
massage customer either within or outside of the City.
MASSAGE THERAPIST: An individual who practices or administers massage to the
public who can demonstrate to the Issuing Authority that he or she:
   A.   Has current insurance coverage of five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000) for professional liability in the practice of massage;
   B.   Is affiliated with, employed by, or owns a therapeutic massage business
licensed by the City; and
   C.   Has completed five hundred (500) hours of certified therapeutic massage
training from an Accredited Institution or Accredited Program approved with
curriculum content that includes subjects of anatomy, physiology, hygiene,
ethics, massage theory and research, and massage practice, and has provided
either an original or certified transcript of said training.
OPERATE: To own, manage, or conduct, or to have control, charge, or custody
over.
PERSON(S): Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, limited
liability company, joint venture, or combination of individuals.
SANITARY: Free from pathogenic microorganisms.
THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: A massage business that employs or hires
licensed therapeutic massage therapists to provide therapeutic massage within
the City for a fee or other consideration.
WITHIN THE CITY: Any physical presence within the City, including mobile
massage operations. (Ordinance 2024-01, passed March 12, 2024)
614.03. Licenses.
   Subd. 1.   License Required.
   A.   Therapeutic Massage Establishment License. It shall be unlawful for any
therapeutic massage establishment to operate, engage in, or carry or provide
massage services within the City to the public for consideration without first
having obtained a license from the City pursuant to this chapter. The owner/
operator of a therapeutic massage establishment need not be licensed as a
therapeutic massage therapist if he or she does not at any time practice or
administer massage to the public.
   B.   Massage Therapist License. It shall be unlawful for any person to
practice, administer, or provide massage services to the public for
consideration within the City without first having obtained a license from the
City pursuant to this chapter, but excluding services conducted exclusively in
the home of the massage customer either within or outside of the City.
   C.   Retroactivity. The provisions of this chapter shall apply
retroactively. Existing therapeutic massage establishments and massage
therapists subject to the licensing requirements shall have until May 14, 2024
to submit the required license application and fees and conform to the
requirements herein.
   Subd. 2.   Exceptions. Therapeutic massage establishment licenses and
massage therapist licenses are not required under this chapter for the
following places, and employees thereof, where massage services are provided by
or under the direction of any of:
   A.   Persons duly licensed as a doctor in this state to practice medicine,
surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic, physical therapy, podiatry so long as the
massage is administered in the regular course of the medical practitioner's
practice to prepare a patient for a medical procedure, or in complement to a
medical procedure previously performed on the patient and the massage is not
provided as part of a separate and distinct massage business. Any licensed
doctor offering any form of massage without a direct link to a medical
procedure must obtain a massage therapist license.
   B.   Persons working solely under the direction and control of a duly
licensed medical professional licensed under Minn. Stat. Chapter 147 or 148 or
a dental professional licensed under Minn. Stat. Chapter 150A, provided the
massage is administered on the premises of the medical business.
   C.   Places duly licensed or operating as a hospital, clinic, nursing home,
hospice, sanitorium or group home established for the hospitalization or care
of human beings, provided the massage is administered only to the residents or
patients of the facility as part of their care and not provided as part of a
separate service.
   D.   Athletic trainers, certified by the National Association of Athletic
Trainers (NAAT), when working with an amateur, semiprofessional or professional
athlete or athletic team.
   E.   A student enrolled in any accredited institution that provides an
accredited program of study or course work involving massage therapy, provided
that the massage is provided during and as a part of the course or clinical
component of the institution's program or course work and the students are
supervised by an instructor while performing the massage therapy.
   F.   Persons providing temporary massage services such as "chair massage"
are not required to obtain a therapeutic massage establishment license if all
of the following requirements are met:
       1.   The massage is provided in a place of business where the massage
can be easily be seen by any employee or visitor on the premises;
      2.   The establishment where the massage is being provided does not hold
a license to sell alcoholic beverages;
      3.   Each recipient of a massage remains fully clothed in the normal
daytime attire worn when he or she enters the establishment and does not remove
any clothing, except outerwear such as a coat or jacket. (Ordinance 2024-01,
passed March 12, 2024)
614.04. License Application.
   Subd. 1.   Therapeutic Massage Establishment License Application. An
application for a therapeutic massage establishment license shall be made on a
form supplied by the City. All questions asked or information required by the
application forms shall be answered fully and completely by the applicant. It
shall be the continuing duty of each licensee to properly notify the City
within ten business days of any change in the information or facts required to
be furnished on the application for license. Failure to comply with this
requirement shall constitute cause for denial, revocation or suspension of such
license.
   Subd. 2.   Massage Therapist License Application. An application for a
massage therapist license shall be made on a form supplied by the City. All
questions asked or information required by the application forms shall be
answered fully and completely by the applicant. It shall be the continuing duty
of each licensee to properly notify the City within ten business days of any
change in the information or facts required to be furnished on the application
for license. Failure to comply with this requirement shall constitute cause for
denial, revocation or suspension of such license. Photo I.D. cards will be
issued to each massage therapist granted a license. (Ordinance 2024-01, passed
March 12, 2024)
614.05. License Fees.
   The fees for a therapeutic massage establishment license and therapeutic
massage license shall be established by the City Council from time to time.
Each application for a license shall be accompanied by payment in full of the
required license and investigation fees, as applicable. (Ordinance 2024-01,
passed March 12, 2024)
614.06. License Application Verification and Consideration.
   Subd. 1.   Background Investigation Release. Applicants for initial licenses
shall also submit an executed release of information authorizing the Wright and
Hennepin County Sheriff's Departments to obtain any information pertaining to
the applicant's character or criminal history which may be deemed confidential,
private, or privileged by the laws of the United States or of any state.
   Subd. 2.   Verification. The City may conduct any and all investigations
deemed necessary by the City to verify the information provided by the
applicant on the application form, including, but not limited to a criminal
history inquiry and driver's license history. Within a reasonable period after
receipt of a complete application form and applicable fees, and completion of
the investigation, the City shall grant or deny the application. Notice shall
be sent by regular mail to the applicant upon denial informing the applicant of
the right to appeal to the City Council within 20 days. Failure to request a
hearing within 20 days of receipt of the Notice shall be a waiver of the right
to appeal. If an appeal is properly made the matter shall be placed upon the
next available City Council agenda. (Ordinance 2024-01, passed March 12, 2024)
614.07. Persons Ineligible for License.
   Subd. 1.    The City may deny issuance of an initial therapeutic massage
establishment license or initial massage therapist license in any of the
following circumstances:
   A.   The applicant is not 18 years of age or older at the time the
application is submitted to the City;
   B.   The applicant has been convicted of any crime deemed by the City to be
directly related to the massage business as prescribed by Minn. Stat. § 364.03,
subd. 2, and who the City has determined has not shown competent evidence of
enough rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties and
responsibilities of a licensee as prescribed by Minn. Stat. § 364.03, subd. 3;
   C.   The applicant has had an interest in, as an individual or as part of a
corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association,
establishment, business or firm, a massage license that was denied, revoked or
suspended within the last ten years of the date the license application is
submitted to the City;
   D.   The applicant is legally prohibited from working in the United States
or has employed persons who are legally prohibited from working in the United
States within the ten years preceding the current application;
   E.   The owner, operator, or any person who has a five percent financial
interest in the business or the appointed on-site manager or agent applicant is
not of good moral character or repute;
   F.   The applicant is not the real party in interest of the establishment.
   G.   The applicant has knowingly misrepresented or falsified information on
a license application or failed to provide all information required by the
application form, or has misrepresented, falsified or omitted information on
any prior application within the ten years preceding the current application;
   H.   The applicant does not meet the definition of therapeutic massage
therapist or therapeutic massage establishment (as applicable) as defined in
this chapter;
   I.   The applicant does not have adequate insurance coverage in effect as
required by this chapter;
   J.   The applicant owes taxes or assessments to the state, county, school
district, or City that are due and delinquent;
   K.   The applicant is an individual or is the spouse of an individual whose
massage-related license has been suspected or revoked in the past five years.
(Ordinance 2024-01, passed March 12, 2024)
614.08. Locations Ineligible for Therapeutic Massage Establishment License.
   A.   Delinquent Taxes. No therapeutic massage establishment shall be
licensed if such establishment is located on property on which taxes,
assessment or other financial claims to the state, county, school district or
City are due and delinquent. In the event a suit has been commenced under Minn.
Stat. § 278.01-278.13, questioning the amount or validity of taxes, the City,
upon application, may waive strict compliance with this provision. No waiver
may be granted, however, for taxes or any portion thereof, which remain unpaid
for a period exceeding one year after becoming due.
   B.   Improper Zoning. No therapeutic massage establishment shall be licensed
if the location of such establishment has not obtained any required land use
approval as outlined in the City's zoning code. (Ordinance 2024-01, passed
March 12, 2024)
614.09. General License Requirements and Restrictions.
   Subd. 1.   Posting. A current therapeutic massage establishment license
shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises at which the massage
business is conducted. Upon demand of the City Administrator or designee, a
therapeutic massage establishment shall also immediately produce a current and
complete list of all licensed massage therapists who are employed by the
therapeutic massage establishment. An individual licensed as a massage
therapist shall also post his/her massage therapist license, with color photo,
in a conspicuous place on the premises at which the therapist is associated. A
massage therapist shall produce his or her massage therapist license upon
demand by the City Administrator.
   Subd. 2.   Premises Licensed. A therapeutic massage establishment license is
only effective for the compact and contiguous space specified in the approved
license application. If the licensed premises at which the massage business is
conducted is enlarged, altered, or extended, the licensee shall inform the City
within ten business days of such event. Failure to comply with this requirement
shall constitute cause for revocation or suspension of such license.
   Subd. 3.   Transfer of License Prohibited. Licenses issued by the City are
issued to the applicant only and are non-transferrable. An attempt to transfer
a license from one person to another or from one establishment to another is a
violation of this chapter which may subject the licensee to suspension or
revocation.
   Subd. 4.   Affiliation With Therapeutic Massage Establishment Required. A
massage therapist shall be employed by, affiliated with, or own a licensed
therapeutic massage establishment, unless a person or place is specifically
exempted from obtaining a therapeutic massage establishment license by this
chapter.
   Subd. 5.   Employment of Unlicensed Massage Therapists Prohibited. No
therapeutic massage establishment shall employ or use any person to perform
massage who is not licensed as a massage therapist under this chapter, unless
the person is specifically exempted by this chapter from obtaining a massage
therapist license. A therapeutic massage establishment may not open for
business without a licensed massage therapist employed by or affiliated with
the therapeutic massage establishment.
   Subd. 6.   Hours of Operation. No customers or patrons may be allowed to
enter the licensed premises after 9:00 p.m. and before 7:00 a.m. daily. No
customers or patrons may be allowed to remain on the licensed premises after 9:
00 p.m. and before 7:00 a.m. daily. No massage therapist shall perform massage
services after 9:00 p.m. and before 7:00 a.m. daily. Business hours must be
posted on all public entryways into the massage facility.
   Subd. 7.   Coverage of Genitals During Massage. The licensee shall require
and ensure that the individual who is receiving the massage shall at all times
have his or her genitals, breasts, buttocks, and anus covered with non-
transparent material or clothing.
   Subd. 8.   Massage Therapist Clothing Requirements. Any massage therapist
performing a massage shall at all times be dressed professionally, shall have
his or her breasts, buttocks, anus, and genitals covered with a non-transparent
material or clothing and shall prominently display or wear their photo
identification card.
   Subd. 9.   Effect of License Suspension or Revocation. No licensee shall
solicit business or offer to perform massage services while under license
suspension or revocation by the City.
   Subd. 10.   Inspection. During any hours in which any person is present on
the licensed premises, the premises licensed under this chapter shall be open
to inspection by any duly authorized representative of the City to determine
whether or not this chapter and all other rules, laws and regulations are being
observed. With reasonable notice, the business records of the licensee,
including income tax returns, shall be available for inspection by the City
during hours when the massage business is open for business. Licensee shall be
subject to a fee for a third inspection, if orders to correct are issued to a
licensee and those orders are not corrected upon re-inspection. All persons, as
a condition to being issued such license, consent to such inspection and
without a search warrant. All massage business premises shall be in good
repair, clean and sanitary and meet the requirements of the City and state
building and fire codes.
   Subd. 11.   Therapeutic massage establishments shall not contain nor allow
the use by any person of sleeping quarters or living spaces of any kind
intended for habitation, including but not limited to beds, cots, or
mattresses.
   Subd. 12.    Massage tables, chairs, and other furniture on which massages
are performed shall either be covered with clean linen or be washed after each
use with a cleaning agent sufficient to prevent the spread of disease. Linens
and towels shall be changed after each use and laundered by a commercial
cleaning establishment or in approved laundry facilities on the premises.
   Subd. 13.   Posting Rates. All therapeutic massage establishments must post
their service rates in a prominent place in the entrance or lobby of the
business.
   Subd. 14.   Illegal Activities. Advertising by a licensee or representative
of the licensee of any potential unlawful, misleading, sexually explicit,
obscene or erotic conduct or massage at the licensed establishment shall be
prohibited. A licensee shall be strictly responsible under this chapter for the
conduct of the business, including the actions of any employee or agent of the
licensee on the licensed premises. (Ordinance 2024-01, passed March 12, 2024)
614.10. Term, Renewal of License.
   Subd. 1.   The term of licenses granted under this chapter is from January 1
through the following December 31. If a person submits an application for a
license to be issued under this chapter any time following January 1 of a
calendar year, the terms of any such license shall expire on December 31 of the
year following issuance of the license. The license fee for a partial calendar
year may be pro-rated to one-half of the annual fee if an application is filed
with the City after June 30.
   Subd. 2.   A licensee must annually submit an application to be renewed with
the required fee. The application shall be submitted to the City at least
forty-five days prior to December 31st and shall be made on the City's
application form.
   Subd. 3.   Within a reasonable period after completion of the renewal
license verification process the City shall issue or deny the license in
accordance with this chapter. The notice and appeal provisions set forth in §
612.06, Subd. 2 shall apply.
(Ordinance 2024-01, passed March 12, 2024)
614.11. Sanctions for License Violations.
   Subd. 1.   Suspension or Revocation. The City may impose an administrative
penalty, or the license may be suspended, revoked or not renewed for any of the
following reasons:
   A.   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in a license
application or a renewal application.
   B.   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the licensed occupation or business.
   C.   Any violation of this chapter or state law.
   D.   A conviction by any licensee that is directly related to the occupation
or business licensed as defined by Minn. Stat.§ 364.03, subd. 2.
   E.   Conducting the licensed massage business in an unlawful manner or in
such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace
to the health, safety, or general welfare of the community.
   F.   If the owner, manager, lessee or any of the employees are found to be
in control or possession of an alcoholic beverage, a narcotic drug or
controlled substance on the premises, other than drugs which may be purchased
over the counter without a prescription or those for which the individual has a
prescription.
   G.   If the holder of an establishment license fails to maintain with the
City a current list of all employees of such licensed premises. The list shall
include all massage therapists licensed under this chapter.
   H.   A police report and/or law enforcement investigation report regarding a
licensed therapeutic massage enterprise or therapist is deemed by the City to
contain a credible allegation of prostitution, sex trafficking or criminal
sexual conduct.
   Subd. 2.   Notice and Hearing. A revocation or suspension shall be preceded
by written notice to the licensee and a hearing before the City Council. The
notice shall give at least ten (10) days' notice of the time and place of the
hearing and shall state the nature of the charges against the licensee. The
notice shall be mailed by regular mail to the licensee at the most recent
address listed on the licensee's license application.
   Subd. 3.   Ability to Reapply After Revocation. If a license is revoked
pursuant to this chapter, the City shall not accept or consider a new license
application from the licensee whose license was revoked for a period of one (1)
year after revocation. (Ordinance 2024-01, passed March 12, 2024)
614.12. Application.
   In addition to license sanctions, a person or entity that violates the
provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by
a fine or imprisonment or both, together with the costs of prosecution. Each
violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance 2024-
01, passed March 12, 2024)
700 Liquor and Beer
701. Liquor
(Title of Chapter amended by Ordinance No. 86-7 passed May 27, 1986)
(Entire Chapter Amended by Ordinance 09-01 passed April 14, 2009)
701.01. Adoption of State Law by Reference.
The provisions of M.S. Ch. § 340A, as they may be amended from time to time,
with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation,
restrictions on consumption, provisions relating to sales, hours of sale, and
all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and consumption
of intoxicating liquor and 3.2 percent malt liquor are hereby adopted by
reference and are made a part of this Chapter as if set out in full. It is the
intention of the City Council that all future amendments to M.S. Ch. § 340A are
hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at
the time this Chapter is adopted.
701.02. City May Be More Restrictive Than State Law.
The Council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. § 340A.509, as it may be
amended from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in this chapter,
additional restrictions on the sale and possession of alcoholic beverages
within its limits beyond those contained in M.S. Ch. § 340A, as it may be
amended from time to time.
701.03. Definitions.
In addition to the definitions contained in M.S. § 340A.101, as it may be
amended from time to time, the following terms are defined for purposes of this
Chapter:
LIMITED ESTABLISHMENT is defined as a food service that provides one or more of
the following:
   (1)   Prepackaged food that receives heat treatment and is served in the
package;
   (2)   Frozen pizza that is heated and served;
In addition the city requires a small menu of ten (10) items or more that are
heated and served on the premises and a seating capacity of at least thirty
(30) persons. (Ordinance #12-07, adopted November 13, 2012)
LIQUOR. As used in this chapter, without modification by the words “An
intoxicating” or “A 3.2 percent malt,” includes both intoxicating liquor and
3.2 percent malt liquor.
RESTAURANT. An eating facility, other than a hotel, under the control of a
single proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the
premises, where full waitress/waiter table service is provided, where a
customer orders food from printed menus and where the main food course is
served and consumed while seated at a single location. To be a restaurant as
defined by this section, an establishment shall have a license from the State
as required by M.S. §157.16, as it may be amended from time to time, and meet
the definition of either a “limited establishment”, “small establishment,”
“medium establishment” or “large establishment” as defined in M.S. §157.16,
subd. 3d, as it may be amended from time to time. (Ordinance #12-07, adopted
November 13, 2012)
701.04. Nudity on the Premises of Licensed Establishments Prohibited.
   Subd. 1.   The City Council finds that it is in the best interests of the
public health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city that
nudity is prohibited as provided in this section on the premises of any
establishment licensed under this Chapter. This is to protect and assist the
owners, operators, and employees of the establishment, as well as patrons and
the public in general, from harm stemming from the physical immediacy and
combination of alcohol, nudity, and sex. The Council especially intends to
prevent any subliminal endorsement of sexual harassment or activities likely to
lead to the possibility of various criminal conduct, including prostitution,
sexual assault, and disorderly conduct. The Council also finds that the
prohibition of nudity on the premises of any establishment licensed under this
chapter, as set forth in this section, reflects the prevailing community
standards of the City.
   Subd. 2.   It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person or
persons on the licensed premises when the person does not have his or her
buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a nontransparent material.
It is unlawful for any person to be on the licensed premises when the person
does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a
non-transparent material.
   Subd. 3.   A violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable as
provided by law, and is justification for revocation or suspension of any
liquor, wine, or 3.2 percent malt liquor license or the imposition of a civil
penalty.
701.05. Term and Expiration of Licenses.
Each license shall be issued for a maximum period of one year. All licenses,
except temporary licenses, shall expire on June 30 of each year unless another
date is provided by ordinance. All licenses shall expire on the same date.
Temporary licenses expire according to their terms.
701.06. Kinds of Liquor Licenses.
The City may issue the following licenses and permits, up to the number
specified in M.S. Ch. § 340A.
   Subd. 1.   3.2 percent malt liquor on-sale licenses, which may be issued
only to golf courses, restaurants, hotels, clubs, bowling centers, and
establishments used exclusively for the sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor with
the incidental sale of tobacco and soft drinks.
   Subd. 2.   3.2 percent malt liquor off-sale license may be issued only with
the approval of the Municipality and Commissioner of Public Safety.
   Subd. 3.   Temporary 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses may be issued only
with the approval of the Municipality and Commissioner of Public Safety; which
may be issued only to a club, charitable, religious, or nonprofit organization.
   Subd. 4.   Off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued only with the
approval of the Municipality and Commissioner of Public Safety; which may be
issued only to exclusive liquor stores.
   Subd. 5.   On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued to the
following establishments as defined by M.S. § 340A.101, as it may be amended
from time to time, and this chapter: hotels, restaurants, bowling centers,
theaters, clubs or congressionally chartered veterans organizations, theaters
and exclusive liquor stores. Club licenses may be issued only with the approval
of the Municipality and Commissioner of Public Safety. The Council may in its
sound discretion authorize a retail on-sale licensee to dispense intoxicating
liquor off the licensed premises at a community festival held within the city
under the provisions of M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 4b, as it may be amended from
time to time. The Council may in its sound discretion authorize a retail on-
sale licensee to dispense intoxicating liquor off the licensed premises at any
convention, banquet, conference, meeting, or social affair conducted on the
premises of a sports, convention, or cultural facility owned by the city, under
the provisions of M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 4a, as it may be amended from time to
time.
   Subd. 6.   Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses as provided by M.S. §
340A.504, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time. Sunday on-sale
intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued only to a restaurant as defined in
Section 7.03 of this Section, club, bowling center, or hotel which has a
seating capacity of at least thirty (30) persons, which holds an on-sale
intoxicating liquor license, and which serves liquor only in conjunction with
the service of food. Sunday on-sale 3.2 malt liquor license requires Council
approval. (Ordinance #12-07, adopted November 13, 2012)
   Subd. 7.   Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, with the approval
of the Municipality and Commissioner of Public Safety; which may be issued only
in connection with a social event sponsored by a club, charitable, religious,
or other nonprofit corporation that has existed for at least three (3) years.
No license shall be for longer than four consecutive days, and the City shall
issue no more than twelve (12) days worth of temporary licenses to any one
organization in one calendar year.
   Subd. 8.   On-sale wine licenses, with the approval of the Municipality and
Commissioner of Public Safety to: theaters, restaurants that have facilities
for seating at least twenty-five (25) guests at one time and meet the criteria
of M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time. The holder
of an on-sale wine license who also holds an on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor
license is authorized to sell malt liquor with content over 3.2 percent (strong
beer) without an additional license.
   Subd. 9.   Consumption and display licenses, with the approval of the
Municipality and Commissioner of Public Safety; authorizes the establishment to
allow the consumption and display of intoxicating liquor on the licensed
premises. The permit does not authorize the sale of intoxicating liquor.
   Subd. 10.    Seasonal Outside Service. The Council may, by Resolution each
year, permit any licensee holding an on-sale liquor license to sell or serve
intoxicating liquors in areas outside of the licensed building structure on
public or private property which are compact and contiguous with the structure
containing the licensed premises for a period of time between April 1 and
December 1 of each calendar year, as requested by the applicant and determined
by the City Council on the merits of each individual application. The fee for
the Seasonal Outside Service license shall be determined and established in the
City's Annual Rates and Fees Resolution. An application must be filed by the
prospective licensee along with a map depicting the design and area to be used,
with sufficient supporting documentation showing compliance with the following:
   A.    Application Requirements:
      1.    This outdoor area shall be referred to herein as the "licensed
space" or "licensed area," which is distinguished from the licensed building or
structure.
      2.    Property which is not connected to the licensed premises cannot be
used as an outside service area if it is located across a dedicated public
right-of-way such as a street or alley.
      3.    Any such license shall be seasonal and shall not involve the
construction or enlargement of the building structure, and shall not be
enclosed in such a manner that the space becomes an "Indoor Space" as defined
by Minn. Stat. §144.413, Subd. 1(a) as may be amended from time to time.
      4.    Off-street parking spaces may not be reduced by the establishment
of an outside service area below the number of off-street parking spaces which
would be required if the licensed premises, together with the outside service
area, were to be newly constructed in conformity with the zoning code;
provided, however, that this requirement may be modified by the Council by
Resolution upon specific findings that:
         a.    The reduction of off-street parking will either consist solely
of parking owned or licensed by the applicant, or will not be to the detriment
of other businesses sharing the same property and parking lot.
         b.   That denial of this requirement would cause substantial or undue
hardship, and that this hardship outweighs the interests of the community in
maintaining the parking spaces impacted.
      5.    The licensee shall maintain dram shop liquor liability insurance as
required by this Section that acknowledges the outdoor area being covered by
dram shop liquor liability insurance.
      6.    The licensed area shall have a permanent surface of concrete,
asphalt, wood or other fabricated construction material; unless otherwise
approved by the council.
      7.    The licensed area shall be clearly delineated by an approved fence,
barrier, or separating device at least thirty-six (36) inches in height, or
some other approved structure or barrier that has designated areas for ingress
and egress.
      8.    The licensed area shall have sufficient vehicle barriers installed
or erected to reduce the entry of vehicles into the licensed area if the
licensed area is in direct contact or immediately adjacent to a vehicle parking
area.
      9.    The licensed area shall comply with all applicable laws, zoning
district regulations and building codes, including, but not limited to those
relating to handicap accessibility.
      10.   Exterior lighting for the outdoor area shall be designed and
installed so that sufficient light is available for proper use of the licensed
area if the area is to be used past sunset.
      11.    The licensed area shall meet all such other requirements as the
City Council finds necessary or desirable to protect nearby properties and the
public.
      12.    The application shall have a detailed map or drawing showing the
location and dimensions of the licensed area, along with distances to other
adjacent structures, buildings and property lines.
   B.    Ongoing Eligibility and Regulations:
      1.   In the event such a license is issued by the City, the licenses
shall ensure the following:
         a.   That there is an employee in the service area at all times;
         b.   That no device is used in the licensed area after ten o'clock
(10:00) p.m. that is designed, in whole or in part, to produce, reproduce or
amplify sound, noise or music;
         c.   That use of the licensed premises does not violate the provisions
contained in Section
903.01, Subd. 1 of the City Code, within the context of the normal or
appropriate operation of the licensed premises and in context with the zoning
district in which the business is established;
         d.   That the licensees shall promptly remove anyone who becomes
unruly or excessively noisy;
         e.   Maintain at least one waste and one recycling receptacle in the
licensed area;
         f.   Maintain at least one fire safe cigarette disposal receptacle in
the licensed area;
         g.   Prohibit trash, garbage or other disposed of items from leaving
the licensed area, and maintain the licensed area in a clean and orderly
fashion; and
         h.   At all times, maintain the outdoor area in full compliance with
all other local, state, and federal laws and regulations. (Ordinance #20-01,
adopted May 26, 2020)
701.07. License Fees; Pro Rata.
   Subd. 1.   No license or other fee established by the City shall exceed any
limit established by M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, for
a liquor license.
   Subd. 2.   The Council may establish from time to time in the Ordinance
Section
212 the fee for any of the liquor licenses it is authorized to issue. The
license fee may not exceed the cost of issuing the license and other costs
directly related to the enforcement of the liquor laws and this chapter. No
liquor license fee shall be increased without providing mailed notice of a
hearing on the proposed increase to all affected licensees at least thirty (30)
days before the hearing.
   Subd. 3.   The fee for all licenses, except temporary licenses, granted
after the commencement of the license year shall be prorated on a monthly
basis.
   Subd. 4.   All license fees shall be paid in full at the time the
application is filed with the City. If the application is denied, the license
fee shall be returned to the applicant. The Council, upon their enactment of a
Declaration of Emergency, may amend, by Resolution, the day and date of payment
for liquor licenses and the collection of fees for said licenses. The liquor
licenses shall continue to commence on July 1 of each year. The license fee
shall remain the same, unless otherwise addressed by the City Council, and
shall be due and payable in full on the new date established by the City
Council.
   Subd. 5.   A refund of a pro rata share of an annual license fee may occur
only if authorized by M.S. § 340A.408, subd. 5, as it may be amended from time
to time.
   Subd. 6.   Off-sale intoxicating liquor license fees are subject to a
reduction of one hundred dollars ($100.00) if all of the following conditions
are met:
   (1)   The licensee agrees to have a private vendor train all employees
within sixty (60) days of hire and annually thereafter in laws pertaining to
the sale of alcohol, the rules for identification checks, and the
responsibilities of establishments serving intoxicating liquors;
   (2)   The licensee agrees to post a policy requiring identification checks
for all persons appearing to be thirty (30) years old or less; and
   (3)   A cash award and incentive program is established by the licensed, to
award employees who catch underage drinkers, and a penalty program is
established to punish employees in the event of a failed compliance check.
(Subd. 4 amended by Ordinance #20-01, adopted May 26, 2020)
701.08. Council Discretion to Grant or Deny a License.
The Council in its sound discretion may either grant or deny the application
for any license or for the transfer or renewal of any license. No applicant has
a right to a license under this chapter.
701.09. Application for License.
   Subd. 1.   Application Form. Every application for a license issued under
this chapter shall be on a form provided by the City. Every application shall
state the name of the applicant, the applicant’s age, representations as to the
applicant’s character, with references as the Council may require, the type of
license applied for, the business in connection with which the proposed license
will operate and its location, a description of the premises, whether the
applicant is owner and operator of the business, how long the applicant has
been in that business at that place, and other information as the Council may
require from time to time. An application for an on-sale intoxicating liquor
license shall be in the form prescribed by the Municipality and shall also
contain the information required in this section. The form shall be verified
and filed with the City. No person shall make a false statement in an
application.
   Subd. 2.   Financial Responsibility (Liability Insurance). 
   (1)   Prior to the issuance of any license under this chapter for a premises
other than that which is owned by the City of Rockford, the applicant shall
file with the City:
      (a)   A certificate that there is in effect an insurance policy or pool
providing minimum coverage’s of (1) $100,000.00 because of bodily injury to any
one person in any one occurrence, and, subject to the limit for one person, in
the amount of $300,000.00 because of bodily injury to two (2) or more persons
in any one occurrence, and in the amount of $50,000.00 because of injury to or
destruction of property of others in any one occurrence, and (2) $100,000.00
for loss of means of support of any one person in any one occurrence, and,
subject to the limit for one person, $300,000.00 for loss of means of support
of two (2) or more persons in any one occurrence; an annual aggregate of
$600,000.00 may be included in the insurance coverage; or,
   (2)   Prior to the issuance of any license under this Chapter for a premises
owned by the City of Rockford, the applicant shall file with the City:
      (a)   A certificate, with the City listed as an additional insured, that
there is in effect an insurance policy or pool providing minimum coverage’s of
(1) $1,000,000.00 because of bodily injury to any one person in any one
occurrence, and, subject to the limit for one person, in the amount of
$2,000,000.00 because of bodily injury to two (2) or more persons in any one
occurrence, and in the amount of $300,000.00 because of injury to or
destruction of property of others in any one occurrence, and (2) $1,000,000.00
for loss of means of support of any one person in any one occurrence, and,
subject to the limit for one person, $2,000,000.00 for loss of means of support
of two (2) or more persons in any one occurrence; an annual aggregate of
$2,000,000.00 may be included in the insurance coverage.
   Subd. 3.   Workers’ Compensation Insurance.
   (1)   Every applicant for the issuance of or renewal of an on-sale or off-
sale license shall present to the City acceptable evidence of compliance with
the workers’ compensation insurance coverage requirement of M.S. § 176.182, by
providing the name of the insurance company, the policy number, and date of
coverage, or the permit to self-insure.
      (a)   The workers’ compensation insurance policy required of this section
shall provide that it may not be cancelled for cause by the insured or the
insurer without first giving ten days written notice to the City, addressed to
the Clerk. (Ordinance 18-06, adopted May 22, 2018)
701.10. Description of Premises.
The application shall specifically describe the compact and contiguous premises
within which liquor may be dispensed and consumed. The description may not
include any parking lot or sidewalk.
701.11. Applications for Renewal.
At least forty-five (45) days before a license issued under this Chapter is to
be renewed, an application for renewal shall be filed with the City. The
decision whether or not to renew a license rests within the sound discretion of
the Council. No licensee has a right to have the license renewed.
701.12. Transfer of License.
No license issued under this chapter may be transferred without the approval of
the Council. Any transfer of stock of a corporate licensee is deemed to be a
transfer of the license, and a transfer of stock without prior Council approval
is a ground for revocation of the license. An application to transfer a license
shall be treated the same as an application for a new license, and all of the
provisions of this Code applying to applications for a license shall apply.
701.13. Investigation.
   Subd. 1.   On an initial application for a license, on an application for
transfer of a license and, in the sound discretion of the Council that it is in
the public interest to do so, on an application for renewal of a license, the
City shall conduct a background investigation of the applicant or it may
contract with the Wright County Sheriff’s Department for the investigation. The
applicant shall pay with the application an investigation fee of two hundred
fifty dollars ($250) which shall be in addition to any license fee. The results
of the investigation shall be sent to the Municipality.
701.14. Hearing and Issuance.
The Council shall investigate all facts set out in the application and in the
background investigation. Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard
for or against the granting of the license. After the investigation the Council
shall in its sound discretion grant or deny the application. If the city denies
issuance of a license the applicant may request a hearing within thirty (30)
days. No license shall become effective until all fees are paid, insurance and
surety bonds certificates have been submitted, has been approved by the
Municipality.
701.15. Restrictions on Issuance.
   Subd. 1.   Each license shall be issued only to the applicant for the
premises described in the application.
   Subd. 2.   Not more than one (1) license shall be directly or indirectly
issued within the City to any one person.
   Subd. 3.   No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any
premises on which taxes, assessments, utility charges, service charges, or
other financial claims of the City are delinquent and unpaid.
   Subd. 4.   No license shall be issued for any place or any business
ineligible for a license under state law.
   Subd. 5.   No license shall be issued to any person who is not a resident of
the state. If the applicant is a corporation, all of the shareholders shall be
residents of the State. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any
license existing on the effective date of this Chapter or to the renewal of an
existing license.
701.16. Conditions of License.
The failure of a licensee to meet any one of the conditions of the license
specified below shall result in a suspension of the license until the condition
is met.
   Subd. 1.   Within sixty (60) days after employment, every person selling or
serving liquor in an establishment which has an on-sale license shall receive
training regarding the selling or serving of liquor to customers. The training
shall be provided by an organization approved by the Council. Proof of training
shall be provided in writing to the Clerk, by the licensee.
   Subd. 2.   Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of the place of
business and the conditions of sobriety and order in it. The act of any
employee on the licensed premises is deemed the act of the licensee as well,
and the licensee shall be liable to all penalties provided by this Chapter and
the law equally with the employee.
   Subd. 3.   Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health officer,
City employee, or any other person designated by the Council to conduct
compliance checks and to otherwise enter, inspect, and search the premises of
the licensee during business hours and after business hours during the time
when customers remain on the premises without a warrant.
   Subd. 4.   No on-sale establishment shall display liquor to the public
during hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited.
   Subd. 5.   Compliance with financial responsibility requirements of state
law and of this chapter is a continuing condition of any license.
   Subd. 6.   The liquor license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the
licensed establishment at all times.
701.17. Hours and Days of Sale.
   Subd. 1.   The hours of operation and days of sale shall be those set by
M.S. § 340A.504, as it may be amended from time to time, except that the City
Council may, by resolution or ordinance, provide for more restrictive hours
than State law allows.
   Subd. 2.   No person shall consume nor shall any on-sale licensee permit any
consumption of intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor in an on-sale
licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally
occur.
   Subd. 3.   No on-sale licensee shall permit any glass, bottle, or other
container containing intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor to remain
upon any table, bar, stool, or other place where customers are served, more
than thirty (30) minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.
   Subd. 4.   No person, other than the licensee and any employee, shall remain
on the on-sale licensed premises more than thirty (30) minutes after the time
when a sale can legally occur.
Any violation of any condition of this section may be grounds for revocation or
suspension of the license.
701.18. Minors on Premises.
   Subd. 1.   No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be employed
in any rooms constituting the place in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2
percent malt liquor are sold at retail on sale, except that persons under the
age of eighteen (18) may be employed as musicians or to perform the duties of a
bus person or dishwashing services in places defined as a restaurant, hotel,
motel or other multi-purpose building serving food in rooms in which
intoxicating liquors or 3.2 percent malt liquor are sold at retail on sale.
   Subd. 2.   No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years may enter a
licensed establishment except to work, consume meals or attend a social
function and must vacate the premises no later than 10:00 p.m.
701.19. Suspension and Penalties.
   Subd. 1.   The following are the minimum periods of suspension or penalties
which shall be imposed by the Council for violations of the provisions of this
chapter or M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time or any rules
promulgated under that chapter as they may be amended from time to time:
   (1)   First license violation will incur a two hundred dollar ($200.00)
administrative fine.
   (2)   Second violation within any three (3) year period will incur a five
hundred dollar ($500.00) administrative fine and one (1) day suspension with
date of suspension to be determined by the city council.
   (3)   Third violation within any three-year period shall incur a one
thousand dollar ($1,000.00) administrative fine and one (1) week suspension
with the date of suspension to be determined by the City Council.
   Subd. 2.   Lapse of required proof of financial responsibility shall affect
an immediate suspension of any license issued pursuant to this chapter or state
law without further action of the Council. Notice of cancellation or lapse of a
current liquor liability policy shall also constitute notice to the licensee of
the impending suspension of the license. The holder of a license who has
received notice of lapse of required insurance or of suspension or revocation
of a license may request a hearing thereon and, if a request is made in writing
to the Clerk, a hearing before the Council shall be granted within ten (10)
days.
   Subd. 3.   The term “violation” includes any and all violations of the
provisions in this section, or of M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time
to time or any rules promulgated under that chapter as they may be amended from
time to time. The number of violations shall be determined on the basis of the
history of violations for the preceding three (3) year period. Revocation shall
occur within sixty (60) days following a violation for which revocation is
imposed.
800 Traffic & Motor Vehicles
801. Traffic and Parking
801.01. Definitions.
Any term used in this chapter and defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section 169.01
has the meaning given it by that section.
801.015. Definitions.
“All Terrain Vehicles” means a motor vehicle other than a snowmobile designed
primarily to be used on other than roads, highways, streets, and alleys. (Ord.
85-4, adopted May 28, 1985.)
801.02. Turning, Restriction on Turns.
The council, by resolution, may, whenever necessary to preserve a free flow of
traffic or to prevent accidents:
   (1)   Designate any intersection as one where the turning of vehicles to the
left or to the right, or both, is to be restricted at all times or during
specified hours. The street superintendent shall mark, by appropriate signs,
any intersection so designated. No intersection on a trunk highway shall be so
designated until the consent of the Commissioner of Highways to such
designation is first obtained.
   (2)   Designate any intersection or street as one where U-turns of vehicles
is prohibited. The street superintendent shall mark, by appropriate signs, any
intersection or street so designated.
No person shall turn a vehicle contrary to the directions on such signs.
801.03. Through Street; One-Way Streets.
The council, by resolution, may designate any street or portion of a street as
a through highway or a one-way roadway where necessary to preserve the free
flow of traffic or to prevent accidents. The street superintendent shall post
appropriate signs at the entrance to such streets. No trunk highway shall be so
designated unless the consent of the Commissioner of Highways to such
designation is first secured.
801.04. Truck Restrictions.
The council, by resolution, may designate streets on which travel by commercial
vehicles in excess of a specified gross weight is prohibited. The street
superintendent shall erect appropriate signs on such streets. No person shall
operate a commercial vehicle on such posted streets in violation of the
restrictions stated.
801.05. Seasonal Weight Restrictions.
The maintenance department may recommend the prohibition of operation of
vehicles upon any street within the city or recommend weight restrictions on
vehicles to be operated on such street whenever the street by reason of
deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic conditions will be seriously
damaged or destroyed unless the use of vehicles on the street is prohibited or
the permissible weights thereof reduced. The council shall act on such
recommendation and may direct the maintenance department by resolution to erect
and maintain appropriate signs plainly indicating the prohibition or
restriction at each end of that portion of the street so effected. No person
shall operate a vehicle on a posted street in violation of the prohibition or
restriction.
801.06. Parking Regulations.
   Subd. 1.   Parallel Parking. On all city streets, cars shall be parked
parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway in accordance with law. (Ord. No.
84-7, adopted September 14, 1984)
   Subd. 2.   No Parking, Stopping or Standing Zones. The council may, by
resolution, designate certain streets or portions of streets as no parking or
no stopping or standing zones and may limit the hours in which the restrictions
apply. The street superintendent shall mark by appropriate signs each zone so
designated. Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or a traffic control devise,
no person shall stop or park a vehicle in an established no stopping or
standing zone when stopping or standing is prohibited. No vehicle shall be
parked in a no parking zone during hours when parking is prohibited except that
a vehicle may be parked temporarily in such zone for the purpose of forming a
funeral procession and a truck may be parked temporarily between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any business day for the purpose of loading or
unloading where access to the premises is not otherwise available.
   Subd. 3.   Time Limit Parking Zones. The council may, by resolution,
designate certain areas where the right to park is limited during hours
specified. The street superintendent shall mark by appropriate signs each zone
so designated. During the hours specified on the sign, no person shall park a
vehicle in any limited parking zone for a longer period than is so specified.
   Subd. 4.   Time Restrictions. No vehicle shall be parked on non-residential
streets between 4:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.; and no vehicle shall in any case be
parked upon any street in any one place for a longer continuous period than
twelve (12) hours.
   Subd. 5.   Impoundment. Any police officer may remove a vehicle from a
street to a garage or other place of safety when the vehicle is left unattended
and constitutes a violation of the parking ordinance or an obstruction to
traffic or hinders snow removal or street improvement or maintenance
operations. Such vehicle shall not be released until the fees for towing and
storage are paid in addition to any fine imposed for violation of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 93-10, adopted October 12, 1993)
   Subd. 6.   Owner Responsibility. The presence of any motor vehicle on any
street when standing or parked in violation of this chapter is prima facie
evidence that the registered owner of the vehicle committed or authorized the
commission of the violation.
   Subd. 7.   Parking on City Right-of-Way. Except as set forth below, no motor
vehicle shall be parked upon the City right-of-way. (Ord. No. 89-11, adopted
August 14, 1989)
   (1)   Where parallel parking is allowed and where there is an adjacent curb,
each motor vehicle stopped or parked shall be stopped or parked with the right
hand wheels of the vehicle parallel with, and within twelve inches of, the
right hand curb, and, where painted markings appear on such curb or on the
street, such vehicle shall be within such markings, front and rear; provided
that upon a one-way roadway, all motor vehicles shall be so parked, except that
the left hand wheels of the vehicle may be parallel with and within twelve
inches from the left hand curb, but the front of the vehicle in any event and
with respect to the remainder of the vehicle, shall be in the direction of the
flow of traffic upon such one-way street.
   (2)   Where angle parking has been established and is allowed, as shown by
curb marking or sign posting, or both, each vehicle stopped or parked shall be
at an angle of approximately 45 to 60 degrees with the front wheel touching the
curb and within any parking lines painted on the curb or street, provided that
the front wheel not touching the curb shall be the portion of the vehicle
furthest in the direction of one-way traffic.
   (3)   Upon streets not having a curb, each vehicle shall be stopped or
parked on the paved portion of the roadway, and within twelve inches of the
edge of the paving. (Ord. No. 89-11, adopted August 14, 1989)
   Subd. 8.   Parking of Certain Vehicles Restricted. No person shall park any
of the following described vehicles on any residential street or alley
unattended for more than six hours:
   (1)   Vehicles that weigh 10,000 pounds or more.
   (2)   Vehicles having an over-all length of more than twenty (20) feet, or a
width at any point of more than seven and one half (7 1/2) feet.
   (3)   Dump trucks, tractors, truck-tractors, trailers, boats, and boat
trailers, semi-trailers, or any heavy machinery.
   (4)   Any truck, trailer or semi-trailer which is being used for the
transportation of livestock or has been used for the transportation of
livestock and has not been cleaned. (Ord. 96-09, adopted December 23, 1996)
801.07. Truck Zones, Loading Zones, Etc.
   Subd. 1.   Establishment and Hours. The council may, by resolution,
establish spaces in streets as loading zones or truck zones. The hours of 7:00
A.M. and 6:00 P.M. of any day except Sundays, New Year's Day, Memorial Day,
July 4th, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day or such other time as
the council may specify in the resolution establishing the zone shall be the
loading zone or truck zone hours. The street superintendent shall mark each
such zone by appropriate signs.
   Subd. 2.   Truck Zone Regulations. During truck zone hours, no person shall
stop, stand, or park any vehicle except a truck in a truck zone. No person
shall stop, stand or park a truck in a truck zone during truck zone hours
except to receive or discharge passengers or freight and then only for a period
no longer than is necessary for the purpose.
   Subd. 3.   Loading Zone Regulations. During loading zone hours, no person
shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in a loading zone except to receive or
discharge passengers or freight and then only for a period no longer than is
necessary for the purpose. No person shall occupy a loading zone with a vehicle
other than a truck for more than five minutes during such hours.
   Subd. 4.   Procedure and Cost. Any person desiring the establishment of a
loading zone or truck zone abutting premises occupied by him shall make written
application therefore to the council. If the council grants the request, the
proper city officer shall bill the applicant for the estimated cost of placing
signs and of painting the curb. When the amount is paid to the clerk-treasurer,
the designated law enforcement agency shall install the necessary signs and
paint the curb.
   Subd. 5.   Semi-Trailers. No person shall allow a semi-trailer to stand or
be parked unattached from a tractor unit for any length of time on any street
in the city except in an emergency in order to change tractors.
801.08. Snow Season Parking.
During the period from November 1st to April 1st no person shall park a vehicle
on or within fifteen (15) feet of the curb line or edge of paved surface
between the hours of 2 a.m. to 6 a.m.
   Subd. 1.   Ice/Snow Accumulation. It is unlawful for any person to park a
vehicle on any street after ice accumulation, continuous or intermittent snow
fall during which there has been an accumulation of two inches or more of snow
on any street until the same has been plowed or removed from the full width of
the roadway.
   Subd. 2.   Enforcement. Vehicles parked in violation of this chapter will be
towed and stored at the owner's expense. (Ordinance 18-08, adopted August 15,
2018)
801.09. Establishment of Safety Zones, Lanes of Traffic, Etc.
To assist in the direction and control of traffic, to improve safe driving
conditions at any intersection or dangerous location, and to warn pedestrians
or drivers of motor vehicles of dangerous conditions or hazards, the council
may establish safety zones, lanes of traffic, and stop intersections, and may
order installation by the street superintendent of stop signs, yield signs,
warning signs, signals, pavement markings or other devices. No regulation may
be established on a trunk highway unless the consent of the Commissioner of
Highways is first secured.
801.10. Removing Keys.
No person shall leave a motor vehicle, except a truck which is engaged in
loading or unloading, unattended on any street, used car lot, or unattended
parking lot without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition and
removing all ignition keys from the vehicle. Whenever any designated law
enforcement agent finds any motor vehicle standing in violation of this
provision, he shall remove the keys from the vehicle and deliver them to city
hall.
801.11. Exhibition Driving, Prohibited.
No person shall turn, accelerate, decelerate or otherwise operate a motor
vehicle within the city in a manner which causes unnecessary engine noise or
backfire, squealing tires, skidding, sliding, swaying, throwing of sand or
gravel or in a manner simulating a race. Squealing or screeching sounds emitted
by tires or the throwing of sand or gravel by the tires is prima facie evidence
of a violation of this section.
801.115 All Terrain Vehicles.
   Subd. 1.   Purpose:  The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public
health, safety and welfare, by establishing guidelines for the operation of All
Terrain Vehicles within the City limits.
   Subd. 2.   Findings:  The City finds it is sometimes necessary to allow an
all terrain vehicle within the city limits and upon city streets for
transportation purposes.
   Subd. 3.   Definitions: The following terms as used in this Section shall
have the same meaning as in Minnesota Statute § 84.92.
   A.   “Class 2 all-terrain vehicle” means an all-terrain vehicle that has a
total dry weight of 1,000 to 1,800 pounds.
   B.   “Operate” means to ride upon and control the operation of an all-
terrain vehicle.
   C.   “Operator” means every person who operates or is in actual physical
control of an all terrain vehicle.
   Subd. 4.   Equipment:
   A.   Mufflers. Standard mufflers shall be properly attached and in constant
operation to reduce the noise of operation of the motor to the minimum
necessary for operation. No person shall use a muffler cutout, by pass,
straight pipe, or similar device on an all-terrain vehicle; and the exhaust
system shall not emit or produce a sharp popping or crackling sound.
   B.   Brakes. Brakes shall be adequate to control the movement and to stop
and hold under any conditions of operation.
   C.   Lights. At least one clear lamp shall be attached to the front of the
all-terrain vehicle with sufficient intensity to reveal persons or vehicles at
a distance of at least 100 feet ahead during the hours of darkness under normal
atmospheric conditions. Such headlamps shall be so aimed that glaring rays are
not projected into the eyes of an oncoming vehicle operator. The all-terrain
vehicle shall also be equipped with at least one red tail lamp having a minimum
candle power of sufficient intensity to exhibit a red light plainly visible
from a distance of 500 feet to the rear during the hours of darkness under
normal atmospheric conditions. This equipment shall be required and shall be in
operating condition when the all-terrain vehicle is operated between the hours
of one hour after sunset and one hour before sunrise or at times of reduced
visibility.
   Subd. 4.   Requirements for Operation:
   A.   No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle within the City unless
the all-terrain vehicle is registered pursuant to Minnesota Statute § 84.922.
   B.   Any person operating an all-terrain vehicle within the City shall meet
the applicable education and training requirements under Minnesota Statute §
84.925.
   Subd. 5.   Operating Restrictions: Except as herein specifically permitted
and authorized, no person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle:
   A.   On a public sidewalk or walkway provided for use for pedestrian travel;
   B.   On private property of another without lawful authority or written
consent of the owner or occupant;
   C.   On any publicly owned lands and frozen waters, including but not
limited to, cemeteries, park property, playgrounds, recreational areas and golf
courses, except areas authorized for use by the proper public authorities;
   D.   On any public or private school grounds unless permission is expressly
obtained from responsible school authorities;
   E.   In a manner so as to tow any person or thing on a public street or
highway except through use of the rigid tow bar attached to rear of the all-
terrain vehicle;
   F.   In a manner so as to create a loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which
disturbs, annoys or interferes with the peace and quite of other persons;
   G.   In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the
persons or property of another or cause injury or damage to persons or
property; or
   H.   At a speed greater than 10 mph when within 100 feet of any lakeshore,
except in channels, or of a fisherman, ice house, skating rink, or sliding
area, nor where the operation would conflict with the lawful use of property or
would endanger other persons or property.
   Subd. 6.   Operations on Streets and Highways: No person shall operate an
all-terrain vehicle on any municipal street or roadway except as provided in
this Subsection.
   A.   A class 2 all-terrain vehicle that is currently licensed may be
operated, for transportation purposes only and not recreational purposes, upon
a municipal street, roadway or alley, so long as it maintains its course on the
far right hand side of such street, roadway, or alley and in the same direction
as the traffic on the nearest lane of the roadway adjacent thereto. Where
available, alleys shall be used for all-terrain vehicle traffic rather than
municipal streets or roadways.
   B.   No all-terrain vehicle may be operated on any street, roadway or alley
at a speed exceeding ten (10) mph.
   C.   No all-terrain vehicle shall enter any uncontrolled intersection
without making a complete stop. The operator of an all-terrain vehicle shall
yield the right of way to any vehicle or pedestrian.
   D.   No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle on any street, roadway,
alley or shoulder so as to be traveling side-by-side with another all-terrain
vehicle or other vehicle in the same lane or immediate area.
   E.   No person under sixteen (16) years of age shall operate an all-terrain
vehicle on any street, roadway, alley or shoulder thereof.
   F.   No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle on any street, roadway,
alley or shoulder thereof unless it is equipped with working turn signals and a
sign indicating that it operates at speeds slower than other traffic, and it
has current public liability and bodily injury insurance.
   G.   No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle on any street, roadway,
alley or shoulder thereof, unless the person has a valid driver’s license.
   Subd. 7.   Operations of All-Terrain Vehicle While Under the Influence of
Alcohol or a Controlled Substance: It is unlawful for any person to operate or
to be in physical control of any all-terrain vehicle in the City while under
the influence of alcohol or a controlled substance or under the influence of a
combination of alcohol and a controlled substance.
   Subd. 8.   Littering. No persons shall deposit paper, litter, rubbish or
debris on public or private property, or throw paper, litter, rubbish or debris
from an all-terrain vehicle.
   Subd. 9.   Chasing Animals. It is unlawful to intentionally drive, chase,
run over or kill any bird, or animal domestic or wild, with an all-terrain
vehicle.
   Subd. 10.   Hours of Operation. No person shall operate an all-terrain
vehicle within the City limits between the hours of 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
   Subd. 11.   Unattended All-Terrain Vehicles. It is unlawful for the owner or
operator of an all-terrain vehicle to leave or allow an all-terrain vehicle to
remain unattended on public property or on privately owned parking lots used by
the public, while the motor is running, while the key is available, or with the
ignition unlocked. (Ordinance #11-06, adopted July 26, 2011)
801.12. Flood Control Dike.
No person shall operate or park any motor vehicle or snowmobile upon the flood
control dike without the advance permission of the council.
801.13. Resolutions.
All traffic control resolutions in force on the effective data of this chapter
shall hereby remain in force.
801.14. Penalty.
Any person convicted of violating any parking regulation of this chapter is
guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
802. Snowmobiles
802.01. Definitions.
   Subd. 1.   Snowmobile. “Snowmobile” means a self-propelled vehicle
designated for travel primarily on snow or ice steered by wheels, skis, or
runners. Snowmobile: shall not include “all terrain vehicles” as defined in
section
801.015. (Ord. No. 85-4, adopted May 28, 1985)
   Subd. 2.   Operate. “Operate” means to ride upon and control the operation
of a snowmobile.
   Subd. 3.   Operator. “Operator” means every person who operates or is in
actual physical control of a snowmobile.
802.02. Where Prohibited/Authorized.
Persons operating snowmobiles within the city limits of the city must travel
only on the designated trail which is as follows:
   (1)   The trail would follow the south side of Walnut Street from the
westerly city limits until it reaches the west edge of the Rockford School
property; then across Walnut Street at a 90 degree angle across Rockford School
property to the intersection of Ash Street and Cedar Street. The trail would
continue across Ash Street and follow along the south side of Cedar Street to
the intersection of Cedar Street and Mechanic Street; turn right onto Mechanic
Street and follow Mechanic Street to the intersection at Bridge Street;
continue across Bridge Street and follow along the south side of Bridge Street
to County Road #50; turn right and follow the west side of County Road #50 to
Lake Rebecca Park Reserve.
   (2)   Snowmobiles may also be operated along the designated trail authorized
by the Department of Natural Resources Grant and Aid Trail.
   (3)   All designated trails will be marked and include stop signs.
Snowmobile operators are expected to adhere to all vehicle operation
regulations.
   (4)   Snowmobiles are prohibited from any public sidewalk/ trailway provided
for pedestrian travel, on private property without the owner’s permission, and
all other public property unless designated as the snowmobile trail. Street use
will be permitted by taking the shortest, most direct route to and from the
designated snowmobile trail, following all traffic laws, operating the
snowmobile on the right side of the road within the curb in single file, and at
a maximum speed of 10 mph. (Ord. No. 00-07, adopted December 12, 2000)
802.03. Street Crossing.
A snowmobile may make direct crossing of a street or highway, except an
interstate highway or freeway, provided:
   (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the street or highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents
a quick and safe crossing.
   (2)   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop at every intersection.
   (3)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard.
   (4)   In crossing a divided street or highway, the crossing is made only at
an intersection of such street or highway with another public street or
highway.
   (5)   If the crossing is made between the hours of one-half hour after
sunset to one-half hour before sunrise or in conditions of reduced visibility,
only if both front and rear lights are on.
802.04. Laws and Chapters.
Chapters
801 and
803 of this code and Minnesota Statutes 84.81 to 84.88 and Minnesota Statutes
Ch. 169, shall apply to the operation of snowmobiles upon streets and highways,
except those which by their nature have no application.
802.05. Right-Of-Way.
No snowmobile shall enter any intersection without yielding the right-of-way to
any vehicles or pedestrians at the intersection, or so close to the
intersection as to constitute an immediate hazard.
802.06. Minors.
   Subd. 1.   Operation. No person under 14 years of age shall operate on
streets or the roadway surface of highways or make a direct crossing of a
trunk, county state-aid, county highway, or city street as the operator of a
snowmobile. A person 14 years of age or older, but less than 18 years of age,
may operate a snowmobile on streets and highways as permitted under this
chapter and make a direct crossing on such streets and highways only if he has
in his immediate possession a valid snowmobile safety certificate issued by the
Commissioner, as provided by M.S. 84.872.
   Subd. 2.   Owner Responsibility. It is unlawful for the owner of a
snowmobile to permit the snowmobile to be operated contrary to the provisions
of this section.
802.07. Manner of Operation.
No person shall operate a snowmobile:
   (1)   At any place while under the influence of alcohol or drugs as defined
in M.S. 169.121;
   (2)   At a rate of speed greater than 15 miles per hour;
   (3)   At any place in a careless, reckless or negligent manner or heedlessly
in disregard of the rights or safety of others, or in a manner so as to
endanger or be likely to endanger or cause injury or damage to any person or
property.
   (4)   During the hours from 10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M. (Ordinance No. 02-02,
adopted January 8, 2002)
   (5)   So as to tow any person or thing in a public street or highway except
through use of a rigid tow bar attached to the rear of the snowmobile.
   (6)   On any streets or roads where travel is prohibited by state law or on
any street adjacent to public skating rink grounds, or dike or in any cemetery.
802.08. Equipment.
No person shall operate a snowmobile any place within the city unless it is
equipped with the following:
   (1)   Standard mufflers which are properly attached and which reduce the
noise of operation of the motor to the minimum necessary for operation. No
person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass, straight pipe or similar device on a
snowmobile motor.
   (2)   Brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold the
snowmobile under any condition of operation.
   (3)   A safety or so-called “deadman” throttle in operating condition. A
safety or “deadman” throttle is defined as a device which, when pressure is
removed from the engine accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to be
disengaged from the driving track.
   (4)   When operated between the hours of one-half hour after sunset to one-
half hour before sunrise or at times of reduced visibility at least one clear
lamp attached to the front, with sufficient intensity to reveal persons and
vehicles at a distance of at least 100 feet ahead during the hours of darkness
under normal atmospheric conditions. Such head lamp shall be so aimed that
glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of an oncoming snowmobile
operator. It shall also be equipped with at least one red tail lamp having a
minimum candlepower of sufficient intensity to exhibit a red light plainly
visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear during hours of darkness under
normal atmospheric conditions.
   (5)   Reflective material at least 16 square inches on each side, forward of
the handlebars, so as to reflect light at a ninety degree angle.
802.09. Removal of Keys.
Every person leaving a snowmobile in a public place shall lock the ignition,
remove the key and take the same with him.
802.10. Emergency Use.
Notwithstanding any prohibitions in this chapter, a snowmobile may be operated
on a public thoroughfare in an emergency during the period of time when, and at
locations where, snow upon the roadway renders travel by automobile
impractical.
802.11. Animals.
It is unlawful to intentionally drive, chase, run over or kill any animal with
a snowmobile.
803 Manufactured Home Park Speed Limit
803.01. Adoption by Reference.
Minnesota Statutes 327.27, subd. 2, and 327.14 are adopted by reference.
803.02. Speed Limit.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle in excess of ten (10) miles per hour in
any manufactured home park.
804 Junk Motor Vehicles
804.01. Regulations of Junk Motor Vehicles.
It shall be unlawful to abandon or store a junk motor vehicle within the City
on public or private property, unless stored within an enclosed garage. Any
junk motor vehicle abandoned or stored in violation of this chapter shall be
impounded by the official law enforcement agency of the City. (Ord. No. 92-11,
adopted April 28, 1992)
804.02. Junk Motor Vehicle Defined.
“Junk Motor Vehicle” means any vehicle which is not in operable condition, or
which is wholly or partially dismantled, or which is used for the sale of parts
or as a source kept for scrapping, dismantling or salvage of any kind, or which
is not properly licensed for operation within the State of Minnesota or by the
State of Minnesota. (Ord. No. 92-11, adopted April 28, 1992)
804.03. Exceptions.
   Subd. 1.   Definition. “Collector's vehicle” means any vehicle for which the
State of Minnesota has issued a pioneer license, a classic car license, a
collector license, or a street rod license, or which bears original plates in
accordance with state law.
   Subd. 2.   Regulations. A collector's vehicle on its owner's property shall
not be considered a junk motor vehicle, regardless of whether it is operable,
provided the pioneer, classic car, collector, street rod, or original license
plate is affixed to the vehicle and the vehicle is completely covered by a
covering designed for the purpose of covering the vehicle.
   Subd 3.    Conditional Use Permits. A non-residential holder of a
conditional use permit is hereby exempt from this Chapter and must comply with
the conditions set up in the Conditional Use Permit issued to that business.
(Ord. No. 92-11, adopted April 28, 1992)
805 Operation and Regulation of Motorized Golf Carts
805.01. Operation.
Persons who are physically handicapped as defined in Minnesota Statutes,
Section 169.045, subdivision 2, are authorized to operate motorized golf carts
on designated roadways or portions of roadways within the city. The operator
must observe all traffic laws, except such as cannot reasonably be applied to
motorized golf carts. (Ord. No. 07-09, adopted June 12, 2007)
805.02. Permit Required.
No person shall operate a motorized golf cart without obtaining a permit as
provided herein. Permit fee shall be set forth in section
212.02. Permits shall be granted on a per application basis and determined by
length of the disability. (Ord. No. 07-09, adopted June 12, 2007)
805.03. Application.
Every application for a permit shall be made on a form supplied by the City and
shall contain the following information:
   (1)   The name and address of the applicant.
   (2)   The nature of the applicant’s physical handicap.
   (3)   The roadways or portions thereof on which the motorized golf cart
shall be operated on.
   (4)   The time of operations of the motorized vehicle.
   (5)   Such other information as the City may require. (Ord. No. 92-14,
adopted May 26, 1992)
805.04. Conditions of the Permit.
No permits shall be granted unless the following conditions are met:
   (1)   The applicant must demonstrate that he/she is a handicapped person as
defined in Minnesota Statues, Section 169.345, Subd. 2.
   (2)   The applicant must submit a certificate signed by a physician that the
applicant is able to safely operate a motorized golf cart on the roadways or
that a person with a Minnesota Drivers license shall operate the motorized golf
cart.
   (3)   The applicant must provide evidence of insurance as provided by
Minnesota Statute Section 65B.40, Subd. 5 for motorcycles. (Ord. No. 92-14,
adopted May 26, 1992)
805.05. Designation of Roadways.
The following highways are prohibited for use, other than crossing, as follows:
   (1)   State Trunk Highway 55.
   (2)   Wright County CSAH 20. (Ord. No. 07-09, adopted June 12, 2007)
805.06. Times of Operation.
Motorized golf carts may only be operated on designated roadways from sunrise
to sunset. They shall not be operated in inclement weather or when visibility
is impaired by weather, smoke, fog or other conditions, or when there is
insufficient light to clearly see persons or vehicles thereon at a distance of
500 feet. (Ord. No. 92-14, adopted May 26, 1992)
805.07. Other Regulations.
The motorized golf cart must be equipped with rear view mirrors as required by
statute for other vehicles. The motorized golf cart must display a slow moving
vehicle emblem, as described by statute, on the rear thereof. (Ord. No. 92-14,
adopted May 26, 1992)
805.08. Suspension or Revocation.
The City Council may suspend or revoke a permit at any time if there is
evidence that the permittee cannot safely operate a motorized golf cart on the
designated roadways. (Ord. No. 92-14, adopted May 26, 1992)
900. Nuisances and Offences
901. Nuisances
901.01. Authority.
Minnesota Statute §412.221, Subd. 23, and as may be amended from time to time,
provides authority for the City Council to define Public Nuisances and
establish processes for their prevention and abatement. On that basis,
Minnesota Statute §412.221, Subd. 23 is incorporated, and as may be amended
from time to time, by reference herein and this Section is thereby adopted.
(Ordinance 18-07, adopted June 26, 2018)
901.02. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Section, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this Chapter, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
“Nuisance” means anything which is injurious to health, or indecent or
offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as
to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property. (See Minnesota
Statutes 561.01) This may be in the form of a thing, intentional or negligent
act, activity, occupation, use of property; or the omission of an act,
occupation or use of a property which:
   A.   Annoys, injures or endangers the health, safety, comfort or repose of
the public; or
   B.   Offends public decency; or
   C.   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, or tends to obstruct or render
dangerous for passage any lake, river, stream, canal, basin, public park,
square, street, alley, right of way, highway or sidewalk; or
   D.   In any way renders the public insecure in life or in use or enjoyment
of property. (Ordinance 18-07, adopted June 26, 2018)
901.03. Reporting, Inspection and Initiation of Process.
Based upon the job duties and number of available staff; size, location and
population of the City; and upon consideration of the tax base and properties
located herein, it is determined that the inspection, investigation and
initiation of nuisance reviews and enforcement actions shall be made by formal
written compliant. Members of the City Council and City staff may also initiate
the enforcement process of a nuisance at their sole discretion and review. It
is, however, understood that City staff will generally not initiate enforcement
of nuisances without a formal complaint being properly filed in City Hall. A
Public Nuisance Complaint Form shall be available in City Hall during normal
business hours, and to be effectively submitted the form must be completed in
its entirety, signed and dated with sufficient information to support the
efforts of City staff in inspecting and enforcing correction of the nuisance.
City staff will not act upon incomplete forms or forms that lack sufficient
detail and information to support a timely and proper investigation and review.
(Ordinance 18-07, adopted June 26, 2018)
901.04. Nuisances Declared.
   Subd. 1.   Public Health. The following are declared to be nuisances
affecting health:
   A.   A pond, pool or pooling of water that has become stagnant;
   B.   Harboring or retaining diseased or deceased animals;
   C.   Rotting, decayed or unwholesome food or vegetable matter;
   D.   Discharge, disposal, accumulation, or collection of sewage or
industrial waste in violation of Section
401 of the City Code;
   E.   A privy vault or garbage can with a loose lid allowing insects or
animals entry and egress;
   F.   The dumping, littering or pollution of any public well or cistern,
stream or lake, canal or body of water by sewage, industrial waste, garbage or
other substances;
   G.   The accumulation of manure, rubbish, garbage, cans, bottles or other
debris;
   H.   Noxious weeds and other rank growth of vegetation;
   I.   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders in quantities
sufficient to hinder, detract or obstruct the use of property;
   J.   Breeding sites or conditions supporting mosquito infestations including
unused tires, pots, pans, cans, pails, bottles and other containers left
outdoors in which water or debris may accumulate;
   K.   Any grass that exceeds twelve (12) inches in height;
   L.   Burning in violation of
Chapter 505 of the City Code, or otherwise without proper timely permitting and
approval of the Fire Chief;
   M.   Any trade, business or operation as defined by Statute not properly
licensed by the Board of Health if thereby required.
   Subd. 2.   Peace and Safety. The following are declared to be nuisances
affecting peace and safety:
   A.   All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks twenty 24 hours
after the snow or other precipitation causing the condition has ceased to fall;
   B.   All trees, hedges, billboards, or other obstructions which prevent
persons from having a clear view of all traffic approaching an intersection;
   C.   All wires and limbs of trees which are so close to the surface of a
sidewalk or street as to constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles;
   D.   All unnecessary noises and annoying vibrations;
   E.   Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary use by the public
of streets, alleys, sidewalks, or public grounds except under such conditions
as are permitted by this code or other applicable law;
   F.   Placing or storing on any street, sidewalk, alley, or public right-of-
way any boxes, goods, wares, merchandise, building materials, machinery,
business or trade article, except for the purpose of immediately transferring
the same to some other proper place;
   G:   Any tree, shrub, bush, or other vegetation located on private property
which obstructs routine use or travel on any public right-of-way;
   H.   Radio aerials or television antennae erected or maintained in a
dangerous manner;
   I.   Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use
of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather,
obstructing traffic and the free use of the street or sidewalk;
   J.   All hanging signs, awnings, and other similar structures over streets
and sidewalks, or so situated so as to endanger public safety, or not
constructed and maintained as provided by ordinance;
   K.   The allowing of rain water, ice, or snow to fall from any building or
structure upon any street or sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk;
   L.   Any barbed wire fence less than 6 feet above the ground and within 3
feet of a public sidewalk or way;
   M.   All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so situated
or operated on private property as to attract the public;
   N.   Wastewater (sump pump, swimming pool water, or water which has been
used in the manufacturing process or mechanical process) allowed to flow upon,
across or over streets, sidewalks, or other public property or private property
except that owned by the person discharging the water;
   O.   Accumulations in the open of discarded or disused machinery, household
appliances, automobile bodies, or other material, in a manner conducive to the
harboring of rats, mice, snakes, or vermin, or the rank growth of vegetation
among the items so accumulated, or in a manner creating fire, health, or safety
hazards from such accumulation;
   P.   Accumulation in the open of broken or unused metal, wood, lumber,
cement, electrical fixtures, plumbing fixtures, building materials (but
excluding building materials awaiting use in construction or improvement
presently in progress on the same premises), trash, debris, rubbish, in a
manner conducive to the harboring of rats, mice, snakes, or vermin, or the rank
growth of vegetation among the items so accumulated, or in a manner creating
fire, health, or safety hazards from such accumulation;
   Q.   Any well, hole, or similar excavation which is left uncovered or in
such other condition as to constitute a hazard to any child or other person
coming on the premises where it is located;
   R.   Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or a public
street drain, storm sewer, gutter, or ditch with trash or other materials;
   S.   Digging excavations, placing culverts, placing dams, or doing any act
which may alter or affect the drainage of public property, streets, alleys or
sidewalks; or alter or affect flows of the public storm sewer and drainage
ditch system, without authorization by the city;
   T.   The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk, or other public
property of any glass, tacks, nails, bottles, or other substance which may
injure any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire when passing over such
substance;
   U.   The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public property outside of a
designated receptacle, public right-of-way or on adjacent private property;
   V.   Throwing, placing, or depositing dirt, sand, leaves, trash, lawn
clippings, weeds, grass, snow, or other materials in the streets, sidewalks,
other public ways and the gutters thereof;
   W.   Permitting dirt or mud from construction or landscaping activities to
be carried or deposited unto nearby streets, sidewalks, other public ways and
the gutters thereof;
   X.   All other conditions or things which are likely to cause injury to the
person or property of anyone;
   Y.   Operate any artificial lighting facilities upon any private property
without an effective shade or equivalent device to protect nearby residential
premises from being adversely affected thereby;
   Z.   Any used refrigerator, ice box, or freezer with door latch intact which
is accessible to children.
   AA.   Dead trees on public or private property, found to be a safety hazard
by the Forester.
   BB.   Property that is not in compliance with the guidelines of the City’s
storm water management and erosion control guidelines.
   CC.   Leaving or displaying anything for sale on public property; or
leaving, displaying, erecting or posting any signage (political, directional,
sale or otherwise) on public or private property without formal consent of the
property owner. All sales and signage must be consistent and in conformity with
all other provisions and regulations as set forth in the City Code.
   DD.   Property that has been disturbed by construction, grading, or other
activity and is not seeded, sodded, or otherwise planted with a ground cover
within 240 days, unless the 240 days expires between November 1 and May 15, in
which case the ground cover must be established by the following July 15,
unless an extension is granted by the City.
   EE.   A structure, or a portion thereof, located in or abutting a
Residential Zoning District, if the exterior is not completed in accordance
with City-approved construction plans within 180 days after the date that the
city building permit was issued;
   FF.   The placement of mail boxes or other delivery receptacles in the
public right of way, except those that are in compliance with the United States
Postal Service for requirements for location and type; which are installed as
far back from the street pavement as reasonably practical and installed at an
appropriate height to avoid snow plowing damage.
   GG.   Intentional discharge of items or materials including, but not limited
to grass clippings, leaves, pet feces, solvents, antifreeze, oil, fireplace
ash, or paint onto a street, storm sewer system or water resource such as a
wetland, pond, creek or river.
   HH.   Depositing, or permitting the deposit of, pet feces upon or in ponds,
wetlands, creeks, rivers or upon any public right of way, public trail or
publicly owned or controlled property, or on private property not owned by the
pet owner and without consent or approval of the owner of the property;
   II.   Diving or jumping from public bridges or piers into unknown water
depths and debris may result in injury or death. It is a petty misdemeanor for
any person to dive or jump from any public bridge or pier in the City where
such prohibited activity is properly posted and signed.
   Subd. 3.   Buildings. The following are declared to be nuisances affecting
building maintenance and appearance; blighted and dilapidated buildings:
   A.   Buildings and other structures that have been so poorly maintained that
their physical condition and appearance has become blighted and / or
dilapidated and detract from the surrounding neighboring or area are declared
to be a nuisances because they are unsightly, decrease abutting and adjoining
landowner’s and occupants’ enjoyment of their property and neighborhood,
adversely affect property values and neighborhood or area patterns.
   B.   Standards. A building or other structure is a nuisance if it does not
comply with the following requirements:
      1.   No part of any exterior surface may have deterioration, rotting,
holes, breaks, gaps or loose boards, blocks or timbers that would allow access
and egress to rodents, insects or vermin.
      2.   Every exterior surface that has had a surface finish such as paint
applied must be maintained to avoid noticeable deterioration of the finish. No
wall or exterior surface may have peeling, cracked, chipped or otherwise
deteriorated surface finish on more than 20 percent of that wall or exterior
surface.
      3.   No glass, including windows and exterior light fixtures, may be
broken or cracked, and no screens may be torn or separated from moldings.
      4.   Exterior doors and shutters must close to create an appropriate
seal, be hung properly and have an operable mechanism to keep them securely
shut in place.
      5.   Cornices, moldings, lintels, sills, bay or dormer windows, and
silmilar projections must be kept in good repair and free from cracks and
defects that make them hazardous or unsightly.
      6.   Roof surfaces must be tight and have no defects that admit water.
All roof drainage systems must be secured and hung properly.
      7.   Chimneys, antennae and similar projections must be structurally
sound and in good repair. These projects must be secured properly, where
applicable, and securely attached to an exterior wall or exterior roof.
      8.   Foundations of buildings must be structurally sound and in good
repair. (Ordinance 18-07, adopted June 26, 2018)
901.05. Enforcement.
   Subd. 1.   Procedure. Upon the filing of a complaint, or upon City staff or
City Council initiation, the City Clerk shall inspect the reported nuisance and
determine if, in fact, a nuisance exists. Upon determination that a nuisance
exists, the following procedures shall be followed, with the primary goal being
compliance with the City Code and removal or abatement of the nuisance:
   A.   City staff shall attempt personal contact with the property owner,
either in person or by phone, to explain the nuisance, discuss what actions
need to be taken to correct or remove the nuisance, and answer any questions
the property owner may have.
   B.   If the nuisance remains after attempted or actual personal contact, a
Public Nuisance Notice shall be sent to the property owner. This notice shall
state the following:
      1.   The property upon which the nuisance is located;
      2.   The nature of the nuisance or nuisances, with reference to which
provision or provisions of the City Code that the nuisance violates;
      3.   The steps that must be taken to abate the nuisance, along with a
stated reasonable amount of time within which the nuisance is to be corrected
or removed;
      4.   A statement that the property owner can contact the City Clerk with
any questions they may have;
      5.   A statement that the city may abate the nuisance or take further
action if the nuisance is not timely corrected;
      6.   A statement that the property owner can appeal the determination of
the nuisance or nuisances to the City Administrator; and if unsatisfied with
that determination, may appeal to the City Council; and
      7.   A statement that the city may assess the costs of abatement and
other applicable expenses against the property in accordance with this section
and Minnesota Statute.
   C.   If no timely appeal is submitted and the nuisance is not abated within
the deadline given, the City Clerk shall send a second letter constituting a
Second and Final Notice of Public Nuisance with the information restated from
Section B above, but including the following:
      1.   A statement of Final Notice and a firm reasonable deadline for
correction or removal of the nuisance;
      2.   A statement of the next legal proceeding or steps that will be taken
if the property owner fails to correct the nuisance; and
      3.   A restatement of their right to appeal the determination to the City
Administrator first, and then the City Council if unsatisfied with the
determination of the City Administrator.
   D.   If an appeal is timely filed, the matter shall be set on a City Council
meeting agenda for formal review by the City Council. Notice of the meeting
shall be sent to the property owner clearly stating the date, time and location
of the City Council hearing, must be served in the same manner as the abatement
notice, and must be given at least ten (10) days before the hearing. After
holding the hearing, the City Council may issue an Order requiring abatement of
the nuisance.
   E.   Notwithstanding the procedure provided above, if the City Clerk
determines that a nuisance constitutes a serious and imminent danger to the
public safety or health, the City Clerk may summarily abate the nuisance after
a reasonable attempt to notify the owner or occupant of the property, if
possible. The City Clerk shall immediately thereafter notify in writing the
owner or occupant of the premises of the action taken.
   Subd. 2.   Cost of Recovery. The owner of the property upon which a nuisance
or nuisances have been abated by the City, or a person who has caused a public
nuisance on property not owned by that person, is personally liability to the
city for the cost of abatement, including unpaid administrative fees and costs.
Unpaid charges constitute a lien against the premises where the abatement
occurred on and after the date they were incurred.
   A.   Within thirty 30 days of completing the work necessary to abate the
nuisance, a bill shall be sent to the property owner or other responsible party
for the cost of the abatement. The amount is immediately due and payable to the
City Clerk.
   B.   If the cost, or any part thereof, has not been paid in full as required
above and otherwise herein within 30 days after the date of the bill, the City
Council may certify the unpaid cost against the property to which the cost is
attributable. Before certification against the property, reasonable notice of
the impending certification and an opportunity to be heard by the City Council
must be given to the property owner and taxpayer of record. Failure of the
taxpayer to receive the notice will not invalidate the certification. The City
Council may certify unpaid cost to the County Auditor for collection along with
the current taxes in the following year or in annual installments, not
exceeding 10, as the City Council may determine on a case by case basis.
   C.   The owner of the premises upon which a nuisance has been abated by the
City, or a person whose actions or inactions caused a nuisance on the property
of the public or another which has been abated by the City, shall be personally
liable for the cost to the City of the abatement, including administrative and
legal costs.
   D.   The City Clerk, at their sole discretion and in addition to the process
provided above, may take any or all of the following steps, either separately
or simultaneously, regarding abatement of public nuisances:
      1.   Contact the Sheriff Department for the County in which the Public
Nuisance exists and file a criminal complaint; and
      2.   File in District Court for an Injunction to cease the Public
Nuisance Activity on the property, or for an Order directing the property owner
to correct or remove the nuisance; and
      3.   Abate the nuisance pursuant to the procedure provided above.
(Ordinance 18-07, adopted June 26, 2018) (Amended by Ordinance 2025-04, adopted
July 8, 2025)
901.06. Hazardous Buildings and Excavations.
The “Hazardous Building Law” as set forth in Minnesota Statutes 463.15 –
463.261, as may be amended, is adopted and incorporated by reference as if set
forth in full herein. Any violations of these Statutes shall constitute Public
Nuisances and may be abated pursuant to the provisions provided herein.
(Ordinance 18-07, adopted June 26, 2018)
901.07 Tree Diseases.
   Subd. 1.   Policy Findings. The City Council has determined that the health
of the trees within the municipal limits is threatened by fatal tree diseases.
It is further determined that the loss of trees growing upon public and private
property would substantially depreciate the value of property within the City
and impair the safety, good order, general welfare and convenience of the
public. It is declared to be the intention of the council to control and
prevent the spread of tree diseases and this chapter is enacted for that
purpose.
   Subd. 2.   Provisions of Law Adopted. Sections 1.0109 through 1.0111 of 3
Minnesota Code of Agency Rules, Department of Agriculture, Shade Tree Program
(1978 Edition) as the same may have been amended, is adopted by reference.
   Subd. 3.   Forester.
   A.   Position created. The powers and duties of the City Forester as
provided by this Section are conferred on the Utilities Superintendent.
   B.   Duties. It is the duty of the Forester to coordinate, under the
direction and control of the council, all activities of the City relating to
the control and prevention of tree diseases. The forester shall recommend to
the City Council the details of a program for the control of tree diseases, and
perform the duties incident to such a program adopted by the City Council.
   C.   Program. It is the intention of the council to conduct a program of
plant pest control pursuant to the authority granted by Minnesota Statutes
18.022. This program is directed specifically at the control and elimination of
tree diseases, and is undertaken at the recommendation of the Commissioner of
Agriculture. The Forester shall act as coordinator between the Commissioner of
Agriculture and the City Council in the conduct of this program.
   Subd. 4.   Nuisance Declared. The following are declared to be public
nuisances whenever they may be found within the City:
   A.   Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected to any degree
with the Dutch Elm Disease fungus, Ceratocystis Ulmi (Buisman) Moreau, or which
harbors any of the elm bark beetles, Scolytus multistrialus (eich.) or
Hylurgopinus rufipes (March).
   B.   Any elm tree or part thereof, including logs, branches, stumps,
firewood, or other elm material from which the bark has not been removed and
burned or sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle insecticide.
   C.   Any living or standing oak tree or part thereof infected to any degree
with the oak wilt disease fungus ceraloiystis fogacearum.
   D.   Any dead oak trees or part thereof which in the opinion of the forester
constitutes a hazard, Including, but not limited to, logs, branches, stumps,
firewood, or other oak material, which has not been stripped of its bark and
burned or sprayed with an effective fungicide.
   E.   Any other shade trees with an epidemic disease.
   Subd. 5.   Abatement. It is unlawful for any person to permit any public
nuisance as defined in
901.07, Subd 4 to remain on any premises owned or controlled by him within the
city. Such nuisance may be abated in the manner prescribed as follows:
   A.   Inspection and Investigation. The Forester shall inspect all premises
and places with the city as often as practicable to determine whether any
condition described in Section
901.07, Subd. 4 of this Section exists thereon.
   B.   Entry on Private Premises. The Forester may enter upon private premises
at any reasonable time for the purpose of carrying out any of the duties
assigned him under this Section.
   C.   Diagnosis. The Forester shall, upon finding conditions indicating
disease infestation, immediately send appropriate specimens or samples to the
Commissioner of Agriculture for analysis, or take such other steps for
diagnosis as may be recommended by the Commissioner of Agriculture. Except as
provided subsection E of this Section, no action to remove infected trees or
wood shall be taken until positive diagnosis of the disease has been made.
   D.   Abatement of Tree Disease Nuisances. In abating the nuisances defined
in
901.07, Subd. 4 of this Section, the Forester shall cause the infected tree or
wood to be sprayed, removed, burned, or otherwise effectively treated so as to
destroy and prevent as fully as possible the spread of tree diseases. Such
abatement procedures shall be carried out in accordance with current technical
and expert opinions and plans as may be designated by the Commissioner of
Agriculture.
   E.   Procedures for Removal of Infected Trees and Wood.
      1.   Whenever the Forester finds with reasonable certainty that the
infestation defined in
901.07, Subd. 4 exists in any tree or wood in any public or private place in
the City, they shall proceed as follows:
         a.   If the Forester finds that the danger of infestation of other
trees is not imminent because of dormancy, they shall notify the abutting
property owner and/or the owner of the property upon which the tree is located,
by certified mail that the nuisance will be abated within a specified tine, not
less than five days from the date of mailing of such notice. The Forester shall
immediately report such action to the City Council, which shall proceed by:
            (1)   Abating the nuisance as a public improvement under Minnesota
Statutes, Chapter 429.101, or
            (2)   Abating the nuisance as provided in
901.07, Subd. 6.
      2.   If the forester finds with reasonable certainty that immediate
action is required to prevent the spread of the disease, he may proceed to
abate the nuisance forthwith. He shall report such action immediately to the
City Council and to the owner of the property where the nuisance is located.
   Subd. 6.   Council Action.
   A.   Upon receipt of the Forester's report required. by
901.07, Subd. 5.E of this Section, the City Council shall, by resolution, order
the nuisance abated.
   B.   Before action is taken on such resolution, the City Council shall
publish notice of its intention to meet to consider taking action to abate the
nuisance. This notice shall be mailed to affected property owners and published
once not less than 1 week prior to such meeting. The notice shall state the
time and place of the meeting, the property affected, action proposed, the
estimated cost of the abatement, and the proposed bases of assessment, if any,
of costs.
   C.   At the hearing or adjournment thereof, the City Council shall hear
property owners with reference to the scope and desirability of the proposed
project. The council shall thereafter adopt a resolution confirming the
original resolution with such modifications as it considers desirable and
provide for the doing of the work of day labor or by contract.
   Subd. 7.   Records. The Forester shall keep a record of the costs of
abatements done under this Section and shall report monthly to the Treasurer
all work done for which assessments are to be made stating and certifying the
description of land, lots, parcels involved and the amount chargeable to each.
   Subd. 8.   Assessments. On or before September 1 of each year the Treasurer
shall list the total unpaid charges for each abatement against each separate
lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this chapter. The council
may then spread the charges or any portion thereof against the property
involved as a special assessment under Minnesota statutes 429.101 and. other
pertinent statutes for certification to the county auditor and collection the
following year along with current taxes.
   Subd. 9.   Treatment. Whenever the Forester determines that any tree or wood
within the city is infected with disease, he may spray or otherwise treat all
nearby high value trees, with an effective disease-destroying agent. Spraying
and other treatment activities authorized by this section shall be conducted in
accordance with technical and expert opinions and plans of the Commissioner of
Agriculture and under the supervision of the Commissioner and his agents
whenever possible. The notice provisions of Section
901.07, Subd. 6 apply to spraying and treatment operations conducted under this
Section.
   Subd. 8.   Transporting Wood Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to
transport within the city any diseased wood or any bark-bearing elm or oak wood
without having first obtained permission from the Forester. The forester shall
grant such permission only when the purpose of this Section will be served
thereby by minimizing the risk of spread of the disease.
   Subd. 9.   Stockpiling. Any bark bearing elm wood may be stockpiled within
the city limits during the period September 15 through April 1. Any such wood
not utilized by April 1 must then be removed and disposed of as provided by
law.
   Subd 10.    Interference Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to
prevent, delay or interfere with the Forester or their agents while they are
engaged in the performance of duties established by this Section. (Ordinance
18-07, adopted June 26, 2018)
901.08. Prohibitions; Penalty.
A person must not act or fail to act in a manner that is or causes a public
nuisance. A person must not maintain, allow, or permit a public nuisance to
exist on property that the person owns, occupies, or otherwise controls. A
violation of this Ordinance constitutes a Misdemeanor Level Criminal Offence
and may be punished pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 609.02, Subd. 3, as may be
amended from time to time. (Ordinance 18-07, adopted June 26, 2018)
902. General Offenses
902.01. Public Drinking.
   Subd. 1.   Consumption. No person shall consume intoxicating liquor or non-
intoxicating malt liquor on any public sidewalk or street, or in a vehicle upon
a public street.
   Subd. 2.   Possession. No person shall have in possession intoxicating
liquor or non-intoxicating malt liquor in an open container on any public
sidewalk or street or in a vehicle upon a public street.
   Subd. 3.   Penalty. A violation of this Section constitutes a Misdemeanor
Level Criminal Offence and may be punished pursuant to Minnesota Statutes.
609.02, Subd. 3, as may be amended from time to time. (Ordinance 18-07, adopted
June 26, 2018)
903. Storage, Collection, Disposal, and Transportation of Waste Materials
903.01. Purpose.
The purpose of this Section is to maintain and protect the health, safety,
comfort and repose of the public regulations of sanitation, open burning,
storage, collection disposal and transportation of waste materials in the city.
(Ordinance 18-07, adopted June 26, 2018)
903.02. Definitions.
Commercial Waste: The term commercial waste producers shall mean all residences
with over 4 units, any business, school, and churches.
Compostable Items: The term compostable items shall mean decomposable items
such as leaves, grass clippings, and yard scraps.
Garbage: The term garbage means all decomposable and organic solid wastes,
including materials resulting from handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food, but excluding human excrement, sewage and other water
carried wastes.
Recyclable Materials: The term recyclable materials shall mean newspaper,
cardboard, computer paper, ledger paper, glass, tin cans, bi-metal cans,
aluminum cans, magazines, plastic bottles as listed in the recycling contract
and any other recyclable materials as added to the recycling contract.
Refuse: The term refuse means all non-combustible wastes including ashes,
crockery, household rubbish, and all combustible wastes including rags and old
clothes; but does not include any material such as earth, sand, brick, stone,
plaster or other similar substances that may accumulate as a result of
construction operation; it also does not include appliances, auto parts, tree
limbs, or flammable material including gasoline and motor oil.
Residence: The term residence for this chapter means any dwelling located
within the City boundaries including residential, commercial, schools, and
churches.
Residential Waste Producers: The term residential waste producers shall mean
all residences with up to 4 units.
Waste, industrial: The term industrial waste means all organic inorganic wastes
except garbage, resulting from any manufacturing, building repairing,
demolition, construction, processing, grain cleaning, the operation of garages
and service stations and other similar activities. (Ordinance 18-07, adopted
June 26, 2018)
903.03. Deposit of Refuse Restricted.
   Subd. 1.   No person shall deposit, cause to be deposited or situate
garbage, refuse or containers for garbage or refuse upon any street, alley,
vacated lot or upon any ground appurtenant to any building in the city, except
upon the premises wherein the garbage or refuse originated. No person shall
bury any refuse in the City.
   Subd. 2.   No person except as licensed by Hennepin or Wright County and
having obtained a permit from the City shall transport garbage from commercial
waste producers over any street or alley in the city or shall disturb, collect
or in any manner interfere with garbage or refuse placed in containers for
collection, or interfere in any manner with containers for garbage or refuse.
   Subd. 3.   No person shall disturb, collect or in any manner interfere with
recyclable materials placed in containers or alongside of containers for
collection, or interfere in any manner with containers for recyclable
materials, except as authorized by the City or by the person who placed the
recyclable materials in the containers for collection.
   Subd. 4.   Private use of any City dumpster shall be forbidden. Dumpsters
located within a city park shall be for park use only.
   Subd. 5.   No person unless authorized by the City Refuse Collection
Contract shall transport garbage from any residential waste producers over any
street or alley in the City or shall disturb, collect or in any manner
interfere with garbage or refuse placed in containers for collection, or
interfere in any manner with containers for garbage or refuse. (Ordinance 18-
07, adopted June 26, 2018)
903.04. Storage of Garbage, Refuse and Recyclables.
   Subd. 1.   Except as otherwise provided, all garbage and refuse shall be
kept in rust resistant, water tight, nonabsorbent and easily washable
containers which are equipped with bail or handles and covered with close-
fitting covers. Insofar as practicable, all garbage shall be drained of
liquids.
   Subd. 2.   All containers shall be washed and treated with disinfectant as
often as necessary to prevent a nuisance. Recyclable containers shall be
vendor- approved containers.
   Subd. 3.   The property owner shall control the garbage and refuse on the
premises so as to keep the premises in a clean and sanitary condition and shall
have the garbage and refuse removed at regular intervals, being at least once
each week, or as often as deemed necessary by the City Health Officer. Pickup
and removal of recyclable materials shall be at regular intervals and shall be
established by council and listed in the recycling contract. (Ordinance 18-07,
adopted June 26, 2018)
903.05. Collection of Garbage, Refuse and Recyclables.
   Subd. 1.   The hauler(s) as designated by the City Refuse Collection
Contract are hereby responsible for the weekly collection of all garbage/refuse
from the residential waste producers in a zone as specified in the contract.
The City Council shall set the day of collection for both Hennepin and Wright
County.
   Subd. 2   The property owner or occupant of a commercial waste producer in
the City shall provide for the collection of the garbage and refuse on the
premises in a clean and sanitary condition, with a licensed hauler from either
Hennepin or Wright county having obtained a Permit from the City, but in no
event less frequently than one pickup per week, or as often as deemed necessary
by the City Health Officer.
   Subd. 3.   All garbage/refuse collected in the City shall be transported on
the streets and alleys in vehicles with leak-proof bodies of easily cleanable
construction designed not to create a nuisance. Vehicles carrying refuse/
garbage and recyclable materials within the City shall be so operated that the
contents do not spill or drip upon streets or alleys or otherwise create a
nuisance. Every vehicle shall be kept to prevent nuisances and equipped with a
broom and shovel. Each collection vehicle driver shall be instructed on the
weight restrictions set by the City council allowing a 7 ton per axle load
limit for garbage trucks licensed in the City.
   Subd. 4   Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 443.015, the City Council may
annually levy an assessment for fees for garbage / refuse services delinquent
and remaining unpaid, or otherwise in default of payment, equal to such unpaid
cost as of September first of each year, against each lot or parcel of land so
served for which the service charge is unpaid. Such assessment may include a
penalty not to exceed 10 percent of the amount thereof and shall bear interest
at such amount not exceeding 6 percent per annum as the council shall
determine. Such assessment shall be certified to the auditor of the county in
which the land assessed is situated and shall be collected and remitted to the
Treasurer in the same manner as assessments for local improvements. (Ordinance
18-07, adopted June 26, 2018)
903.06. Permits for Garbage and Waste Collection.
   Subd. 1.   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to collect garbage/
refuse from any commercial waste producer within the City shall submit a
written application to the city council for a permit.
   Subd. 2.   The City Council shall consider such application, and if it finds
that the applicant is a responsible person and has the proper equipment,
facilities, resources and personnel to provide adequate collection service
under this chapter and that it would be in the public interest to do so, it may
direct the City Clerk to issue the applicant the permit.
   Subd. 3.   The fee shall be submitted with the application as listed in
Section
212 of the City Code.
   Subd. 4   The applicant shall submit to the City Clerk a certificate of
insurance against liability imposed by law for injury, death and property
damage in an amount acceptable to the council.
   Subd. 5.   The permit shall be issued for a period of 1 year. (Ordinance 18-
07, adopted June 26, 2018)
903.07. Compost Regulations.
   Subd. 1.   Private Compost Sites. Persons are allowed to have one compost
site on their property. The compost site must not be located in the front yard
nor any closer than 5 feet to the side yard property line or closer than 5 feet
to the rear yard property line. All private compost sites must be contained
within screening or fencing to prevent blowing and scattering of material. A
private compost site must not be any larger than 25% of your yard. No private
compost site may exceed 25% of the total lot size and shall not exceed 500
square feet and four feet in height.
   Subd. 2.   Municipal Compost Site. The City municipal compost site is
designated on the public works waste water treatment plant/garage site. The
site will be a fenced area and the entrance shall be clearly marked by signs,
which will also state the time of operation for the site. The city council may
from time to time, by resolution, as the City Council may determine, change the
location of the above referenced site or the time of operation.
   A.   Only compost material that originates or comes from within the City
limits shall be collected or accepted at the municipal site, unless otherwise
authorized by the City Council.
   B.   Compost materials shall be received at the collection site in bulk form
or in reusable, recyclable or disposable bags or containers which must be
emptied and shall not be added to the compost pile. No plastic bags or
containers shall be left at the site. Vehicles delivering compost materials in
bulk form must be enclosed or covered.
   C.   Compost material shall not contain extraneous materials including
animal wastes or municipal solid waste, garbage or refuse.
   D.   The composting operation, including delivery shall not generate off-
site nuisances, such as dust, odor and wind blown debris. The operation shall
be free of pests and vermin.
   E.   Compost materials must be fenced, screened or covered, to prevent
blowing or scattering of materials and to prevent animals from disturbing or
removing the contents.
   F.   No compost materials may be treated with any kind of herbicides or
pesticides.
   G.   Composting shall be accomplished in accordance with the regulations and
requirements of all other agencies, organizations, or entities have
jurisdiction over such activity.
   H.   There shall be no fee charged for city residents to drop their yard
waste at the municipal site, and no charge for City residents to pickup the
finished material. The City will notify residents when compost is available for
their use and schedule times for receiving it. (Ordinance 18-07, adopted June
26, 2018)
903.08. Recyclable Regulations.
The City Council shall contract after receiving bids or negotiating the current
contract for the collection of certain recyclable materials from residences in
the city on such terms and for such periods as the council may determine.
(Ordinance 18-07, adopted June 26, 2018)
903.09. Penalty.
Any person or entity violating any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding $700.00 or by imprisonment for
a period not exceeding ninety 90 days, or both, plus in either case, the costs
of prosecution. In addition, if that person's or entity's behavior, in
violation of this section, is also violative of State of Minnesota law
regarding civil or criminal trespass, the City may apply its remedies under
those provisions of law. (Ordinance 18-07, adopted June 26, 2018)
904 Graffiti Prevention
904.01. Purpose and Intent.
The City Council is enacting regulations to help prevent the spread of graffiti
vandalism and to establish a program for the removal of graffiti from public
and private property. The City Council finds that graffiti is a public nuisance
and destructive of the rights and values of property owners as well as the
entire community. Unless the City acts to remove graffiti from public and
private property, the graffiti tends to remain. Other properties then become
the target of graffiti, and entire neighborhoods are affected and become less
desirable places in which to be, all to the detriment of the City. The City
Council intends, through the adoption of this Code, to provide additional
enforcement tools to protect public and private property from acts of graffiti
vandalism and defacement. The Council does not intend for this Code to conflict
with any existing anti-graffiti state laws. (Ordinance 18-07, adopted June 26,
2018)
904.02. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Section, the following words shall have the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in the Section, exempt where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
Aerosol paint container means any aerosol container that is adapted or made for
the purpose of applying spray paint or other substances capable of defacing
property.
Broad-tipped marker means any felt tip indelible marker or similar implement
with a flat or angled writing surface that, at its broadest width is greater
than 1/4 inch, containing ink or other pigmented liquid that is not water
soluble.
Etching equipment means any tool, device, or substance that can be used to make
permanent marks on any natural or man-made surface.
Graffiti means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting or other
defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted,
or engraved upon or otherwise affixed to any surface or public or private
property by any graffiti implement, to the extent that the graffiti was not
authorized in advance by the owner or occupant of the property, or despite
advance authorization, is otherwise deemed a public nuisance by the City
Council.
Graffiti implement means an aerosol paint container, a broad-tipped marker,
gummed labels, paint stick, or graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush or any
other devise capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural or
manmade surface.
Paint stick or graffiti stick means any device containing a solid form of
paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied
to a surface by pressure and leaving a mark of at least 1/8 inch in width.
Person means any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other
legal entity. (Ordinance 18-07, adopted June 26, 2018)
904.03. Prohibited Acts.
   Subd. 1.   Defacement. It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti
to any natural or manmade surface on any City-owned property, or without the
permission of the owner or occupant, on any property not owned by the City.
   Subd. 2.   Possession of Graffiti Implements.
   A.   By Minors at or Near School Facilities. It is unlawful for any person
under the age of 18 years to possess any graffiti implement while on any public
property, grounds facilities, buildings, or structures, or in areas immediately
adjacent to those specific locations upon public property, or upon private
property without the prior written consent of the owner or occupant of such
private property.
   B.   In Designated Public Places. It is unlawful for any person to possess
any graffiti implement while in or upon any public facility, park, playground,
recreational facility, or other public building or structure owned or operated
by the City or while in or within 50 feet of an underpass, bridge abutment,
storm drain, or similar types of infrastructure unless otherwise authorized by
the City.
   Subd. 3.   Accessibility to Graffiti Implements.
   A.   Furnishing to Minors Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person,
other than a parent or legal guardian, to sell, exchange, give, loan, or
otherwise furnish, or cause or permit to be exchanged, given, loaned, or
otherwise furnished, any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker, or paint
stick to any parents or guardian of the person. (Markers containing water
soluble ink or pigmented liquid are exempt from this section.)
   B.   Display and Storage.
      1.   Every person who owns, conducts, operates, or manages a retail
commercial establishment selling aerosol paint containers, paint sticks, or
broad-tipped markers must store containers, sticks or markers in an area
primarily observable, through direct visual observation or surveillance
equipment, by employees of the retail establishment during the regular course
of business.
      2.   In the event that a commercial retail establishment is unable to
store the aerosol paint containers, paint sticks, or broad-tipped markers in an
area as provided above, the establishment must store the containers, sticks,
and markers in an area not accessible to the public in the regular course of
business without employee assistance.
      3.   Every person who operates a retail establishment selling graffiti
implements must:
         a.   Place a sign in clear public view at or near the display of such
products stating: “Graffiti is against the law. Any person who defaces real or
personal property with paint or any other liquid or device is guilty of a crime
punishable by imprisonment of up to ninety (90) days and/or a fine up to
$700.00.”
         b.   Place a sign in the direct view of such person responsible for
accepting customer payment for graffiti implements stating: “selling spray
paint, paint sticks, broad-tipped markers to persons under eighteen (18) years
of age is against the law and punishable by imprisonment of up to ninety (90)
days and/or a fine up to $700.00.” (Ordinance 18-07, adopted June 26, 2018)
904.04. Penalties.
   Subd. 1.   Fines and Imprisonment. Any person violating this Code is guilty
of a Misdemeanor.
   A.   In the case of a minor, the parents or legal guardian are jointly and
severely liable with the minor for payment of all fines.
   B.   Failure of the parents or legal guardian to make payment will result in
the filing of a lien on the parents’ or legal guardians’ property that includes
the fine and administrative costs.
   C.   A violation of this Ordinance constitutes a Misdemeanor Level Criminal
Offence and may be punished pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 609.02, Subd. 3, as
may be amended from time to time.
   Subd. 2.   Restitution. In addition to any punishment specified in this
Section, the court will order any violator to make restitution to the victim
for damages or less caused directly or indirectly by the violator’s offense in
the amount or manner determined by the Court. In the case of a minor, the
parents or legal guardian shall be ordered jointly and severely liable with the
minor to make the restitution.
   Subd. 3.   Civil Responsibility for Damages for Wrongful Sale, Display or
Storage. Any person who sells, displays or stores, or permits the sale, display
or storage, of any graffiti implement in violation of the provisions of this
Section is personally liable for all costs, including attorney’s fees and court
costs, incurred by any party in connection with the removal of graffiti, the
repair of any property containing graffiti, or such party’s prosecution of a
civil claim for reimbursement or damages resulting from such graffiti removal
or property repair, arising from the use by any person of such wrongfully soil,
displayed or stored graffiti implement in violation of the provisions of this
Code, provided that such liability shall not exceed $1,500.00.
   Subd. 4.   Public Parks. Specific penalties for vandalism and/or graffiti
found in any City park shall result in:
   A.   Requirement to pay for any and all damages,
   B.   Any violation shall be considered a petty misdemeanor or a general
misdemeanor subject to a fine of $300 to $700, respectively,
   C.   Individual(s) shall be required to perform community service, and
   D.   Individual(s) shall be banned from all City parks for a period of not
less than 1 year. (Ordinance 18-07, adopted June 26, 2018)
904.05. Graffiti as Nuisance.
   Subd. 1.   The existence of graffiti on public or private property in
violation of this Section is expressly declared to be a public nuisance and,
therefore, is subject to removal and abatement provisions specified in this
Section.
   Subd. 2.   It is the duty of both the owner of the property to which the
graffiti has been applied and any person who may be in possession or who has
the right to possess such property to, at all times, keep the property clear of
graffiti.
904.06. Removal of Graffiti by Perpetrator.
Any person applying graffiti on public or private property has the duty to
remove the graffiti within 24 hours after notice by the City or private owner
of the property involved. Such removal must be done in a manner prescribed by
the City Administrator and/or Public Works Supervisor or any additional person
as authorized by the City Council. Any person applying graffiti is responsible
for the removal or for the payment of the removal. Failure of any person to
remove graffiti or pay for the removal shall constitute an additional violation
of this Section. Where graffiti is applied by an unemancipated minor, the
parents or legal guardian are also responsible for such removal or for the
payment for the removal.
904.07. Removal of Graffiti by Property Owner or City.
If graffiti is not removed by the perpetrator according to Section
904.06, graffiti shall be removed pursuant to the following provisions:
   Subd. 1.   Property Owner Responsibility. It is unlawful for any person who
is the owner or has the primary responsibility for control of property or for
repair or maintenance of property in the City to permit property that is
defaced with graffiti to remain defaced for a period of 10 days after service
by first class mail of notice of the defacement. The notice shall contain the
following information:
   A.   The street address and legal description of the property sufficient for
identification of the property;
   B.   A statement that the property is a potential graffiti nuisance property
with a concise description of the conditions leading to the finding;
   C.   A statement that the graffiti must be removed within 10 days after
receipt of the notice and that if the graffiti is not abated within that time,
the City will declare the property to be a public nuisance, subject to the
abatement procedures in this Section.
   Subd. 2.   Exceptions to the Property Owner Responsibility. The removal
requirements of subdivision 1 above does not apply if the property owner or
responsible party can demonstrate that:
   A.   The property owner or responsible party lacks the financial ability to
remove the defacing graffiti; or
   B.   The property owner or responsible party has an active program for the
removal of graffiti and has scheduled the removal of the graffiti as part of
that program, in which case, it is unlawful to permit such property to remain
defaced with graffiti for a period of 15 days after service by First Class Mail
of notice of the defacement.
     Subd. 3.    Right of City to Remove.
   A.   Use of Public Funds. Whenever the City becomes aware or is notified and
determines that graffiti is located on publicly or privately owned property
viewable from a public or quasi=public place, the City is authorized to use
public funds for the removal of the graffiti, or for the painting or repairing
of the graffiti, but will not authorize or undertake to provide for the
painting or repair of any more extensive an area than that where the graffiti
is located, unless the City Administrator, or the designee of the City
Administrator, determines in writing that a more extensive area is required to
be repainted or repaired in order to avoid an aesthetic disfigurement to the
neighborhood or community, or unless the property owner or responsible party
agrees to pay for the costs of repainting or repairing the more extensive area.
   B.   Right of Entry on Private Property. Prior to entering upon private
property or property owned by a public entity other than the City for the
purpose of graffiti removal, the City must attempt to secure the consent of the
property owner or responsible party and a release of the City from liability
for property damage or personal injury. If the responsible party fails to
remove the offending graffiti within the time specified by this Code, or if the
City has requested consent to remove or paint over the offending graffiti and
the property owner or responsible party has refused consent for entry on terms
acceptable to the City and consistent with the terms of this Section, the City
will commence abatement and cost recovery proceedings for the graffiti removal
according to the provisions specified below.
   C.   Abatement and Cost Recovery Proceedings.
      1.   Notice of Due Process Hearing. The City Administrator, or the
designee of the City Administrator, serving as the Hearing Officer, must
provide the property owner of record and the party responsible for the
maintenance of the property, if a person different than the owner, not less
than 48 hours notice of the City’s intent to hold a due process hearing at
which the property owner or responsible party is entitled to present evidence
and argue that the property does not constitute a public nuisance. Notice must
be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action according to state
law. If the owner of record cannot be found after a diligent search, the notice
may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the
property for a period of 10 days and publication thereof in the official
newspaper of general circulation published in the area in which the property is
located.
      2.   Determination of Hearing Officer. The determination of the Hearing
Officer after the due process hearing is final and not appealable. If, after
the due process hearing, regardless of the attendance of the Owner or the
responsible party or their respective agents, the Hearing Officer determines
that the property contains graffiti viewable from a public or quasi-public
place, the Hearing Officer must give written notice in an eradication order
that, unless the graffiti is removed within 10 days, the City may enter upon
the property, cause the removal, painting over (in such color as that meets
with the approval of the Hearing Officer), or such other eradication thereof as
the Hearing Officer determines appropriate, and provide the Owner and the
responsible party thereafter with an accounting of the cost of the eradication
effort on a full cost recovery basis.
      3.   Eradication Effort. Not sooner than the time specified in the order
of the Hearing Officer, the City Administrator, or the designee of the City
Administrator, is to implement the eradication order and provide an accounting
to the Owner and the responsible party of the costs thereof.
      4.   Cost Hearing. The Owner or responsible party may require a cost
hearing before the Hearing Officer on the eradication accounting, and
appropriate due process must be extended to the Owner or responsible party. If
following the cost hearing or, if no hearing is requested, after the
implementation of the eradication order, the Hearing Officer determines that
all or a portion of the cost are appropriately chargeable to the eradication
effort, the total amount set forth in the eradication accounting, or an amount
thereof determined as appropriate by the Hearing Officer, is due and payable by
the Owner or responsible party within 30 days. Any amount of eradication
charges assessed by the Hearing Officer that are less than the total amount set
forth in the eradication accounting must be explained by written letter from
the Hearing Officer to the City Council.
      5.   Lien. As to such property where the responsible party is the
property owner, if all or any portion of the assessed eradication charges
remain unpaid after thirty (30) days, the portion thereof that remains unpaid
constitutes a lien on the property that was the subject of the eradication
effort. (Ordinance 18-07, adopted June 26, 2018)
905. Noise
905.01. Public Nuisance Noise Prohibited.
   Subd. 1.   General. No person shall make, continue, or cause to be made any
loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise or any noise which unreasonably annoys,
disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, or
welfare of others or precludes their enjoyment of property or affects their
property value. This general prohibition is not limited by the specific
restrictions of
905.02.
   Subd. 2.   Horns, Signaling Devices, etc.
   A.   The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile,
motorcycle, or other vehicle on any street, public place, or private property
within the City except as a present danger warning;
   B.   The creation by means of any such horn or signaling device of any
unreasonably loud or harsh sound;
   C.   The sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable
period of time;
   D.   The use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or
electricity;
   E.   The use of any horn, whistle, or other device operated by engine
exhaust;
   F.   The use of any such signaling device when traffic is held up for any
reason.
   Subd. 3.   Radios, Amplifiers, etc. The using, operating, or permitting to
be played any radio, musical instrument, phonograph, juke box, amplifier, or
other machine or device for the producing, reproducing, or amplifying of sound
in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, or comfort of persons residing
or working, or peaceably gathered in its vicinity. The operation of said
machine or device between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and. 7:00 A.M. shall be prima
facie evidence of a violation of this section if done in such manner as to be
plainly audible:
   A.   Within any building or structure used for residential purposes; or
   B.   At a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure, or vehicle in
which it is located.
   Subd. 4.   Loud Speakers, Amplifiers for Advertising. The using, operating,
or permitting to be played any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the
producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the
purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to
any building or structure.
   Subd. 5.   Yelling, Shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or
singing at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or
repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel, motel, or other
place of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity.
   Subd. 6.   Animals, Birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird which by
causing frequent or long-continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of
any persons in the vicinity.
   Subd. 7.   Whistles or Sirens. The blowing of a locomotive whistle or steam
whistle attached to any stationary boiler or in any siren whatsoever except to
give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or
danger, or by public emergency vehicles.
   Subd. 8.   Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any
vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent
loud or explosive noises therefrom and which complies with all applicable state
laws and regulations.
   Subd. 9    Defect in Vehicle or Load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle,
or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in such manner as to create loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise which shall disturb the
comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity.
   Subd. 10.   Sound Trucks for Advertising Purposes. The use of sound trucks
or any other vehicle equipped with sound-amplifying devices for the purposes of
advertising any program, project, or meeting of any public agency, private
business, religious organization, civic group, political party, or charitable
organization.
   Subd. 11.   Loading, Unloading, Opening Boxes. The creation of a loud and
excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the
opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and containers.
   Subd. 12.   Construction or Repairing of Buildings. The erection (including
excavating), demolition, alteration, or repair of any building between the
hours of 9:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. on Monday thru Saturday and all day Sunday and
the following State Legal Holidays: New Years Day, Martin Luther King's
Birthday, Presidents Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Veterans Day, Labor
Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas, except where single individuals or
families work on single family residences owned by them; for their own
occupancy provided that the building inspector may, in cases of emergency,
grant permission to repair at any time when he finds that such repair work will
not affect the health and safety of the persons in the vicinity.
   Subd. 13.   Schools, Courts, Churches, Hospitals. The creation of any
excessive noise on any street or private property adjacent to any school,
institution of learning, church, court, or hospital while the same are in use
which unreasonably interferes with the use thereof provided conspicuous signs
are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital or
court street.
   Subd. 14.   Hawkers, Peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers,
and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
   Subd. 15.   Pile Drivers, Hammers, etc. The operation between the hours of
9:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. on Monday thru Saturday and all day Sunday and the
following State Legal Holidays: New Years Day, Martin Luther King's Birthday,
Presidents Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Veterans Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas of any pile driver, power shovel, pneumatic
hammer, jack hammer, derrick, power or electric hoist, or other appliance the
use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise.
   Subd. 16.   Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan
or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to
the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower
or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient
to deaden such noise.
   Subd. 17.   Noise in Residential Areas. No person shall, between the hours
of 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. congregate because of or participate in any party
or gathering of people from which noise emanates of a sufficient volume so as
to disturb the peace, quiet, or repose of persons residing in any residential
area. Noise between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. of such volume as to
be plainly audible at a distance of fifty feet from the residential dwelling
unit wherein such party or gathering is located shall be prima facie evidence
of a violation of this section. No persons shall visit or remain within any
residential dwelling unit wherein such party or gathering is taking place
except the owner, persons residing in that unit, or persons who have gone there
for the sole purpose of abating the disturbance.
905.02. Responsibility.
The owner and tenant of any premises on which a violation of Section
905.01 occurs shall make every reasonable effort to see that the violation
ceases. Violation of Section
905.01 shall be deemed the act of the custody, or having charge of premises who
allows or permits the violation to take place. Violation of Section
905.01 shall also be deemed the act of the non-resident landlord, provided he
has received written notice from the City of the violation and has failed to
make every reasonable effort to see that the violation ceases.
905.03. Penalties.
Violation of this Section is a petty misdemeanor.
905.04. Civil Remedies.
   Subd. 1.   Nuisance. Violation of this Section may be abated as a nuisance
as provided by
901.05 and
901.08.
   Subd. 2.   Other Remedies. Violations of this Section may be enforced by
injunction or other appropriate civil remedy.
(Amended by Ordinance 2025-04, adopted July 8, 2025)
905.06. Exemption.
The provisions of this Section that restrict hours of operation shall not apply
to City approved community-wide festival (s), which may operate until 11:59
p.m. (Ordinance 18-07, adopted June 26, 2018)
1000. Land Use
1001. Zoning
1001.01 SCOPE AND INTERPRETATION
Subd. 1.   Scope.  The use of all land and every building or portion of a
building erected, altered in respect to height and area, added to or relocated,
and every use within a building or use accessory thereto in the city shall be
in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. Any existing building or
structure and any existing use or properties not in conformity with the
regulations in this chapter shall be regarded as non-conforming, but may be
continued, extended or changed, subject to the special regulations provided in
this chapter with respect to non-conforming properties or uses.
Subd. 2.   Interpretation.  In interpreting and applying the provisions of this
chapter, the regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general
welfare. Where the provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions than
those of any other regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall be
controlling. Where the provisions of any other regulation impose greater
restrictions than this chapter, the more restrictive provision shall be
controlling.
Subd. 3.   Private Agreements.  This chapter does not abrogate any easement,
covenant, or any other private agreement where such is legally enforceable but
which shall not be enforced by the City; provided, that where the regulations
of this chapter are more restrictive, or impose higher standards or
requirements than such easements, covenants, or other private agreements, the
requirements of this chapter shall be controlling. (Ordinance 13-02, Adopted
May 14, 2013)
Subd. 4.   Authority. This Chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted
by the Municipal Planning Act, Minnesota Statutes, Section 462.351 to 462.363.
1001.02 RULES AND DEFINITIONS
Subd. 1.   Rules of Word Construction. For the purposes of this Chapter,
certain terms of words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
   A.   The word “person” includes an owner or representative of the owner,
firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as
well as an individual.
   B.   The word “building” shall include the word “structure”, the word “lot”
shall include the word “plot”, “piece”, or “parcel”.
   C.   The present tense includes the future tense.
   D.   The word “shall” is mandatory; the word “may” is permissive.
   E.   The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
   F.   All measured distances expressed in feet shall be to the nearest tenth
of a foot.
   G.   When calculating parking stall requirements, arty fraction of a number
shall constitute an additional parking space.
   H.   When calculating residential density, any fraction of a number shall
not constitute an additional dwelling unit.
   I.   For terminology not defined in this Section, the most current Webster's
dictionary shall be used to define such terms.
Subd. 2.   Definitions. The following words and terms, wherever occur in this
Chapter, shall be interpreted as herein defined:
Accessory Building. A subordinate building which is located on the same lot or
parcel as the main building and the use of which is clearly incidental to those
of the Main use.
Accessory Use. A use subordinate to the main use on a lot and used for purposes
customarily incidental to those of the main use.
Alley. Any public space or thoroughfare less than sixteen (16) feet, but not
less than ten feet in width which has been dedicated or deeded to the public
for public use and designed to provide secondary property access.
Allowable Use. A use which may be lawfully established in a particular district
provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations, and performance
standards of said district.
Antenna. Commercial, public, or private broadcasting towers exceeding 100% (or
two times) of the district height limitations.
Apartment. A portion of a building consisting of a room or suite of rooms which
is designed for, intended for, or used as a residence by a single family or an
individual, and is equipped with cooking facilities. Includes dwelling unit and
efficiency unit.
Apartment Building. Three (3) or more dwelling units or apartments grouped in
one building, with each unit sharing a common area for ingress and egress.
Automobile Laundry (Car Wash). A building, or portion thereof, containing
facilities for washing two or more automobiles, using mechanical devices.
Automobile Repair - Major. General repair, rebuilding or reconditioning
engines, motor vehicles or trailers; collision service, including body, frame
or fender straightening or repair; overall painting or paint job; vehicle steam
cleaning.
Automobile Repair-Minor. Installation, including cellular telephones, audio
systems, and minor repairs, upholstering, replacement of parts (tires, glass,
etc.) and minor motor services to passenger automobiles and trucks not
exceeding twelve thousand (12,000) pounds gross weight, but not including any
operation specified under “Automobile Repair-Major”.
Automobile Wrecking. The dismantling or wrecking of used motor vehicles or
trailers, or the storage, sale, or dumping of dismantled, partially dismantled,
or wrecked vehicles or their parts. (See Junk Yard)
Basement.  That portion of a building between floor and ceiling, which is
partly below and partly above grade (as defined in this section).
Brew on Premises. A facility that provides the ingredients and equipment for a
customer to use to brew malt liquor at the store. Alcoholic beverages may not
be sold or otherwise provided to customers of a brew on premises store, unless
the owner of the brew on premises store holds the appropriate liquor license.
Customers using the brew on premises store must be of the minimum age required
to purchase intoxicating liquor. Malt liquor brewed by a customer in the store
must not be sold and must be used by the customer solely for personal or family
use. (Ordinance 15-02, adopted February 24, 2015)
Brewery. A facility that produces beer, ale or other beverages made from malt
by fermentation and containing not less than one-half of one percent alcohol by
volume. (Ordinance 15-02, adopted February 24, 2015)
Brewery, Small. A brewery that produces not more than twenty thousand (20,000)
barrels of malt liquor in a calendar year as regulated by Minnesota Statues, as
may be amended. (Ordinance 15-02, adopted February 24, 2015)
Brewpub. A small brewery with a restaurant use operated on the same premises as
the brewery. (Ordinance 15-02, adopted February 24, 2015)
Buffer. The use of land, topography, difference in elevation, space, fences or
landscape plantings to screen or partially screen a use or property from the
vision of another use or property.
Buildable Area. The space remaining on a lot after the minimum setback and open
space requirements of this Chapter have been met and excluding easements.
Building. Any structure having a roof and built for the support, shelter or
enclosure of persons, animals, chattel or movable property of any kind, and
includes any structure.
Building Height.  The vertical distance above a reference datum measured to the
highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard
roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof.
The reference datum shall be selected by either of the following, whichever
yields a greater height of building:
   a.   The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface
within a five (5) foot horizontal distance of the exterior wall of the building
when such sidewalk or ground surface is not more than ten (10) feet above
lowest grade.
   b.   An elevation ten (10) feet higher than the lowest grade when the
sidewalk or ground surface described in Item a above is more than ten (10) feet
above lowest grade.
The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height of any
segment of the building.
Building Line. An imaginary line separating buildable area and required yards.
Building Line Setback.  The minimum horizontal distance between the building
and the lot line.
Cannabis Business Related. Unless otherwise noted in this section, words, and
phrases contained in Minnesota Statutes, section 342.01 and the rules
promulgated pursuant to any of these acts, shall have the same meanings in this
title.
   a.   Adult-Use Cannabis Product. As defined under Minnesota Statutes,
section 342.01, subd. 4.
   b.   Cannabis Cultivation. A cannabis business licensed to grow cannabis
plants within the approved amount of space from seed or immature plant to
mature plant, harvest cannabis flower from mature plant, package and label
immature plants and seedlings and cannabis flower for sale to other cannabis
businesses, transport cannabis flower to a cannabis manufacturer located on the
same premises, and perform other actions approved by the office.
   c.   Cannabis Manufacturer. A cannabis business that makes cannabis and/or
hemp concentrate, manufactures artificially derived cannabinoids, adult-use
cannabis products, lower-potency hemp edibles, and/or hemp-derived consumer
products, and sells cannabis concentrate, hemp concentrate, artificially
derived cannabinoids, cannabis products, lower-potency hemp edibles, hemp-
derived consumer products to other cannabis businesses pursuant to Minnesota
Statute sections 342.26 and 342.31.
   d.   Cannabis Mezzobusiness. A cannabis business that grows cannabis plants
from seed or immature plant to mature plant, harvests the cannabis flower from
a mature plant, makes cannabis and/or hemp concentrate, manufactures
artificially derived cannabinoids, adult-use cannabis products, lower-potency
hemp edibles, and/or hemp-derived consumer products, and sells immature
cannabis plants and seedlings, adult-use cannabis flower, adult-use cannabis
products, lower-potency hemp edibles, hemp-derived consumer products, and other
products authorized by law to other cannabis businesses and to consumers
pursuant to Minnesota Statute section 342.29.
   e.   Cannabis Microbusiness. A cannabis business that grows cannabis plants
from seed or immature plant to mature plant, harvests the cannabis flower from
a mature plant, makes cannabis and/or hemp concentrate, manufactures
artificially derived cannabinoids, adult-use cannabis products, lower-potency
hemp edibles, and/or hemp-derived consumer products, and sells immature
cannabis plants and seedlings, adult-use cannabis flower, adult-use cannabis
products, lower-potency hemp edibles, hemp-derived consumer products, and other
products authorized by law to other cannabis businesses and to consumers,
including on-site consumption, pursuant to Minnesota Statute section 342.28.
   f.   Cannabis Testing Facility. A cannabis business that obtains and tests
immature cannabis plants and seedlings, cannabis flower, cannabis products,
hemp plant parts, hemp concentrate, artificially derived cannabinoids, lower-
potency hemp edibles, and hemp-derived consumer products from cannabis
microbusinesses, cannabis mezzobusinesses, cannabis cultivators, cannabis
manufacturers, cannabis wholesalers, lower-potency hemp edible manufacturers,
and industrial hemp growers pursuant to Minnesota Statute sections 342.37 and
342.38.
   g.   Cannabis Retail Businesses. A state licensed retail location and the
retail location(s) of a mezzobusinesses with a retail operations endorsement,
microbusinesses with a retail operations endorsement, medical combination
businesses operating a retail location, and lower-potency hemp edible
retailers.
   h.    Cannabis Retailer. Any person, partnership, firm, corporation, or
association, foreign or domestic, selling cannabis product to a consumer and
not for the purpose of resale in any form.
   i.   Cannabis Wholesaler. A cannabis business that sells immature cannabis
plants and seedlings, cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency hemp
edibles, and hemp-derived consumer products to cannabis microbusinesses,
cannabis mezzobusinesses, cannabis manufacturers, and cannabis retailers
pursuant to Minnesota Statute sections 342.33 and 342.34.
   j.    Daycare. A location licensed with the Minnesota Department of Human
Services to provide the care of a child in a residence outside the child's own
home for gain or otherwise, on a regular basis, for any part of a twenty-four
(24) hour day.
   k.   Hemp Business. A business licensed by the Office of Cannabis Management
(OCM) as defined by Minnesota Statute section 342.01, subd. 34.
   l.   Lower-Potency Hemp Edible Manufacturer. A hemp business that makes hemp
concentrate, manufactures artificially derived cannabinoids lower-potency hemp
edibles, and/or hemp-derived consumer products, and sells hemp concentrate,
artificially derived cannabinoids, lower-potency hemp edibles, hemp-derived
consumer products to other cannabis businesses and hemp businesses pursuant to
Minnesota Statute section 342.45.
   m.   Lower-Potency Hemp Edible Retailer. A hemp business that sells lower-
potency hemp edibles to customers, including on-site consumption, pursuant to
Minnesota Statute section 342.46.
   n.   Lower Potency Hemp Edible. As defined under Minnesota Statutes, section
342.01, subd. 50.
   o.   Office of Cannabis Management. State of Minnesota Office of Cannabis
Management, as may be referred to as "OCM" in reference to this title.
   p.   Place of Public Accommodation. A business, accommodation, refreshment,
entertainment, recreation, or transportation facility of any kind, whether
licensed or not, whose goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages or
accommodations are extended, offered, sold, or otherwise made available to the
public.
   q.   Preliminary License Approval. Office of Cannabis Management pre-
approval for a cannabis business license for applicants who qualify under
Minnesota Statutes, section 342.17.
   r.   Public Place. A public park or trail, public street or sidewalk; any
enclosed, indoor area used by the general public, including, but not limited
to, restaurants; bars; any other food or liquor establishment; hospitals;
nursing homes; auditoriums; arenas; gyms; meeting rooms; common areas of rental
apartment buildings, and other places of public accommodation.
   s.   Residential Treatment Facility. As defined under Minnesota Statutes,
section 245.462, subd. 23.
   t.   Retail Registration. An approved registration issued by Wright County
to a cannabis retail business.
   u.   School. A public school as defined under Minnesota Statutes, section
120A.05 or a nonpublic school that complies with the reporting requirements
under Minnesota Statute, section 120A.24.
   v.    State License. An approved license issued by the Office of Cannabis
Management to a cannabis retail business. (Ordinance 2025-01, adopted January
14, 2025)
Cellar. That portion of a building between floor and ceiling which is wholly or
partly below grade and so located that the vertical distance from grade to the
floor below is equal to or greater than the vertical distance from grade to
ceiling.
Cemetery. A site or property set apart for the burial or interment of the dead.
Church. A building wherein people regularly assemble for religious worship and
which is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain
public worship.
Comprehensive Plan. A comprehensive plan prepared and approved by the City,
including a compilation of policy statements, goals, standards, fiscal
guidelines, and maps indicating the general locations recommended for the
various functional classes of land use, places and structures, and for the
general physical development of the City, including any unit or part of such
plan separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.
Concept Plan.  A report in map and text form submitted as the first phase of a
Planned Unit Development (PUD) proposal, depicting the location, general
purpose, general type of land use and circulation patterns, primary
relationships between site elements and between the proposed development and
surrounding development, proposed general schedule of development, and
information on the developer.
Condominium.  A multiple dwelling or development containing individually owned
dwelling units and jointly owned and shared areas and facilities, which
dwelling or development is subject to the provisions of the Minnesota
Condominium Law, Minnesota Statutes, Section 515.A.1-101 to 515.A.4-115.
Crematory. An establishment involving mechanical equipment and appurtenances to
cremate deceased human or animal bodies through the application of extreme
heat, reducing them to a particulate and ash-like consistency. (Ord. 2025-05,
adopted November 25, 2025)
Day Care Facility. Any facility licensed by the State Department of Public
Welfare, public or private, which for gain or otherwise regularly provides one
or more persons with care, training, supervision, habilitation, rehabilitation
or developmental guidance on a regular basis, for periods of less than twenty-
four (24) hours per day, in a place other than the person's own home. Day care
facilities include but are not limited to: family day care homes, group family
day care homes, day care centers, day nurseries, nursery schools, day-time
activity centers, day treatment programs and day services, as defined by
Minnesota State Statutes, Section 245. 782.5.
Density, Residential. A number expressing the relationship of the number of
dwellings to an acre of land as established in the Comprehensive Plan.
Distillery. A facility that produces ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl,
sprits of wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or other distilled spirits,
including all dilutions and mixtures thereof for non-industrial use. (Ordinance
15-02, adopted February 24, 2015)
District.  Sections of the City for which the regulations governing the height,
area, use of building and premises are the same.
Dog Kennel. Any premises where three or more dogs, over six months of age, are
owned, boarded, bred, or offered for sale.
Dwelling. A building or portion thereof, designated exclusively for residential
occupancy, including one-family, two-family, and multiple family dwellings, but
not including hotels, motels, boarding houses, or manufactured housing.
Dwelling, Multiple (Apartment). A building designed with three (3) or more
dwelling units exclusively for occupancy by three (3) or more families living
independently of each other, but sharing hallways and main entrances and exits.
A two-family dwelling (duplex) with a separate rooming unit(s) shall be
considered and classified as a multiple family dwelling.
Dwelling, Single-Family. A dwelling unit designed exclusively for occupancy by
one (1) family.
   a.   Attached: A dwelling which is joined to another at one or more sides by
a party wall.
   b.   Detached: A dwelling unit not attached to another dwelling or structure
or is entirely surrounding by open space.
Dwelling, Two-Family.  A residence designed for or occupied by two (2) families
only, with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each. A two-family
dwelling (duplex) with a separate rooming unit(s) shall be considered and
classified as a multi-family dwelling.
   a.   Double Bungalow: A two-family dwelling with two (2) units side-by-side.
   b.   Duplex: A two-family dwelling unit with one (1) unit above the other.
Dwelling Site.  A designated location for residential use by one or more
persons using temporary or movable shelter, including camping and recreational
vehicle sites.
Dwelling Unit. A residential building or portion thereof intended for occupancy
by one (1) or more persons with facilities for living, sleeping, cooking and
eating, but not including hotels, motels, nursing homes, seasonal cabins,
boarding or rooming houses, resorts, tourist homes, or trailers.
Dwelling Unit Occupancy. Occupancy of a dwelling unit for the purpose of
enforcing provisions of this Chapter shall be limited by restrictions as
included in the definition of family in this Section.
Dwelling Unit, Temporary. A residence allowed for a specific time which is
intended for occupancy by one (1) or more persons with facilities for living,
sleeping, cooking and eating. Temporary dwelling units shall not include
garages, tents, or accessory buildings.
Essential Services. Overhead or underground electrical, gas, steam or water
transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or
disposal systems used by public utilities or governmental departments or
commissions or as are required for the protection of the public health, safety,
or general welfare, including towers, poles, wires, substations, mains, drains,
sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, reservoirs, wells, elevated tanks, fire alarm
boxes, police call boxes, and other similar equipment and accessories in
connection therewith, but not including buildings, except those buildings that
are an integral part of the essential service.
Family. An individual or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage,
adoption or a group of not more than five (5) persons who need not be related
by blood or marriage living together in a dwelling unit.
Farm Winery. A winery operated by the owner of a Minnesota farm producing
table, sparkling or fortified wines from grapes, grape juice, other fruit bases
or honey with a majority of the ingredients produced on the premises.
(Ordinance 15-02, adopted February 24, 2015)
Fence. Any partition, structure, wall, or gate erected as a dividing marker,
barrier, or enclosure and located along the boundary or within the required lot
area.
Flood Related.
   a.   Accessory Use or Structure. A use or structure on the same lot with,
and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or
structure.
   b.   Basement. Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its
floor or base sub-grade (belowground level) on all four sides, regardless of
the depth of excavation below ground level.
   c.   Conditional Use. A specific type of structure or land use listed in the
official control that may be allowed but only after an in-depth review
procedure and with appropriate conditions or restrictions as provided in the
official zoning controls or building codes and upon finding that: (1) Certain
conditions as detailed in the Zoning Ordinance exist and (2) the structure and/
or land use conform to the comprehensive land use plan if one exists and are
compatible with the existing neighborhood.
   d.   Equal Degree of Encroachment. A method of determining the location of
floodway boundaries so that flood plain lands on both sides of a stream are
capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.
   e.   Flood. A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the
stage of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry
areas.
   f.   Flood Frequency. The frequency for which it is expected that a specific
flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
   g.   Flood Fringe. That portion of the flood plain outside of the floodway.
Flood fringe is synonymous with the term “floodway fringe” used in the Flood
Insurance Study for the City.
   h.   Flood Plain. The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland,
watercourse or lake which have been or hereafter maybe covered by the regional
flood.
   i.   Flood-Proofing. A combination of structural provisions, adjustments or
changes to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the
reduction or elimination of flood damages.
   j.   Floodway. The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse
and those portions of the adjoining flood plain which are reasonably required
to carry or store the regional flood discharge.
   k.   Obstruction. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building,
wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across,
or projecting into any channel, watercourse or regulatory flood plain which may
impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself
or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water.
   l.   Principal Use or Structure. Means all uses or structures that are not
accessory uses or structures.
   m.   Reach. A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment
of a stream or river influence by a natural or man-made obstruction. In an
urban area, the segment or a stream or river between two consecutive bridge
crossings would most typically constitute a reach.
   n.   Regional Flood. A flood which is representative of large floods known
to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what
can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100
year recurrence interval. Regional flood is synonymous with the term “base
flood” used in the Flood Insurance Study.
   o.   Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. A point not less than one (1)
foot above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood
elevation caused by encroachments on the flood plain that result from
designation of a floodway.
   p.   Structure. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to
the ground or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings,
factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, travel
trailers/vehicles not meeting the exemption criteria specified in Section
1001.23 and other similar items.
   q.   Variance. A modification of a specific permitted development standard
required in an official control including this ordinance to allow an
alternative development standard not stated as acceptable in the official
control, but only as applied to a particular property for the purpose of
alleviating a hardship, practical difficulty or unique circumstance as defined
and elaborated upon in a community's respective planning and zoning enabling
legislation.
Floor Area, Gross. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of the
building or portion thereof devoted to a particular use, including accessory
storage areas located within selling or working space such as activities, to
the production or processing of goods, or to business or professional offices.
However, the floor area shall not include: basement or cellar floor area other
than area devoted to retailing activities, the production or processing of
goods, or to business or professional offices. The floor area of a residence
shall not include the cellar area.
Funeral Home. An establishment with facilities for the preparation of deceased
human beings for burial or cremation, for the viewing of the body, and for
funeral or celebration of life ceremonies. (Ord. 2025-05, adopted November 25,
2025)
Garage, Private (Residential). An accessory building or accessory portion of
the principal building which is intended for and used to store the private
passenger vehicles and non-commercial trucks not exceeding twelve thousand
(12,000) pounds gross weight, of the family or families resident upon the
premises, and in which no business service or industry is carried on unless
specifically authorized by this Chapter.
Garage, Public. Any garage other than a private garage. May also mean parking
ramp.
Gas Station.  See Motor Fuel Station.
Governing Body. The Rockford City Council.
Grade (Adjacent Ground Elevation). The lowest point of elevation of the
finished surface of the ground between the exterior wall of a building and a
point five feet distant from said wall, or the lowest point of elevation of the
finished surface of the ground between the exterior wall of a building and the
property line if it is less than five feet of a public sidewalk, alley, or
other public way, the grade shall be the elevation of the sidewalk, alley, or
public way.
Group Home. A dwelling principally for boarding; a temporary residence of more
than one family combined as one household.
Home Occupation.  Any occupation or profession of a service character which is
secondary to the main use of the premises and which may generate additional
traffic, parking, dust, noise, disturbance, odor, light, risk/safety, excessive
use of resources (such as water, etc.); which alters or changes the character
of the single family dwelling unit in any manner; exhibits any exterior
evidence of the home occupation or any home occupation in which customers or
delivery persons in excess call at the single family dwelling.
Hotel (Motel). Any building or portion thereof where lodging is offered to
transient guests for compensation and in which there are more than three
sleeping rooms, with no cooking facilities in an individual room or apartment.
Impervious Surface. A constructed hard surface that either prevents or retards
the entry of water into the soil and causes water to run off the surface in
greater quantities and at an increased rate of flow than prior to development.
Examples include rooftops, decks and asphalt, concrete, paver stone and gravel
surfaces including sidewalks, patios, storage areas and driveways. (Ordinance
15-02, adopted February 24, 2015)
Junk Yard.  An open area where waste, used, or second hand materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled;
including but not limited to, scrap iron and other materials, paper rags,
rubber, tires, lumber, and bottles. A junk yard includes an auto wrecking yard,
but does not include uses established entirely within closed buildings nor
sanitary land fills.
Land Alteration.  The movement of soils by way of grading, filling or
excavation.
Land Reclamation. The process of the re-establishment of acceptable topography
(i.e. slopes), vegetative cover, soil stability and the establishment of safe
conditions appropriate to the subsequent use of the land.
Landscaping. Plantings such as trees, flowers, grass and shrubs and
improvements directly related thereto.
Loading Space. A space or berth on the same lot with a building, or contiguous
to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle
while loading or unloading merchandise or materials and which abuts upon a
street, alley or other appropriate means of access.
Lot. A parcel or portion of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum
zoning requirements for use, coverage and area, and to provide such yards and
other open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on an
improved public street.
Lot Area. The total land area within the lot lines.
Lot, Base. Lots meeting all specifications in the zoning district prior to
being subdivided into a two-family dwelling, townhome, or quadraminium unit lot
subdivision.
Lot, Corner.  A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) streets, the
interior angle of such intersection not exceeding one hundred thirty-five (135)
degrees.
Lot Depth. The distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting the
foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rear most points of the
side lot lines in the rear.
Lot, Double Frontage.  An interior lot having frontage on two (2) streets.
Lot, Front. The front of a lot shall be considered to be that boundary abutting
a public right-of-way having the least width.
Lot Improvement.  Any building, structure, place, work of art, or other object,
or improvement of the land on which they are situated constituting a physical
betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment.
Lot, Interior. A lot, other than a corner lot, including through or double
frontage lots.
Lot Lines. The lot boundary limits. When a lot line abuts a street, park or
other public property, except an alley, such line shall be known as a street
line and when a lot abuts an alley, it shall be known as an alley line.
Lot Line, Rear.  That boundary of a lot which is opposite the front lot line.
If the rear lot line is less than ten (10) feet in length, or if the lot forms
a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be a line ten (10) feet in length
within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot
line.
Lot Line, Side. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear
lot line.
Lot of Record.  Any lot which is legally established according to applicable
regulations at the time of its creation, which is one unit of a plat heretofore
duly approved and filed, or one unit of an auditor's outlot or a registered
land survey, or a parcel of land not so platted, subdivided or registered but
for which a deed, auditor's subdivision or registered land survey has been
recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds prior to September 26, 1983.
Lot, Substandard. A lot or parcel of land for which a deed has been recorded in
the office of the Wright County Recorder upon or prior to the effective date of
this Chapter which does not meet the minimum lot area, structure setbacks or
other dimensional standards of this Chapter.
Lot, Through. A lot fronting on two parallel streets.
Lot, Unit.  Lots created from the subdivisions of a base lot for two-family
dwelling, townhome, or quadraminium dwelling having different minimum lot size
requirements than the conventional base lots within the zoning district.
Lots Width.  The minimum required horizontal distance between the side lot
lines measured at right angles to the lot depth, at the minimum building
setback line. If no setback line is established, the distance between the side
lot lines measured along the public right-of-way.
Manufactured Home (Mobile Home).  A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which in the traveling mode is eight (8) body feet or more in width
or forty (40) body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is three
hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent
chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing,
heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein.
Manufactured Home Lot.  A section of ground in a manufactured home park not
less than 5,200 square feet, designated as the location of one housing unit,
and all other necessary improvements required by this Section.
Manufactured Home Park.  Any park, court, lot, parcel or tract of land,
designed, improved, maintained or intended for the purpose of supplying a
location for manufactured home units or upon which any manufactured homes are
parked. It shall include all buildings used or intended for use as part of the
equipment thereof, whether a charge is made for the use of the manufactured
home park or not.
Mining. The extraction of sand, gravel, or other material from the land in the
amount of fifty cubic yards or more and removal from the site.
Municipal Water and Sewer Systems.  Utility systems serving a group of
buildings, lots, or an area of the city, with the design and construction of
such utility systems as approved by the City Engineer.
Natural Resource Analysis.  A report in map and text form identifying the
existing natural features of a parcel of land and the relationship of a
proposed use to the existing natural conditions of the parcel.
Non-Conforming Structure, Use or Lot - Illegal. A lot, building, structure,
premise, or use unlawfully established and in violation of regulations
applicable at the time of development or initiation.
Non-Conforming Structure, Use or Lot - Legal.  A lot, building, structure,
premise, or use lawfully established prior to the adoption of this Chapter or
any amendment thereto which does not now conform with the applicable conditions
or provisions of this Chapter for the district in which the structure or use is
located.
Nursery School.  A non-residential facility exclusively providing activities of
an educational or enriching nature for six or more children of up to the age of
six and licensed by the State of Minnesota.
Nursing Home. A private building with facilities for the care of children, the
aged, or the infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders,
but not containing equipment for surgical care or for treatment of disease or
injury. The nursing home shall be licensed by the State Board of Health as
provided for in Minnesota State Statutes.
Occupancy.  The purpose for which a building is used or intended to be used.
The term shall also include the building or room housing such use. Change of
occupancy is not intended to include change of tenants or proprietors.
Open Space.  Any open area not covered by structures, but not limited to the
following uses: required or established yard areas, parking areas, sidewalks,
school walks, trails, recreation areas, water bodies, shorelands, watercourses,
wetlands, groundwater recharge areas, floodplain, floodway, flood fringe,
erodible slopes, woodland, and soils with severe limitation for development.
Parcel. An individual lot or tract of land.
Performance Standard. Criterion established for setbacks, fencing, landscaping,
screening, drainage, accessory buildings, outside storage and to control noise,
odor, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or glare
or heat or other nuisance elements generated by or inherent in uses of land or
buildings.
Person. A natural person, his heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns, and
also includes a firm, partnership, or corporation, its or their successors or
assigns, or the agent of any of the aforementioned.
Planned Unit Development.14  A zoning district that allows a mixing of
buildings and uses can occur which cannot be otherwise addressed under this
section and/or whereby internal site design standard deviations from this
section may be allowed to improve site design and operation.
Prefabricated Home. A non-mobile housing unit that is basically fabricated at a
central factory and transported to a building site where final installations
are made, permanently affixing the module to a foundation on the site.
Railroad Right-of-Way.  A strip of land with railway tracks and auxiliary
facilities for track operation.
Recreational Vehicle.  Includes manufactured homes less than thirty-five (35)
feet in overall length, including those with telescope or fold down, chassis,
mounted campers, house cars, motor homes, tent trailers, slip-in-campers (those
mounted in a pickup truck or similar vehicle), converted buses, and converted
vans used primarily for recreational purposes. Cars used for racing shall not
be included within this definition.
Residential Care Facility.33 Any program, defined by Minnesota statutes section
245A.02, subdivision 14, that provides twenty four (24) hour a day care,
supervision, food, lodging, rehabilitation, training, education, habilitation,
or treatment outside a person's own home, including a nursing home or hospital
that receives public funds, administered by the commissioner of the department
of human services to provide services for five (5) or more persons whose
primary diagnosis is mental retardation or a related condition or mental
illness and who do not have a significant physical or medical problem that
necessitates nursing home care; a program in an intermediate care facility for
four (4) or more persons with mental retardation or a related condition; a
nursing home or hospital that was licensed by the commissioner of the
department of human services on July 1, 1987, to provide a program for persons
with a physical handicap that is not the result of the normal aging process and
considered to be a chronic condition; and chemical dependency or chemical abuse
programs that are located in a hospital or nursing home and receive public
funds for providing chemical abuse or chemical dependency treatment services
under Minnesota statutes 254B. Residential programs include home and community
based services for persons with mental retardation or a related condition that
are provided in or outside of a person's own home.
Restaurant (Class I) Traditional Restaurant.  Food is served to a customer and
consumed by him/her while seated at a counter or table. Cafeteria – Food is
selected by a customer while going through a line and taken to a table or
counter for consumption.
Restaurant (Class II) Fast Food Restaurant. A majority of customers order and
are served their food at a counter and take it to a table or counter where it
is consumed. However, a significant number may take the food outside to eat in
an automobile or off the premises. Drive-In Restaurant – Most customers consume
their food in an automobile, regardless of how it is served. Carry Out and
Delivery Restaurant – Food is prepared for consumption off the premises only.
School.  A building used for the purpose of elementary or secondary education,
which meets all the requirements of compulsory education laws of the State of
Minnesota, and not providing residential accommodations.
Secondary Use. A use which ordinarily is not essentially a permitted or
conditional use within the district; which is within a building containing an
allowable use, which is intended primarily for an allowable use, which is
intended primarily for the use, convenience, and benefit of the principal use
of persons residing, employed, or somehow engaged in activities of the
principal use.
Self-Storage Facility. A facility containing separate and private individual
spaces of varying sizes leased or rented only for the storage of personal
property where and individual renter or leasee control and access an individual
space via its own access door; the facility may also include ancillary
activities such as a facility office, retail sales of moving supplies, and/or
rental of moving vehicles and trailers. (Ordinance 2025-04, adopted July 8,
2025)
Self-Storage Facility, Indoor. A fully enclosed building that is climate
controlled containing separate and private individual spaces of varying sizes
leased or rented only for the storage of personal property where and individual
renter or leasee control and access an individual space via its own access door
that is interior to the building and not directly accessed via an exterior
door; the facility may also include ancillary activities such as a facility
office, retail sales of moving supplies, and/or rental of moving vehicles and
trailers. (Ordinance 2025-04, adopted July 8, 2025)
Semi-Public Use. Uses owned by private or private non-profit organizations
which are open to some, but not all of the public, such as denominational
cemeteries, private schools, clubs, lodges, recreational facilities, churches,
etc.
Sexually Oriented Uses.  Sexually oriented uses include sexually oriented
bookstores, sexually oriented motion picture theaters, sexually oriented motion
picture sales/rentals, sexually oriented mini-motion picture theaters, sexually
oriented massage parlors, sexually oriented steam room/bathhouse/sauna
facilities, sexually oriented companionship establishments, sexually oriented
rap/conversation parlors, sexually oriented health/sport clubs, sexually
oriented cabarets, sexually oriented novelty businesses, sexually oriented
motion picture arcades, sexually oriented modeling studios, sexually oriented
hotels/motels, sexually oriented body painting studios, and other premises,
enterprises, establishments, businesses or places open to some or all members
of the public, at or in which there is an emphasis on the presentation,
display, depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or
“specified anatomical areas” which are capable of being seen by members of the
public. Activities classified as obscene as defined by Minnesota Statutes
§617.241, as may be amended, are not included.
   A.   Specified Anatomical Areas.
      1.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttock, anus, or female breast(s) below a point immediately above the
top of the areola; and
      2.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   B.   Specified Sexual Activities.
      1.   Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal
intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of
unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual
relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual
relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct:
anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio,
necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or
      2.   Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation,
arousal or tumescence; or
      3.   Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus,
or masturbation; or
      4.   Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks,
or female breast; or
      5.   Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, clad
in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, and who are engaged in
activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other
physical restraint of any such persons; or
      6.   Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually-oriented contact
with an animal by a human being; or
      7.   Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal
irrigation.
   C.   Sexually Oriented Uses - Accessory. The offering of retail goods for
sale which are classified as Sexually oriented uses on a limited scale and
which are incidental to the primary activity and goods and/or services offered
by the establishment. Examples of such items include the sale of Sexually-
oriented magazines, the sale and/or rental of Sexually-oriented motion
pictures, the sale of Sexually-oriented novelties, and the like.
   D.   Sexually Oriented Uses - Principal. The offering of goods and/or
services which are classified as Sexually oriented uses as a primary or sole
activity of a business or establishment and include but are not limited to the
following:
      1.   Sexually Oriented Use - Body Painting Studio. An establishment or
business which provides the service of applying paint or other substance,
whether transparent or non-transparent, to or on the body of a patron when such
body is wholly or partially nude in terms of “specified anatomical areas”.
      2.   Sexually Oriented Use - Bookstore. A building or portion of a
building used for the barter, rental or sale of items consisting of printed
matter, pictures, slides, records, audio tape, videotape, or motion picture
film if such building or portion of a building is not open to the public
generally but only to one or more classes of the public excluding any minor by
reason of age or if a substantial or significant portion of such items are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description
of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.
      3.   Sexually Oriented Use - Cabaret. A building or portion of a building
used for providing dancing or other live entertainment, if such building or
portion of a building excludes minors by virtue of age or if such dancing or
other live entertainment is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
the presentation, display, depiction or description of “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.
      4.   Sexually Oriented Use - Companionship Establishment. A companionship
establishment which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the
service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion between
an employee of the establishment and a customer, if such service is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities”
or “specified anatomical areas”.
      5.   Sexually Oriented Use -Conversation/Rap Parlor. A conversation/rap
parlor which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the service of
engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or discussion, if such service
is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.
      6.   Sexually Oriented Use - Escort Service. A business that provides one
or more persons to accompany a customer to places and/or activities that occur
off-premises of the escort service operation, if such service is distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas”.
      7.   Sexually Oriented Use - Health/Sport Club. A health/sport club which
excludes minors by reason of age, or if such club is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas”.
      8.   Sexually Oriented Use - Hotel or Motel. Sexually oriented hotel or
motel means a hotel or motel from which minors are specifically excluded from
patronage and wherein material is presented which is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
"specified sexual activities" or “specified anatomical areas”.
      9.   Sexually Oriented Use - Massage Parlor. Health Club. A massage
parlor or health club which restricts minors by reason of age, and which
provides the services of massage, if such service is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas”.
      10.   Sexually Oriented Use – Mini-Motion Picture Theater. A building or
portion of a building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for
presenting material if such building or portion of a building as a prevailing
practice excludes minors by virtue of age, or if such material is distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas” for observation by patrons therein.
      11.   Sexually Oriented Use - Modeling Studio. An establishment whose
major business is the provision, to customers, of figure models who are so
provided with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual
gratification to such customers and who engage in “specified sexual activities”
or display “specified anatomical areas” while being observed, painted, painted
upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted by such
customers.
      12.   Sexual Oriented Use - Motion Picture Arcade. Any place to which the
public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug operated or electronically,
electrically or mechanically controlled or operated still or motion picture
machines, projectors or other image producing devices are maintained to show
images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the
images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
depicting or describing “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas”.
      13.   Sexually Oriented Use -Motion Picture Theater. A building or
portion of a building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting
material if such building or portion of a building as a prevailing practice
excludes minors by virtue of age or if such material is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or “specified
anatomical areas” for observation by patrons therein.
      14.   Sexually Oriented Use - Novelty Business. A business which has as a
principal activity the sale of devices which stimulate human genitals or
devices which are designed for sexual stimulation.
      15.   Sexually Oriented Use - Sauna. A sauna which excludes minors by
reason of age, or which provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the
purpose of bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a
cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by the sauna is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities”
or “specified anatomical areas”.
Sexually Oriented Use - Steam Room/Bathhouse Facility.5  A building or portion
of a building used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the
purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot
air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent if such building or portion of a
building restricts minors by reason of age or if the service provided by the
steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.
Shoreland Related:27
Building line. A line parallel to a lot line or the ordinary high water level
at the required setback beyond which a structure may not extend.
Bluff. A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff, or embankment having all of
the following characteristics. An area with an average slope of less than 18
percent over a distance for fifty (50) feet or more shall not be considered
part of the bluff:
   a.   Part of all of the feature is located in a shoreland area.
   b.   The slope rises at least twenty-five (25) feet above the ordinary high
water level of the water body.
   c.   The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a point twenty-five
(25) feet or more above the ordinary high water level averages thirty (30)
percent or greater.
   d.   The slope must drain toward the water body.
Drainage. The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains,
grading or other means which include runoff controls to minimize erosion and
sedimentation during and after construction or development, the means for
preserving the water supply and the prevention or alleviation of flooding.
Drainageway. Any natural or artificial watercourse, trench, ditch, swale or
similar depression into which surface water flows.
Easement. A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner
to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation or another person or entity.
Impervious Surface. A constructed hard surface that either prevents or retards
the entry of water into the soil and causes water to run off the surface in
greater quantities and at an increased rate of flow than prior to development.
Examples include rooftops, sidewalks, patios, storage areas, and concrete,
asphalt or gravel driveways.
Shoreland. Land located within the following distances from public waters: one
thousand (1000) feet from the ordinary high water level of a lake, pond or
flowage and three hundred (300) feet from a river or stream or the landward
extent of a floodplain down a river or stream, whichever is greater. The limits
of shorelands may be reduced whenever the waters involved are bounded by
topographic divides which extend landward from the waters for lesser distances
and when approved by the Commissioner of Natural Resources.
Shoreland Impact Zone. Land located between the ordinary high water level of a
public water and a line parallel to it at a setback of fifty (50) percent of
the structure setback.
Watercourse. Any natural or man-made passageway on the surface of the earth so
situated and having such a topographical nature that surface water stands or
flows through it from other areas. The term includes ponding areas, drainage
channels, swales, waterways, creeks, rivers, lakes, streams, wetland areas, and
any other open surface water flow which is the result of storm water or ground
water discharge. This term does not include man-made piping systems commonly
referred to as storm sewers.
Sign Related:
Abandoned Sign. Any sign and/or its supporting sign structure which remains
without a message or whose display surface remains blank for a period of one
(1) year or more, or any sign which pertains to a time, event or purpose which
no longer applies, shall be deemed to have been abandoned. Signs applicable to
a business temporarily suspended because of a change in ownership or management
of such business shall not be deemed abandoned unless the property remains
vacant for a period of one (1) year or more. Any sign remaining after
demolition of a principal structure shall be deemed to be abandoned. Signs
which are present because of being legally established nonconforming signs or
signs which have required a conditional use permit or a variance shall also be
subject to the definition of abandoned sign.
Awning.28  A roof-like cover, often of fabric, plastic, metal or glass designed
and intended for protection from the weather or as a decorative embellishment,
and which projects from a wall or roof of a structure primarily over a window,
walk, or the like. Any part of an awning which also projects over a door shall
be counted as an awning.
Awning Sign.28  A building sign or graphic printed on or in some fashion
attached directly to the awning material.
Balloon Sign.28  A sign consisting of a bag made of lightweight material
supported by helium, hot, or pressurized air which is greater than twenty-four
(24) inches in diameter.
Building Sign.28  Any sign attached or supported by any building.
Canopy.28   A roof-like cover, often of fabric, plastic, metal, or glass on a
support, which provides shelter over a doorway.
Canopy Sign.28  Any sign that is part of or attached to a canopy, made of
fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door or entrance. A
canopy sign is not a marquee and is different from service area canopy signs.
Changeable Copy Sign.28   A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters,
or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or
the surface of the sign. Changeable copy signs do not include signs upon which
characters, letters, or illustrations change or rearrange only once in a 24-
hour period.
Commercial Speech.28  Speech advertising a business, profession, commodity,
service or entertainment.
Elevation.28  The view of the side, front, or rear of a given structure(s).
Elevation Area.28  The area of all walls that face any lot line.
Erect.29  Activity of constructing, building, raising, assembling, placing,
affixing, attaching, creating, painting, drawing or any other way of bringing
into being or establishing.
Flag.28  Any fabric or similar lightweight material attached at one end of the
material, usually to a staff or pole, so as to allow movement of the material
by atmospheric changes and which contains distinctive colors, patterns,
symbols, emblems, insignia, or other symbolic devices.
Flashing Sign.28  A directly or indirectly illuminated sign which exhibits
changing light or color effect by any means, so as to provide intermittent
illumination which includes the illusion of intermittent flashing light by
means of animation. Also any mode of lighting which resembles zooming,
twinkling, or sparkling.
Freestanding Sign.28  Any sign which has supporting framework that is placed
on, or anchored in, the ground and which is independent from any building or
other structure.
Grade.28   Grade shall be construed to be the final ground elevation after
construction. Earth mounding criteria for landscaping and screening is not part
of the final grade for sign height computation.
Ground Sign.28  Any freestanding sign with its sign face mounted on the ground
or mounted on a base at least as wide as the sign and which has a total height
not exceeding eight (8) feet.
Height of Sign.28  The height of the sign shall be computed as the vertical
distance measured from the base of the sign at grade to the top of the highest
attached component of the sign.
Illuminated Sign.28  Any sign which contains an element designed to emanate
artificial light internally or externally.
Marquee.28  Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a theater
building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of that building,
generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.
Marquee Sign.28  Any building sign painted, mounted, constructed or attached in
any manner, on a marquee.
Non-Commercial Speech.28  Dissemination of messages not classified as
commercial speech which include, but are not limited to, messages concerning
political, religious, social, ideological, public service and informational
topics.
Off-Premises Sign.28  A commercial speech sign which directs the attention of
the public to a business, activity conducted, or product sold or offered at a
location not on the same lot where such sign is located. For purposes of this
sign ordinance, easements and other appurtenances shall be considered to be
outside such lot and any sign located or proposed to be located in an easement
or other appurtenance shall be considered an off-premises sign.
Owner.28  In the case of a lot, the legal owner of the lot as officially
recorded by the applicable county, and including fee owners, contract for deed
purchasers and ground lessees. In the case of a sign, the owner of the sign
including any lessees.
Pole Sign.28  See Pylon Sign.
Portable Sign.28  Any sign which is manifestly designed to be transported,
including by trailer or on its own wheels, even though the wheels of such sign
may be removed and the remaining chassis or support is converted to another
sign or attached temporarily or permanently to the ground since this
characteristic is based on the design of such a sign.
Projecting Sign.28  Any sign which is affixed to a building or wall in such a
manner that its leading edge extends more than two (2) feet beyond the surface
of such building or wall face.
Public Notices.28   Official notices posted by public officers, employees or
their agents in the performance of their duties, or as directed by such
officers, employees or agents.
Public Street Right-of-Way.28  The entire right-of-way of any public street.
Pylon Sign.28  Any freestanding sign which has its supportive structure(s)
anchored in the ground and which has a sign face elevated above ground level by
pole(s) or beam(s) and with the area below the sign face open.
Residential District.28  Any district zoned for residential uses.
Roof.28  The exterior surface and its supporting structure on the top of a
building or structure. The structural make-up of which conforms to the roof
structures, roof construction and roof covering sections of the International
Building Code.
Roof Line.28  The upper-most edge of the roof or in the case of an extended
facade or parapet, the upper-most height of said facade.
Roof Sign.28  Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and above the roof of
a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically above the
highest portion of the roof.
Roof Sign, Integral.28  Any building sign erected or constructed as an integral
or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, so that
no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof
and so that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a
space of more than six (6) inches.
Rotating Sign.28  A sign or portion of a sign which turns about on an axis.
Shimmering Sign.28  A sign which reflects an oscillating sometimes distorted
visual image.
Sign.28  Any letter, word or symbol, poster, picture, statuary, reading matter
or representation in the nature of advertisement, announcement, message or
visual communication, whether painted, posted, printed, affixed or constructed,
including all associated brackets, braces, supports, wires and structures,
which is displayed for informational or communicative purposes.
Sign Face.28  The surface of the sign upon, against, or through which the
message of the sign is exhibited.
Sign Structure.28  Any structure including the supports, uprights, bracing and
framework which supports or is capable of supporting any sign.
Sign, Surface Area. The entire area within a single, continuous perimeter
enclosing the extreme limits of the actual sing surface. It does not include
any structural elements outside of the limits of such sign and not forming an
integral part of the display. Only one side of a double-face or V-shaped sign
structure shall be used in computing total surface area.
Site.28  A lot or combination of contiguous lots which are intended,
designated, and/or approved to function as an integrated unit.
Suspended Sign.28  Any building sign that is suspended from the underside of a
horizontal plane surface and is connected to this surface.
Total Site Signage.28  The maximum permitted combined area of all signs allowed
on a specific lot.
Visible.28  Capable of being seen by a person of normal visual acuity (whether
legible or not) without visual aid.
Wall.28   Any structure which defines the exterior boundaries or courts of a
building or structure and which has a slope of sixty (60) degrees or greater
with the horizontal plane.
Wall Sign.28   Any building sign attached parallel to, but within two (2) feet
of a wall, painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined within the
limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by
such wall or building, and which displays only one (1) sign surface.
Window Sign.28   Any building sign, pictures, symbol, or combination thereof,
designed to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity,
event, sale, or service, that is placed inside a window or upon the window
panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.
Significant Tree.13  A healthy tree measuring at least six inches (6”) in
diameter for deciduous trees or twelve (12) feet in height for coniferous
trees.
Site Plan. A map drawn to scale depicting the development of a tract of land,
including, but not limited to, the location and relationship of structures,
streets, driveways, recreation areas, parking areas, utilities, landscaping,
and walkways, as related to a proposed development.
Story.  That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any
floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, including below ground
portions of earth sheltered buildings, except that the topmost story shall be
that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost
floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level directly above
a basement, or unused under floor space is more than six (6) feet above grade
as defined herein for more than fifty (50) percent of the total perimeter or is
more than twenty (12) feet above grade as defined herein at any point, such
basement or unused under floor space shall be considered as a story.
Street.  A public right-of-way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a
highway, thoroughfare, arterial, parkway, collector, through-way, road, avenue,
boulevard, lane, place, drive, court or otherwise designated, which has been
dedicated or deeded to the public for public use and which affords principal
means of access to abutting property.
Street-Collector.  Collector roadways connect neighborhoods within and between
sub-regions and distribute traffic between arterials and local streets. Parking
is restricted as necessary and posted speed limits typically range between 30
and 45 mph. Collector streets typically should have two driving lanes, two
parking lanes, and a bicycle/pedestrian surface if necessary. Collector streets
are typically spaced 0.25-1.0 miles apart. Traffic control typically involves
local street stops, four-way stops, and some traffic signals. Collectors
typically carry 1,000 - 15,000 vehicles per day.
Street-Local.  Local streets provide direct land access within neighborhoods
and other homogeneous land use areas and provide connections to collector
streets. Parking is usually unrestricted, the posted speed limit is 30 mph or
less, and streets are two lanes wide plus space for parking. Traffic control is
most likely to involve strategies such as stop signs, cul-de-sacs, and
diverters. Local streets typically carry about 1,000 vehicles or less per day.
Residential streets typically carry about ten (10) trips per household per day.
Street-Minor Arterial.  Minor arterials connect adjacent sub-regions and
activity centers within sub-regions. Land access is usually restricted and
trips are somewhat longer than on collector streets. Parking is often
restricted and the posted speed limit is 35-45 mph. Width is dependent on the
volume carried. Minor arterials are typically spaced 0.5 - 2.0 miles apart.
Traffic control typically includes traffic signal timing and land access
spacing. Typical traffic volumes range from 5,000 to 30,000 ADT.
Street-Intermediate Arterial.  Intermediate arterials function at a level
between the minor arterial and major arterial categories. Intermediate
arterials are not limited access facilities but serve primarily trips between
rather than within sub-regions.
Street Pavement. The wearing or exposed surface of a street or roadway used by
vehicular traffic.
Street-Principal (Major, Arterial). Major arterials provide a high level of
mobility between sub-regions, serving medium to long distance trips. Principal
arterials are grade separated or have high capacity controlled at-grade
intersections. No parking is permitted, the posted speed limit is typically 40-
55 mph and traffic volumes range from 10,000 to 50,000 ADT. Major arterials are
typically spaced one to three miles apart.
Street Width.  The shortest distance between the lines delineating the right-
of-way of a street.
Structure. Anything which is built, constructed or erected; an edifice or
building of any kind; or any piece of work artificially built up and/or
composed of parts joined together in some definite manner whether temporary or
permanent in character. Among other things, structures include buildings,
manufactured homes, walls, fences, swimming pools, billboards and poster
panels.
Townhouses. Structure housing three (3) or more dwelling units contiguous to
each other only by the sharing of one (1) common wall, such structures to be of
the town or row houses type as contrasted to multiple apartment structures.
Tree Protection.13  Snow fencing or polyethylene laminar safety netting placed
at the drip-line of the significant trees to be preserved. Tree protection
measures shall remain in place until all grading and construction activity is
terminated.
Undue Hardship.33 The same as that term is defined in Minnesota statutes
chapter 462.357, as may be amended, meaning that the property in question
cannot be put to a reasonable use if used under the conditions allowed by the
Zoning Ordinance.
Use.  The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is
designated, arranged, or intended or for which it is occupied, utilized or
maintained, and shall include the performance of such activity as defined by
the performance standards of this Chapter.
Variance.33  A modification of the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance
consistent with Minnesota statutes chapter 462.357, as applied to a specific
property and granted pursuant to the standards and procedures established by
the Zoning Ordinance.
Yard.  An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and
unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as
otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining
the width of a side yard, the mean horizontal distance between the lot line and
main building shall be used.
Yard, Depth of. The mean horizontal distance between the line of a building and
the street or alley right-of-way where one exists; otherwise, a lot line.
Yard, Front. A yard extending across any street frontage of a lot between the
side lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between any street
line and main building or any projections thereof other than the projections of
the usual steps, entrance-way, unenclosed balconies, or open porch.
Yard. Rear. A yard extending across the rear of a lot, measured between the
side lot lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot
line and the rear of the main building or any projections other than steps,
unenclosed balconies, or unenclosed porches. On corner lots, the rear yard
shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least
dimension. On both corner lots and interior lots, the rear yard shall in all
cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
Yard, Required. That distance specified in the yard requirements pertaining to
setbacks. Setbacks and required yards are used interchangeably.
Yard, Side. A yard between the principal building and the side line of the lot
extending from the front lot line of the lot to the rear yard.
Yard Waste Compost Facility. A site used to compost yard waste materials,
including all structures or processing equipment used to control drainage;
collect and treat leachate; and storage areas for the incoming waste, the final
product, and residuals resulting from the composing process.
Yard Waste Materials. Garden wastes, leaves, lawn cuttings, weeds and pruning
generated by residential or commercial properties.
Zoning Administrator. The duly appointed officer charged with the
administration and enforcement of this Chapter.
Zoning District. An area or areas of the City (as delineated on the Zoning Map)
set aside for specific uses with specific regulations and provisions for use
and development as defined by this Chapter.
Zoning District Overlay.  A zoning district containing regulations superimposed
upon other zoning district regulations and superseding the underlying zoning
district use regulations.
Zoning District Underlying (Base). All zoning districts except overlay zoning
districts.
Zoning Map. The map or maps incorporated into this Chapter as part thereof,
designating the zoning districts.
1001.03 ADMINISTRATION AND FEES
Subd. 1.   Administrative Procedure.  All proposed developments shall conform
with the provisions of this subdivision when requesting platting, rezoning, or
site plan approval.
   A.   Upon application for rezoning and platting of a parcel of land, the
petitioner shall present a general development plan. This plan shall be a
conceptual rendering only and shall not require the fine detail of a site plan.
The general development plan shall be drawn to scale with topography of a
contour interval not greater than two feet and showing the following:
      1.   The proposed site with showing existing development on adjacent
properties within two hundred (200) feet.
      2.   General location of proposed structures.
      3.   Tentative street arrangements, both public and private.
      4.   Amenities to be provided such as recreational areas, open space,
walkways, etc.
      5.   Tentative plat showing proposed streets and parks in relationship to
the proposed development.
      6.   General location of parking areas.
      7.   Proposals for availability of public sanitary sewer, water, and
storm drainage.
   B.   A public hearing as required in this Chapter shall be scheduled before
the Planning Commission. Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission
shall make recommendation to the Council.
   C.   The Council shall then consider the rezoning request.
   D.   If the zoning change is approved, the general development plan shall be
attached to and is a part of the chapter establishing the zoning change.
   E.   Thereafter, changes in the general development plan will not be allowed
without review by the Planning commission and approval by the council.
   F.   Before building permits are issued, a site plan shall be reviewed by
the Planning Commission and approved by the Council.
   G.   The site plan shall be based upon an accurate certified survey; shall
be prepared by or under the supervision of an architect and/or engineer
registered in the State of Minnesota, and shall contain the following
information: site plans shall be approved if they show conformity to this code,
the comprehensive plan and all other application regulations.
      1.   Complete details of the proposed site development including, but not
limited to, identification signs, location of buildings, streets, driveways,
parking spaces, dimensions of the lot, lot area and yard dimensions.
      2.13   Complete landscaping plans reflecting all information and
standards set forth, including species and showing planting size and mature
size of trees and shrubs proposed. For significant trees to be saved, location,
species, diameter, and tree protection methods must be identified on the
landscape plan.
      3.   Plans and specifications for fences, walls, and other buffers as
required herein.
      4.   Complete plans for proposed sidewalks or walkways to service
parking, recreation and service areas within the proposed development.
      5.   Complete plans and specifications for exterior wall finishes
proposed for all principal and accessory buildings.
      6.   Complete plans for storage areas for waste and garbage.
      7.   Complete utility plans and fire protection plans.
   H.   Properties in the City presently zoned in the R-2, RM, or any of the
non-residential districts which are not presently developed shall be required
to follow the site plan review procedures of Paragraph 7 above before the
development shall occur. All general development plans and/or site plans which
have been approved by Council action shall comply with all applicable
regulations which are in effect at the time a building permit is applied for,
provided that within six months of the date of said general development plan or
site plan approval or a development contract, a building permit has been
executed. If not executed within six months, the City regulation in effect at
the time of the approval of said site plan or general development plan or
development contract shall apply. Developments which require and which have
received site plan approval by the Council, but for which no building permits
have been applied for and issued within one year of council approval shall be
considered null and void and shall be subject to the site plan re-approval
requirements of this section; provided that within one year of the original
Council approval, the original petitioner may request in writing an extension
of not more than six months.
   J.   Proposed minor structural additions involving 10% or less of the total
existing floor area which meet all requirements may be approved by the zoning
administrator prior to a building permit being issued and shall not require
Planning Commission or Council action.
   K.   Financial Guarantee.
      1.   Following the approval of the site plan required in this subdivision
and before issuance of a building permit, the developer shall guarantee to the
City the completion of all private exterior amenities as shown in the site
plan. Such amenities are hereby defined as landscaping, private driveways,
parking areas, recreational facilities, drainage systems, and other similar
facilities.
      2.   The guarantee shall be in the form of a cash deposit or irrevocable
letter of credit.
      3.   A cash deposit or irrevocable letter of credit shall be in the
amount of 125% of the estimated cost of such amenities of such estimated costs.
      4.   The time allowed for completion of such private exterior amenities
shall be set out in the resolution approving the site plan and the guarantee
shall provide for its forfeit to the city in the event such completion date is
not met by the developer. For good cause shown, the Council may extend the time
for completion, in which event the developer shall provide a like guarantee for
the extended period.
      6.   As various portions of such amenities are completed by the developer
and approved by the city, the city may release such portion of the guarantee as
is attributable to such completed work. The developer shall notify the City in
writing, that the improvements have been completed and may be inspected.
      7.   Any instrument, submitted as a financial guarantee of completion of
required site improvements, which contains provision for an automatic
expiration date after which the instrument may not be drawn upon,
notwithstanding the status of the required improvements, shall contain the
following statement requiring notice to the city: It is a condition of this
financial guarantee that it shall be deemed automatically extended without
change for six months from the present or any future expiration date(s) unless
sixty days prior to the expiration date(s) we shall notify the city in writing
by certified mail that we elect not to consider this financial guarantee
renewed for an additional period.
   L.   On development proposals requiring site plan review pursuant to this
section, the Council, upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission, shall
act as the Board of Zoning Appeals and adjustments with respect to variances
from this chapter proposed by the site plan in accordance with the findings in
this section.
   M.   Fees for plat approval and lot division are set forth in
Chapter 212. Applications for the foregoing must be accompanied by the fee.
   N.   Whenever a variance, conditional use permit, rezoning and/or
preliminary plat application has been considered and denied by the City Council
and/or Planning and Zoning Commission, a similar application and proposal for
variance, conditional use permit, rezoning, and/or preliminary plat affecting
the same property shall not be considered again by the Planning and Zoning
Commission or City Council for at least six (6) months from the date of its
denial, except as follows:
      1.   If the applicant or property owner can clearly demonstrate that the
circumstances surrounding the previous application have changed significantly.
      2.   If the City Council/Planning and Zoning Commission determines that
the circumstances surrounding a previous application have changed
significantly.
      3.6   Application to reconsider a similar application previously denied
by the City Council or Planning and Zoning Commission within one (1) year from
the date of denial shall require a four-fifths (4/5s) vote of the City Council
or Planning and Zoning Commission.
(Subd. 1 amended by Ordinance 2025-04, adopted July 8, 2025)
Subd. 2.   Zoning Administrator. The office of Zoning Administrator is hereby
established. The Council may appoint as many persons as it deems necessary to
carry out the duties of the office, which duties shall include the following:
   A.   Issue certificates of occupancy and maintain records thereof.
   B.   Periodically inspect buildings, structures, and uses of land to
determine compliance with the terms of this chapter.
   C.   Notify, in writing, any person responsible for violating a provision of
this chapter, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action
necessary to correct it.
   D.   Order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures;
order removal of illegal buildings, structures, additions, alterations; order
discontinuance of illegal work being done, or take any other action authorized
by this chapter to insure compliance with or to prevent violation of its
provisions, including all maps, amendments, conditional uses and variances.
   E.   Maintain permanent and current records of the zoning ordinance,
including all maps, amendments, conditional uses and variances.
   F.   Maintain a current file of all permits, all certificates and all copies
of notices of violation, discontinuance, or removal for such -time as necessary
to insure a continuous compliance with the provisions of this chapter and, on
request, provide information to any person having a proprietary or tenancy
interest in any specific property.
   G.   Provide clerical and technical assistance to the Planning Commission
and Board of Zoning Adjustment and Appeals.
   H.   Submit each month to the Planning Commission an itemized summary of
certificates and permits granted and other significant activity of the
preceding month.
   I.   Receive, file, and forward to the Board of Zoning Adjustment and
Appeals or Planning Commission all applications for conditional use permits,
variances, amendments or development plans as required herein.
   Subd. 3.    Board of Zoning Adjustment and Appeals.
   A.   Creation and Membership. A Board of Zoning Adjustment and Appeals is
hereby established and vested with such administrative authority as is
hereinafter provided. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall serve as the
Board of Zoning Adjustment and Appeals.
   B.   Powers. The Board shall have power to hear appeals from administrative
determinations and questions of doubt concerning the exact location of district
boundary lines, to hear appeals of administrative determinations from and to
grant adjustment in and exceptions to any of the provisions of this chapter,
except those adjustments and exceptions governed by Council determination, to
the extent of the following, and no further:
      1.   To consider applications for variance and modifications in any of
the provisions of this chapter relating to:
         a.   Height, yard, area, and lot width and depth regulations.
         b.   Sign regulations providing that no such variance may be granted
contrary to the requirements of the Minnesota Outdoor advertising Control Act
and provided further that no variances shall be granted to permit signs in
districts or locations where such signs are prohibited.
         c.   Parking and loading regulations.
         d.   Fence regulations.
         e.   Minimum floor area requirements.
         f.   District boundary lines for special protection districts provided
the purpose and intent of the districts are maintained and the provisions of
this chapter are given due consideration.
      2.   The decision of the Board shall be final subject only to the right
of an applicant to appeal such decisions to the Council. Notice of such appeal
must be filed with the zoning administrator within a period of twenty days from
and after a copy of the board's order has been mailed to the applicant at the
address furnished by the applicant in the application.
Subd. 4.33   Variances.
   A.   Review Criteria. The board of adjustment shall not approve any variance
request unless they find failure to grant the variance will result in undue
hardship on the applicant, and, as may be applicable, all of the following
criteria have been met:
      1.   That because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or
topographical conditions of the specific parcel of land involved, a particular
hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience,
if the strict letter of the regulations were to be carried out.
      2.    That the conditions upon which an application for a variance is
based are unique to the parcel of land for which the variance is sought and are
not applicable, generally, to other property within the same zoning
classification.
      3.    That the purpose of the variance is not based exclusively upon a
financial hardship, or a desire to increase the value or income potential of
the parcel of land.
      4.    That the alleged hardship is caused by the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance and has not been created by any persons having an interest in the
parcel of land and is not a self-created hardship.
      5.    That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other land or improvements in the neighborhood
in which the parcel of land is located.
      6.    That the proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of
light and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the congestion of
the public streets, or increase the danger of fire, or endanger the public
safety.
      7.    That the requested variance is the minimum action required to
eliminate the hardship.
      8.    Does not involve a use which is not allowed within the respective
zoning district.
   B.   Procedure. Application for the adjustment permissible under the
provisions of this section shall be made to the Zoning Administrator, in the
form of a written application. An application for an adjustment shall be
accompanied by payment of a fee, as established within this Section. Upon
receipt of any application, such officer shall set a time and place for a
hearing before the board on such application. At least ten days before the date
of the hearing, a notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the applicant and to
all property owners within 350 feet of the affected property and to other
persons who, in the judgment of the Zoning Administrator, may be affected by a
decision of the Board; although failure of such owners to receive notice shall
not invalidate the proceedings. Notice of the purpose, time, and place of such
public hearing shall be published in the City's official newspaper at least ten
(10) days prior to the date of the hearing.
   C.   Conditions of Approval. In granting any adjustment or variance under
the provisions of this subdivision, the Board shall designate such conditions
in connection therewith as will, in its opinion, secure substantially the
objectives of the regulations or provision to which the adjustment or variance
is granted, as to light, air, and the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience, and general welfare.
Subd. 5.   Conditional Uses.  The council may, by resolution, grant conditional
use permits when such permits are authorized by resolution, grant conditional
use permits when such permits are authorized by other sections of this chapter
and may impose conditions and safeguards in such permits to protect the health,
safety, and welfare of the community and assure harmony with the comprehensive
plan of the city.
   A.   Application. An application for a conditional use permit shall be made
by the owners(s) of the property and shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator. All applications shall be accompanied by an administrative fee
as prescribed by this Chapter and shall include the following information:
      1.   A description of the proposed use.
      2.   A legal description of the property including plat and parcel
number.
      3.   A complete site plan, as described in Section
1001.03, provided that in the case of home occupations, an accurate drawing of
the lot may be used.
      4.   A map showing the property in question and all property within 350
feet of the boundaries of the property in question.
      5.   The names and addresses of the owners of record of all property
within 350 feet of the boundaries of the property in question as the same
appears on the records of the County Auditor.
      6.   Any other information required by the Zoning Administrator, Planning
Commission, or Council.
   B.   Referral to the Planning Commission. Before any conditional use permit
may be granted, the application shall be referred to the Planning Commission
for study concerning the effect of the proposed use on the Comprehensive Plan
and the character and development of the neighborhood, and for its
recommendation to the Council for the granting of such conditional use permit
and the conditions thereof, if any, for the denial of such conditional use
permit.
The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposal to issue a
conditional use permit in the manner provided in this Chapter. Following the
Planning commission review/hearing, the Planning Commission shall make a report
upon the proposal to the Council and shall recommend to the Council whatever
action it deems advisable. (Subd. 03 amended by Ordinance 86-4, passed March
25, 1986.)
   C.   Issuance. Upon receipt of the report of the Planning Commission, the
Council may hold a public hearing in the manner provided in this Chapter. In
considering applications for conditional use permits under this chapter, the
Council shall consider the advice and recommendations of the Planning
Commission and the effect of the proposed use upon the health, safety, and
welfare of occupants or surrounding lands, including, but not limited to,
factors of noise, glare, odors, existing and anticipated traffic conditions,
including parking facilities, on adjacent streets, the effect on values of
property in the surrounding area, and the effect of the proposed use on the
Comprehensive Plan. The Council shall also consider whether the applicant has
complied and is likely to comply in the future, with any additional standards
pertinent to the proposed use as set out in other sections of this and any
other chapter of this code. If detrimental to the health, safety or general
welfare of the community and that the same is in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of this chapter and the comprehensive plan, the Council may
grant such permits and may impose conditions and safeguards therein. The Zoning
Administrator shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any
private or public property for the purpose of inspection and investigating.
   The Council may, by resolution, deny a conditional use permit and include
the findings and reasons for denial in the resolution. If the Planning
Commission recommends denial of a conditional use permit, the findings and
reasons shall be set forth in their written report to the Council. (Subd. 04
amended by Ordinance 86-4, passed March 25, 1986.)
   D.   Standards. The Planning Commission shall recommend a conditional use
permit and the Council shall order the issuance of such permit only if it finds
that such use meets at least the following standards at the proposed location:
      1.   Will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the neighborhood or the city.
      2.   Will be harmonious with general and applicable specific objectives
of the Comprehensive Plan of the City and this chapter.
      3.   Will be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained so as to be
harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity and will not change the essential character
of that area.
      4.   Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future
neighboring uses.
      5.   Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and
services, including streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures,
refuse disposal, water and sewer systems, and schools; or will be served
adequately by such facilities and services provided by the persons or agencies
responsible for the establishment of the proposed use.
      6.   Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for
public facilities anal services and will not be detrimental to the economic
welfare of the community.
      7.   Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment,
or conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property,
or the general welfare because of excessive production of traffic, noise,
smoke, fumes, glare, or odors.
      8.   Will have vehicular approaches to the property which are not so
designed to create traffic congestion or an interference with traffic on
surrounding public thoroughfares.
      9.   Will not result in the destruction, loss, or damage of a natural,
scenic, or historic feature of major importance.
      10.   Will conform to specific standards of this chapter applicable to
the particular use.
   E.   Conditions. In recommending or approving any conditional use permit,
the Planning Commission and Council may impose conditions which it considers
necessary to meet the standards of this chapter and to protect the best
interests of the City. These conditions may include; but are not limited to the
following:
      1.   Ingress and egress to property and proposed structures thereon with
particular reference to vehicle and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic
flow and control, and access in case of fire or other catastrophe.
      2.   Off-street parking and loading areas where required, with particular
attention to the items listed above, and the economic, noise, glare, or odor
effects of the conditional use on nearby property.
      3.   Refuse and service areas, with particular reference to the items (A)
and (B) above.
      4.   Utilities, with reference to location, availability, and
compatibility.
      5.   Diking, fencing, screening, landscaping, or other facilities to
protect adjacent or nearby property.
      6.   Signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting with reference to
glare, traffic safety, economic effect, and compatibility and harmony with
properties in the district.
      7.   Required yards and other open space.
      8.   General compatibility with adjacent and other property in the
district.
   F.33   Expiration:
      1.   Unless the City Council specifically approves a different time when
action is officially taken on the request, conditional use permits that have
been issued shall expire without further action by the City Council, unless the
applicant commences the authorized use within twelve (12) months of the date
the conditional use permit is issued unless before the expiration of the twelve
(12) month period, the applicant shall apply for an extension thereof by
completing and submitting a request for extension, including the renewal fee as
established by the City Code. The request for extension shall state facts
showing a good faith attempt to complete or utilize the use permitted in the
conditional use permit. A request for an extension not exceeding twelve (12)
months shall be subject to the review and approval of the Zoning Administrator.
Should a second extension of time or any extension of time longer than twelve
(12) months be requested by the applicant, it shall be presented to the
Planning Commission for a recommendation and to the City Council for a
decision.
      2.   Any use allowed by a conditional user may be continued, including
through repair, replacement, restoration, maintenance, or improvement, but not
including expansion, except as specifically provided in this chapter, unless
the use is discontinued for a period of more than eighteen months; After a
period of non-use of eighteen months, the conditional use permit shall be
deemed to be expired and void. Reestablishment of the use shall be applied for
and as provided for by this Section for issuance of a conditional use permit
and shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
   G.33   Revocation: The Planning Commission may recommend, and the City
Council may direct, the revocation of any conditional use permit for cause upon
determination that the authorized conditional use is not in conformance with
the conditions of the permit or is in continued violation of the Zoning
Ordinance, City Codes, or other applicable regulations. The City Council or
Planning Commission shall initiate an application and the Zoning Administrator
shall notify the responsible person that they have an opportunity to show cause
why the permit should not be revoked. The application shall be processed and
considered pursuant to this Section. The Zoning Administrator shall provide the
responsible person a copy of the proceedings and findings of the Planning
Commission and City Council.
Subd. 6.   Interim Uses.
   A.   Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of allowing interim uses is:
      1.   To allow a use for a brief period of time until a permanent location
is obtained or while the permanent location is under construction.
      2.   To allow a use that is presently judged acceptable by the City
Council, but that with anticipated development or redevelopment, will not be
acceptable in the future or will be replaced in the future by a permitted or
conditional use allowed within the respective district.
      3.   To allow a use which is reflective of anticipated long range change
to an area and which is in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan provided that
said use maintains harmony and compatibility with surrounding uses and is in
keeping with the architectural character and design standards of existing uses
and development.
   B.   Procedure.
   1.   Existing Uses: Uses defined as interim uses which presently exist as a
legal use or a legal nonconforming use within a respective zoning district
shall be considered approved and shall be treated as allowed uses.
      2.   New Uses: Uses defined as interim uses which do not presently exist
within a respective zoning district shall be processed according to the
standards and procedures for a conditional use permit as established by Subd.
05 of this Chapter.
   C.   General Standards. An interim use shall comply with the following:
      1.   Existing Uses: Shall be in conformance with zoning and building
standards in effect at the time of initial construction and development and
shall continue to be governed by such regulations in the future.
      2.   New Uses:
         a.   Meets the standards of a conditional use permit set forth in
Subd. 05.D of this chapter.
         b.   Conforms to the applicable performance standards of this Chapter.
         c.   The use is allowed as an interim use in the respective zoning
district.
         d.   The date or event that will terminate the use can be identified
with certainty.
         e.   The use will not impose additional costs on the public if it is
necessary for the public to take the property in the future.
         f.   The user agrees to any conditions that the City Council deems
appropriate for permission of the use.
   D.   Termination. An interim use shall terminate on the happening of any of
the following events, whichever first occurs:
      1.   The date stated in the permit.
      2.   Upon violation of conditions under which the permit was issued.
      3.   Upon change in the City's zoning regulations which renders the use
non-conforming.
      4.   The redevelopment of the use and property upon which it is located
to a permitted or conditional use as allowed within the respective zoning
district.
Subd. 7.   Amendment.
   A.   Procedure. This code may be amended whenever the public necessity and
convenience and the general welfare require such amendment by following the
procedure specified as follows:
      1.   Proceedings for amendment shall be initiated by (1) a petition of
the owner or owners of the actual property, the zoning of which is proposed to
be changed; (2) a recommendation of the Planning Commission, or (3) by action
of the Council.
      2.   To defray administrative costs of processing of requests for
amendment of a fee, as established by the Council, shall be paid by the
petitioner.
      3.   All applications for changes in the boundaries of any zoning
district which are initiated by the petition of the owner or owners of
property, the zoning of which is proposed to be changed, shall be accompanied
by a map or plat showing the lands proposed to be changed and all lands within
three hundred fifty feet of the boundaries of the property proposed to be
rezoned, together with names and addressed of the owners of the lands in such
area as the same appear on the records of the County Auditor of Hennepin/Wright
County which shall be provided by the petitioner.
      4.   Before any amendment is adopted, the Planning Commission shall hold
at least one public hearing thereon after a notice of the hearing has been
published in the official newspaper at least ten days before the hearing, and,
in the case of district boundary amendments, has been mailed to property owners
within 350 feet of the subject property, although failure of such owners to
receive notice shall not invalidate the proceedings. Following the hearing, the
Planning Commission shall make a report of its findings and recommendation is
transmitted by the Planning Commission within sixty days, after the hearing,
the Council may take action without awaiting such recommendation.
      5.   Upon filing of such report, the Council shall hold such public
hearings on the amendment as it deems advisable. After the conclusion of the
hearings, if any, the Council may adopt the amendment or any part thereof in
such form as it deems advisable.
      6.15   The Council may, by resolution, deny a proposed amendment and
include the findings and reasons for denial in the resolution. If the Planning
commission recommends denial of a proposed amendment, the findings and reasons
shall be set forth in their written report to the Council. Approval of a
proposed amendment shall require a majority vote of the City Council. Approval
of a proposed Zoning Map amendment which changes all or part of the existing
classification of a zoning district from residential to either business,
industrial, or planned unit development that allows for commercial or
industrial uses shall require a four-fifth’s (4/5’s) vote of the City Council.
   B.   Determination of Substantially Similar Use. Any landowner may request a
determination by the Council that a use not included in any district of this
chapter is substantially similar to a use classified as permitted, conditional,
or accessory in the district in which the property is located. An application
for such a determination shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator who shall
refer it to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall consider the
application and shall file its recommendations with the Council. If the Council
determines that the use is substantially similar to a use included in these
regulations, such use shall thereafter be an allowable use whenever the similar
use is authorized.
Subd. 8.   Certificate of Occupancy.
   A.   Application. A certificate of occupancy shall be obtained before any
building hereafter erected or structurally altered is occupied or used; or the
use of any such building is altered.
   B.   Procedure.
      1.16, 32   Application.
         a.   Requests for a certificate of occupancy for a new building or for
an existing building which has been altered shall be made to the Zoning
Administrator as part of the application for a building permit as required in
this section.
         b.   Applications for a building permit and certificate of occupancy
shall include a certificate of survey. Applications for a building permit and
certificate of survey for all single family dwellings shall explicitly show the
proposed home type and driveway location. Both the home type and driveway
location must match that indicated on the approved grading plan unless approved
by the City Engineer.
         c.   No building permit for the erection or alteration of a building
shall be issued before the application has been made for a certificate of
occupancy.
      2.12   Issuance. The Zoning Administrator shall issue a certificate of
occupancy within ten (10) days after the erection or alteration of a building
or part thereof is completed and found to be in conformance with the applicable
provisions of the City Code.
      3.12   Temporary Certificate of Occupancy.
         a.   The Zoning Administrator may issue a temporary certificate of
occupancy for a period not to exceed six (6) months during the completion of
the erection or alteration of a building and required site improvements.
         b.   The temporary certificate of occupancy shall not be respective to
right, duties or obligations of the owners or City relating to the use or the
occupancy of the premises or any other matter except under such restrictions
and provision as will adequately insure the safety of the occupants.
         c.   The City may require a cash escrow or other security for
completion of required improvements necessary for issuance of a certificate of
occupancy. Such security shall be in the amount determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
            1)   Residential Uses, Prior to issuance of a temporary certificate
of occupancy for a residential use, the developer or builder shall provide the
property owner with a certificate of credit from a local area contractor equal
to the costs of materials and labor as determined by the Zoning Administrator
for all exterior improvements not installed due to season, including but not
limited to driveways and landscaping, required by this Chapter or the
development contract.
      4.12   Non-Conforming Uses. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued
for all lawful nonconforming uses of land or buildings. Application for such
certificate of occupancy for a non-conforming use shall be filed with the
Zoning Administrator by the owner or lessee of the building or land occupied by
such non-conforming use by October 1, 1984. It shall be the duty of the Zoning
Administrator to issue a certificate of occupancy for a lawful non-conforming
use, or refusal of the Zoning Administrator to issue a certificate of occupancy
for such non-conforming use shall be prima facie evidence that such
nonconformity is unlawful. An appeal to the Board of Adjustment and Appeal may
be taken from an adverse decision of the Zoning Administrator.
      5.12   Inspection. A periodic inspection shall be made by the building
inspector of all non-residential buildings and sites which have a certificate
of occupancy, and if it is found that such building does not conform to the
applicable requirements, the certificate of occupancy may be revoked and the
building shall not be occupied until such time as the building is again brought
into compliance with such requirements.
Subd. 9.   Enforcement.
   A.   Compliance with Regulations. No person shall erect, alter, wreck, or
move any building or part thereof without first securing a building permit
therefore.
   B.   Building Permits. Application for a building permit shall be made to
the Zoning Administrator on blank forms to be furnished by the City. Each
application for a permit to construct or alter a building shall be accompanied
by a plan drawn to scale showing the dimensions of the lot to be built upon and
the size and location of the building and accessory buildings to be erected.
Each single family dwelling shall include plans for at least a single stall
garage to be built in conjunction with the home. Applications for any kind of
building permit shall contain such other information as may be deemed necessary
for the proper enforcement of this chapter or any other. The fee for a building
permit shall be determined by the Council. The Zoning Administrator shall issue
the building permit only after determining that the building plans, together
with the application, comply with the terms of this chapter.
   C.   In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building,
structure, or land is used in violation of this chapter, the Zoning
Administrator and the City, in addition to all other remedies, may institute
any proper action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or
use to restrain, correct such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said
building, structure, or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business,
or use in or about said premises.
   D.   Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of
this Chapter when he performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful,
or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful,
and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor, except as
otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.
   E.   The City shall recover the costs of its enforcement of this Chapter
from a person convicted under Subd. 09.D., including reasonable attorney's fees
incurred by the City's attorney in such enforcement.
Subd. 10.   Administrative and Escrow Fees. Each applicant shall be charged the
fixed fee specifically provided by the Council as required to cover the costs
incurred by the City in administratively processing, reviewing and issuing of
permits and approvals and shall make an escrow deposit pursuant to Section
1001.03 Subd. 12.
Subd. 11.   Expiration.  If substantial construction has not taken place within
one year after the date of a permit, the permit shall be void except that, on
application, the Council, after receiving the recommendation of the Planning
Commission, may extend the permit authorizing only the conditional use
specified in the permit and expires if, for any reason, the authorized use
ceases for more than one year.
Subd. 12.   Escrow Deposits.
   A.   Intent. Certain licensed and permitted activities carried on in the
city require the assistance of the city Engineer, city attorney, city planner,
or other city personnel. As these activities primarily benefit private persons
rather than the city as a whole, it is appropriate that the cost of these
services be borne by those benefiting thereby.
   B.   Escrow Deposit Required. Applications for subdivision approval,
rezonings, conditional use permits, planned unit developments, zoning
variances, sewer connection permits, liquor licenses, building permits, and
other municipal considerations may require a cash deposit which shall be placed
in an applicant's escrow account in an amount sufficient to pay all
engineering, legal, and planning fees, and such other costs as may be made the
applicant's responsibility, incurred in connection with an application shall be
charged to the applicant's escrow account and credited to the city.
   C.   Guarantee of Payment. The city shall have the authority to certify the
collection of fees through a tax assessment on the property in question.
   D.   Fee Schedule. The council shall establish fees for services rendered by
the city attorney, city engineer, city planner, and other city personnel. The
fee schedule shall be provided to all persons making application listed in
Chapter
209.02 upon request.
   E.   Individual Fees. Based on the fee schedule adopted pursuant to
209.03, the clerk-treasurer shall determine the amount of the escrow deposit
required after consultation with the city attorney, city engineer, city
planner, and other city personnel whose services may be required. All time,
services, and materials tar be billed to an escrow account shall be itemized.
   F.   Enforcement.
      1.   Application. The application listed in Subd. 15.B shall not be
accepted or processed by the city unless accompanied by an escrow deposit as
provided in this chapter.
      2.   Deficits. If at any time it appears that a deficit will occur in any
escrow account, the clerk-treasurer may then require an additional deposit in
the escrow account sufficient to cover the additional expenses. Failure to make
such additional deposits, or to pay to the city money owed for legal,
engineering or other services for which the applicant is by ordinance made
responsible in connection with an application in Subd. 15.B shall be grounds
for denial or revocation of the permit or license, or cessation of work on a
particular project. Such permit or license shall be revoked only after a
hearing preceded by ten days written notice.
   G.   Refund. Any money remaining in an applicant's escrow account after
payment of all required engineering, legal, and other fees shall be returned to
the applicant.
1001.04 NON-CONFORMING USES33
Subd. 1.   Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the
regulation of nonconforming buildings, structures and uses and to specify those
requirements, circumstances and conditions under which nonconforming buildings,
structures and uses will be operated and maintained. This Zoning Ordinance
establishes separate districts, each of which is an appropriate area for the
location of uses which are permitted in that district. It is necessary and
consistent with the establishment of these districts that nonconforming
buildings, structures and uses not be permitted to continue without restriction
and it is the intent of this chapter that all nonconforming uses shall be
eventually brought into conformity.
Subd. 2.   Non-Conforming Buildings and Uses. The lawful use of buildings or
land existing on March 1, 1995, which does not conform to the provisions of
this chapter may be continued provided, however, that no such non-conforming
use of land shall be enlarged or increase, nor shall any such non-conforming
use be extended to occupy a greater area of land than that occupied by such use
at the time of the adoption of this chapter, nor shall any such non-conforming
use be moved to any other part of the parcel of land upon which the same was
conducted at the time of the adoption of this chapter.
Subd. 3.   Non-Conforming Signs. No sign erected before March 1, 1995, or from
the effective date of any amendments thereto which make such signs non-
conforming, shall be rebuilt, altered, or moved to a new location without being
brought into compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
Subd. 4     Continuance Of Legal Nonconformity. Any legal nonconformity,
including the lawful use or occupation of land or premises existing at the time
of the adoption of an additional control under this chapter, may be continued,
including through repair, replacement, restoration, maintenance, or
improvement, but not including expansion, except as specifically provided in
this chapter, unless:
   1.    The nonconformity or occupancy is discontinued for a period of more
than one year; or
   2.    Any nonconforming use is destroyed by fire or other peril to the
extent of greater than eighty percent (80%) of its market value, and no
building permit has been applied for within one hundred eighty (180) days of
when the property is damaged. In this case, the city of Rockford may impose
reasonable conditions upon a building permit in order to mitigate any newly
created impact on adjacent property.
   3.    Any subsequent use or occupancy of the land or premises shall be a
conforming use or occupancy.
Subd. 5.   Non-Conforming Uses.  The lawful use of a building existing at the
time of the adoption of this chapter may be continued, although such use does
not conform with the provisions hereof. If no structural alterations are made,
a non-conforming use of a building may be changed to another non-conforming use
of the same or more restricted classification. The foregoing provisions shall
also apply to nonconforming uses in districts hereafter changed. Whenever a
nonconforming use of a building has been changed to a more restricted use or to
a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a less restricted
use.
Subd. 6.   Alterations.
   A.   Alterations may be made to a residential building containing non-
conforming residential units when they will improve the livability of such
units provided, however, that they do not increase the number of dwelling units
in the building.
   B.   Maintenance of a building or other structure containing or used by a
non-conforming use will be permitted when it includes necessary non-structural
repair and incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the
nonconforming building or use. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the
placing of a structure in safe condition when said structure is declared unsafe
by the building codes and standards of the City.
   C.   Alteration and normal maintenance to a legal nonconforming building or
structure may be made through the building permit process provided:
      1.    The alterations do not expand the foundation and/or building size
(including deck additions), unless specifically allowed by this Zoning
Ordinance.
      2.    The alterations do not increase the building occupancy capacity or
parking demand.
      3.   The alteration does not increase the degree of the nonconforming
condition of the building, site or the use.
Subd. 7.   Non Conforming Lots.
   A.   General Restriction: No building, structure or use shall be erected,
constructed or established on a nonconforming lot unless a variance is granted
by the city, except as otherwise provided for by this Chapter.
   B.   Vacant Or Redeveloped Lots: Except in environmental protection
districts, legal, nonconforming, vacant lots of record may be developed for
single-family detached dwellings upon approval of an administrative permit,
provided that:
      1.    Legally Established: The lot in question was legally established in
accordance with requirements of this code existing at the time of its creation
and is a separate, distinct tax parcel.
      2.    Allowed Use: Single-family residential dwellings are an allowed use
within the zoning district.
      3.   Access: The lot in question has frontage on and will directly access
an improved public street.
      4.    Setback And Yard Requirements: The setback and yard requirements of
the zoning district can be achieved while simultaneously resulting in
development which complies with the character and general design of the
immediate area and the objectives of the comprehensive plan and this Zoning
Ordinance.
   C.   Developed Lots: An existing conforming use on a lot of substandard size
and/or width may be expanded or enlarged if such expansion or enlargement meets
all other provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.
   D.   Required Merger Of Common Ownership Lots: Within the Shoreland Overlay
District, if in a group of two (2) or more contiguous lots or parcels of land
owned or controlled by the same person, any individual lot or parcel is
nonconforming as to lot width, lot area, or lot frontage such individual lot or
parcel shall not be sold or developed as a separate parcel of land, but shall
be combined with adjacent lots or parcels under the same ownership or control
so that the combination of lots or parcels will equal one or more zoning lots
each meeting the full lot requirements of this Chapter lessening the
nonconformity. (Ordinance 13-02, adopted May 14, 2013)
1001.05 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Subd. 1.   Purpose. The regulation of off-street parking spaces in these zoning
regulations is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public right-of-way
and to promote the safety and general welfare of the public, by establishing
minimum requirements for off-street parking of motor vehicles in accordance
with the utilization of various parcels of land or structures.
Subd. 2.   Application.  Off-street parking regulations shall apply to all
buildings and uses of land established after September 12, 1983, with the
exception of the C-O zoning district.
Subd. 3.   Required Plan. Any application for a site plan approval, for
building permit or for a certificate of occupancy shall include a plan drawn to
scale and dimensioned showing off-street parking and loading space to be
provided in compliance with this section.
Subd. 4.   General Provisions.
   A.   Floor Area. The term “floor area” for the purpose of calculating the
number of off-street parking spaces required shall be determined on the basis
of the exterior floor area dimensions of the buildings, structures or use times
the number of floors, minus ten (l0) percent, except as may hereinafter be
provided or modified.
   B.   Reduction of Existing Off-Street Parking Space or Lot Area. Off-street
parking spaces and loading spaces or lot area existing upon the effective date
of this Section shall not be reduced in number or size, unless said number or
size exceeds the requirements set forth herein for a similar new use.
   C.   Non-Conforming Structures.
      1.   Should a non-conforming structure or use be damaged or destroyed by
fire, it may be re-established if elsewhere permitted in this Chapter, except
that in doing so, any off-street parking or loading space shall be re-
established in conformance with the requirements of this Section.
      2.11   Expansion of a use that is non-conforming due to a lack of
concrete curb required by this section may be allowed by conditional use permit
subject to the following conditions:
         a.   Exception to providing perimeter concrete curb is a one-time
occurrence.
         b.   The proposed expansion is not more than 2,000 square feet or
twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area of the existing principal use,
whichever is least.
         c.   Adequate measures are provided to control storm water drainage as
approved by the City Engineer.
         d.   The provisions of Section
1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and determined to be satisfied.
   D.   Change of Use or Occupancy of Land. No change of use or occupancy of
land already dedicated to a parking spaces, driveways, or loading spaces shall
be made, nor shall any sale of land, division or subdivision of land be made
which reduces area necessary for parking, parking stalls, or parking
requirements below the minimum prescribed by this Section.
   E.   Chance of Use or Occupancy of Buildings. Any change of use or occupancy
of any building or buildings including additions thereto requiring more parking
area shall not be permitted until there is furnished such additional parking
spaces as required by this Section.
   F.   Residential District Parking. Except as provided below in Subdivision
4.G.2 and except on a limited, temporary basis involving guests or work being
performed on site, on and off-street accessory parking facilities in a
residential district shall be utilized solely for the parking of licensed and
operable passenger automobiles, vans, trucks not to exceed gross capacity of
twelve thousand (12,000) pounds; and recreational vehicles and equipment which
are the property of the occupant, except as provided below in Subdivision
4.G.2. Under no circumstances shall required facilities accessory to
residential structures be used for the storage of non-qualifying commercial
vehicles, commercial equipment, or for the parking of automobiles belonging to
the employees, owners, tenants or customers of business or manufacturing
establishments.
   G.   Calculating Space.
      1.   When determining the number of off-street parking spaces results in
a fraction, each fraction shall constitute another space.
      2.   In stadiums, sports arenas, churches and other places of public
assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or other similar
seating facilities, each twenty-two (22) inches of such seating facilities
shall be counted as one seat for the purpose of determining requirements.
      3.   Except as provided for under joint parking and shopping centers,
should a structure contain two (2) or more types of use, the sum of each shall
be calculated separately and shall be used for determining the total off-street
parking spaces required.
   H.   Stall, Aisle and Driveway Design.
      1.   Parking Space Size. Except for handicapped parking spaces, each
parking space shall not be less than nine (9) feet wide and eighteen (18) feet
in length exclusive of access aisles, and each space shall be served adequately
by access aisles.
      2.   Street Access. All off-street parking facilities shall be designed
and constructed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a public street.
Except in the case of a planned unit development, each lot shall have access
directly onto an abutting, improved and City accepted public street. Exception
to this access requirement may be allowed as a conditional use permit pursuant
to Section
1001.05, Subd. 4 of this Chapter.
      3.   Within Structures. The off-street parking requirements may be
furnished by providing a space so designed within the principal building or one
structure attached thereto; however, unless provisions are made, no building
permit shall be issued to convert said parking structure into a dwelling unit
or living area or other activity until other adequate provisions are made to
comply with the required off-street parking provisions of this Section.
      4.   Lot Circulation. Except in the case of single, two-family,
townhouse, quadraminium, and manor home dwellings, parking areas shall be
designed so that circulation between parking bays or aisles occurs within the
designated parking lot and does not depend upon a public street or alley.
Except in the case of single, two-family, townhouse, quadraminium, and manor
home dwellings, parking area design which requires backing into the public
street is prohibited.
      5.   Intersection Separation. No curb cut access shall be located less
than sixty (60) feet from the intersection of two (2) or more street rights-of-
way. This distance shall be measured from the intersection of lot lines.
      6.   Lot Design. Except in the case of single family, two-family,
townhouse, quadraminium, and manor home dwellings, parking areas and their
aisles shall be developed in compliance with the standards on the Parking Lot
Dimension Table.
      7.   Curb Cut Size. No curb cut access shall exceed twenty-four (24) feet
in width unless approved by the City Engineer.
      8.   Side and Rear Yard Setback. Off-street parking stalls, driveways,
and drive aisles shall be setback a minimum of five (5) feet from side and rear
property lines in all districts. (Ordinance 18-08, adopted August 15, 2018)
      9.   Curb Cut Spacing. Driveway access curb openings on a public street
except for single, two-family, quadraminium, manor home, and townhouse
dwellings, shall not be located less than forty (40) feet from one another.
      10.34   Grade.
         a.   Parking Spaces and Areas. The grade elevation of any parking area
shall not exceed six (6) percent, except as approved by the City Engineer.
         b.   Driveways. Unless approved by the City Engineer, the grade
elevation of any driveway shall not exceed:
            1)   Eight (8) percent for single family, two family, and townhouse
dwellings, except as approved by the City Engineer.
            2)   Six (6) percent for all other uses.
      11.   Number of Curb Cuts. Each property shall be allowed one curb cut
access and may be allowed upon city council approval, additional curb cuts for
each one hundred twenty-five (12 5) feet of street frontage. All property shall
be entitled to at least one curb cut. Single family uses shall be limited to
one curb cut access per property unless a conditional use permit is approved
pursuant to Section
1001.03, Subd. 5 of this Chapter.
      12.   Surfacing.
         a.   Farmsteads, farming operations, and detached single family
residential uses: Driveways and parking area shall be surfaced with materials
suitable to control dust and drainage.
         b.   Other Uses:
            1)   All uses other than those specified in subsection 12.a. above
shall have driveways and parking areas which are surfaced with asphalt,
concrete, cobblestone, or paving bricks.
            2)   For legal, nonconforming uses existing upon the effective date
of this Chapter, at any time an improvement is made to property requiring a
conditional use permit, interim use permit, variance, and/or building permit,
all nonconforming design and surfacing of parking areas or driveways existing
on the lot in question shall be brought into full compliance with this Section.
      3)   Plans for surfacing and drainage of driveways and stalls for parking
areas of five (5) or more vehicles shall be submitted to the City Engineer for
review and the final drainage plan shall be subject to written approval.
      4)   For industrial uses which experience frequent heavy equipment
utilization which could be expected to destroy or damage required surfacing
materials, an exemption to the surfacing requirements may be allowed by
conditional use permit pursuant to Section
1001.03, Subd. 5 and provided that:
         a)   General public and employee access driveways and parking areas
shall not be included in the exemption.
         b)   At such time as the presence of heavy equipment is reduced or
eliminated, the surfacing of exempted areas shall be completed in compliance
with this Chapter.
         c)   All other performance standards related to parking and driveways
shall be met.
         d)   The provisions of Section
1001.03, Subd. 5E are considered and determined to be satisfied.
      13.   Striping. Except for single, two-family townhouse, quadraminiums,
and manor home dwellings, all parking stalls shall be marked with white or
yellow painted lines not less than four (4) inches wide.
      14.   Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking
area shall be hooded and so arranged as to reflect the light away from
adjoining property, abutting residential uses, and public rights-of-way, and
shall be in compliance with Chapter.
      15.   Curbing and Landscaping. Except for single, two-family, townhouse,
quadraminiums, and manor home dwellings, all open, off-street parking shall
have a continuous concrete perimeter curb barrier around the entire parking
lot; said curb barrier shall not be closer than five (5) feet to any lot line
except as approved by the City Engineer. Grass plantings and landscaping shall
be provided in all areas bordering the parking area.
      16.   Required Screening. All open off-street parking areas of five (5)
or more spaces shall be screened and landscaped from abutting or surrounding
residential districts and uses, and the public right-of-way in compliance with
this Chapter.
      17.   Snow Storage. Adequate space for snow storage shall be provided on
the site so as not to reduce the required minimum number of parking spaces. In
those cases where excessive snow cannot be properly stored on site, it shall be
immediately removed from the site.
      18.   Driveway Turn Around. In the case of single family, two-family,
townhouse, quadraminium, and manor home dwellings, which front on streets
designated as collector, minor arterial, intermediate arterial and principal
arterial by the City's Comprehensive Plan, the installation of a vehicle turn-
around space, immediately adjacent to the access driveway is allowed and may be
required by the City Council. Said space is to be no larger than ten (10) feet
wide and ten (10) feet in length. Where possible, said space shall be located
away from the principal structure and shall be no closer than twenty (20) feet
from the street surface. Said space shall not to be utilized for parking or
storage purposes.
   I.   Signs. No sign shall be so located as to restrict the sight lines and
orderly operation and traffic movement within any parking lot or driveway. All
signs shall be in conformance with this Chapter.
Subd. 5.   Maintenance. It shall be the joint and several responsibility of the
lessee and owner of the principal use, uses or buildings to maintain in a neat
and adequate manner, the parking space, accessways, striping, landscaping and
required screening.
Subd. 6.   Location.  All accessory off-street parking facilities as required
by this Section shall be located and restricted as follows:
   A.   Required accessory off-street parking shall be on the same lot under
the same ownership as the principal use being served, except under the
provisions of Subd. 10 and Subd. 11 of this Section.
   B.   Except for single, two-family, townhouse, quadraminium, and manor home
dwellings, head-in parking, directly off of and adjacent to a public street,
with each stall having its own direct access to the public street, shall be
prohibited.
   C.   Off-street parking for multiple family, commercial, industrial and
institutional uses shall be setback a minimum of fifteen (15) feet of
any public right-of-way. (Ordinance 18-08, adopted August 15, 2018)
   D.   The boulevard portion of the street right-of-way shall not be used for
parking.
   E.   Setback Area: Required accessory off-street parking shall not be
provided in required front yards or in required side yards in the case of
corner lots, in agricultural and residential zoning districts.
   F.   Required off-street parking areas for one and two-family uses shall be
in the rear yard, side yards other than a required side yard, garage, or
carport, and upon a defined driveway. A parking space in excess of that
specifically required by this Section may be located in an area not to exceed
twelve (12) feet in width abutting the driveway on one side only away from the
principal building in the front yard. The parking area designated in the front
yard abutting the driveway shall be surfaced with either concrete, asphalt or
in cases of existing gravel driveways, gravel may be used for such additional
parking. At any time an improvement is made to property requiring a building
permit, all non-conforming surfacing of parking areas or driveways existing on
the lot in question shall be brought into full compliance with this section.
   G.   With the exception of seasonal recreational equipment of limited size
and weight, the same parking standards for seasonal recreational equipment
shall apply as outlined herein. In cases of seasonal recreational equipment of
limited size and weight, the surfacing required herein shall not apply and the
equipment may be parked over what is traditionally grass. Seasonal recreational
equipment of limited size and weight may include boats, campers designed to be
mounted on automotive vehicles, snowmobiles, boat trailers, motorcycle trailers
and tent or travel trailers.
   H.   Violations may be enforced through tagging.
Subd. 7.   Use of Required Area. Required accessory off-street parking spaces
in any district shall not be utilized for open storage, sale or rental of
goods, repair work, storage of inoperable vehicles, and/or storage of snow.
Subd. 8.   Handicapped Parking Spaces. Except for single family, two-family,
townhouse, quadraminium, and manor home dwellings, at least one handicapped
parking space shall be provided for each use. An additional space shall be
provided for each increment of fifty (50) spaces in excess of the initial fifty
(50) spaces. Handicapped spaces shall be at minimum twelve (12) feet by twenty
(20) feet, shall be located so as to provide convenient, priority access to the
principal use and shall conform to Minnesota Statutes, Section 168.021, as may
be amended.
Subd. 9.8     Number of Spaces Required.8 The following minimum number of off-
street parking spaces shall be provided and maintained by ownership, easement
and/or lease for and during the life of the respective uses hereinafter set
forth:
   A.   Automobile, trailer, marine,, implement, garden supply, building and
material sales, auto repair. Six (6) off-street parking spaces, plus one (1)
additional space for each five hundred (500) square feet of floor area over one
thousand (1,000) square feet.
   B.   Banks. One space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area.
   C.   Drive-in Banks. Two (2) spaces for each drive-in unit plus drive aisle
stacking space of one hundred eighty (180) feet for each drive-in unit.
   D.   Boarding and Lodging House. At minimum one (1) space plus at least one
(1) parking space for each person for whom accommodations are provided for
sleeping.
   E.   Bowling Alley. At least five (5) parking spaces for each alley, plus
additional spaces as may be required herein for related uses contained within
the principal structure plus one (1) space for every employee.
   F.   Car Wash, machine. Twenty-five (25) spaces, plus five (5) additional
spaces per lane in excess of one (1).
   G.   Clinics. One (1) space per one hundred (100) square feet of floor area.
   H.   Churches, auditoriums and other places of assembly. At least one (1)
parking space for each three (3) seats based on the design capacity of the main
assembly hall.
   I.   Community Centers, Health Studios, Libraries, Museums, Private Clubs,
Lodges. Ten (10) spaces plus one for each one hundred fifty (150) square feet
in excess of two thousand (2000) square feet of floor area in the principal
structure.
   J.   Golf course, tennis or swimming club, etc. Twenty (20) spaces per
principal building, plus eight (8) spaces per two hundred (200) square feet of
floor area.
   K.   Elderly (Senior Citizen) Housing. Reservation of area equal to one (1)
parking space per unit. Initial development is, however, required for only one-
half (1/2) space per unit and said number of spaces can continue until such
time as the City considers a need for additional parking spaces has been
demonstrated.
   L.   Funeral Home. One (1) space for each one hundred (100) square feet of
floor area of each chapel with a minimum of twenty (20) parking spaces for each
chapel or parlor, plus one (1) parking space for each funeral vehicle
maintained on the premises. Aisle space shall be provided off-street for making
up a funeral procession.
   M.   Furniture and Appliance Stores. One (1) space per four hundred (400)
square feet of floor area.
   N.   Hospitals. One space for each two (2) patient beds (excluding
bassinets), plus one (1) additional space for each doctor including visiting
doctors, plus one (1) space for each two (2) employees including nurses;
loading and unloading space for hospital ambulances and similar vehicles are
not included in the spaces required.
   O.   Manufacturing or Processing Plant. One (1) space for two (2) employees
on the shift of greatest employment, or one (1) space for each five hundred
(500) square feet of floor area whichever is greater. In addition, one (1)
space for each company motor vehicle on the premises.
   P.   Motels, Motor Hotels, Hotels, Resorts. One (1) space per each rental
unit plus one (1) additional space for each ten (10) units plus one (1) for
each employee on the shift of greatest employment.
   Q.   Motor Fuel Station. At least four (4) off-street parking spaces plus
three (3) off-street parking spaces for each service stall. Those facilities
designed for sale of other items than strictly automotive products, parts or
service shall be required to provide additional parking in compliance with
other applicable provisions of this Section.
   R.   Municipal Administration Buildings, Community Center, Public Libraries,
Art Galleries, Museums, Post Office, etc. One (1) space per three hundred (300)
square feet of floor area.
   S.   Multiple Family Dwellings. Two (2) rent-free spaces per unit plus one
(1) space for each bedroom per unit over two (2).
   T.   Multi-story Office Buildings and Financial Institutions other than
Banks. One (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area.
   U.   Office Buildings, Professional Offices, Medical and Dental Clinics.
Three (3) spaces plus at least one (1) space for each two hundred (200) square
feet of floor area.
   V.   Post Office. One (1) space for each four hundred (400) square feet of
floor area plus one (1) space for each employee.
   W.   Research, Experimental or Testing Station. One (1) space per each
employee on the largest shift or one (1) space per each five hundred (500)
square feet of floor area whichever is greater.
   X.   Restaurants (Class I), Cafes, Private Clubs Serving Food and/or Drink,
Bars, On-Sale Nightclubs. At least one (1) space for each forty (40) square
feet of gross floor area of dining and bar area and one (1) space for each
eighty (80) square feet of kitchen area.
   Y.   Drive-in Restaurant and Fast Food Restaurant (Class II). At least one
(1) parking space for each fifty (50) square feet of gross floor area.
Additionally, one hundred eighty (180) feet of drive aisle stacking space shall
be provided for drive-through facilities.
   Z.   Retail Store and Service Establishment. At least one (1) off-street
parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area.
   AA.   Retail Sales and Service Business with Fifty (50) percent or More of
Gross Floor Area Devoted to Storage Warehouse and/or Industry. At least eight
(8) spaces or one (1) space for each two (200) hundred square feet devoted to
public sales or service plus one (1) space for each five hundred (500) square
feet of storage area; or at least eight (8) spaces and one (1) space for each
employee on the maximum shift, whichever is appropriate.
   BB.   Sanitarium, Convalescent Home Rest Home Nursing Home or Day Nurseries.
Four (4) spaces plus one (1) for each four (4) beds for which accommodations
are offered and one (1) space designated for emergency vehicles.
   CC.   School, Elementary and Junior High. At least one (1) parking space for
each classroom plus one (1) additional space for each fifty (50) students.
Auditorium or event space shall be subject to a separate, additional
calculation.
   DD.   Service Garage. Four (4) spaces per each service stall.
   EE.   Single Family, Two-Family, and Townhouse Unit. Two (2) spaces per
unit.
   FF.   Shopping Centers. Six (6) spaces per each one thousand (1,000) square
feet of gross floor area.
   GG.   Theatres, Civic Centers Auditoriums Stadiums Sports Arenas or Similar
Uses. One (1) space for each four (4) seats, plus one (1) space for each two
(2) employees.
   HH.   Warehousing, Storage or Handling of Bulk Goods. One (1) space per two
employees of the largest shift or one (1) space per each one thousand five
hundred (1,500) square feet of floor area, whichever is greater.
   II.   Wholesaling. One (1) space per each employee on the largest shift or
one (1) space per two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor area whichever is
greater. In addition, one (1) space per company motor vehicle on the premises.
   JJ.   All Other Commercial. Ten (10) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square
feet of floor area.
   KK.   Other Uses. Other uses not specifically mentioned herein or unique
cases shall be determined on an individual basis by the City Council. Factors
to be considered in such determination shall include (without limitation) size
of buildings, type of use, number of employees, expected volume and turnover of
customer traffic and expected frequency and number of delivery or service
vehicles.
   LL.   Space Reductions. Subject to the review and processing of a
conditional use permit as regulated by Section
1001.03, Subd. 5 of this Chapter, the City may reduce the number of required
off-street parking spaces when the use can demonstrate in documented form a
need, which is less than required. In such situations, the City may require
land to be reserved for parking development should use or needs change.
Subd. 10.   Joint Facilities.  The City council may approve a conditional use
permit, pursuant to Section
1001.03, Subd. 5 of this Chapter, for one or more businesses to provide the
required off-street parking facilities by joint use of one or more sites where
the total number of spaces provided are less than the sum of the total required
for each business should they provide them separately. To qualify for joint
parking the following conditions are required to exist.
   A.   Up to fifty (50) percent of the parking facilities required for a
theater, bowling alley, bar or restaurant may be supplied by the off-street
parking facilities provided by types of uses specified as primarily daytime
uses in Item D below.
   B.   Up to fifty (50) percent of the off-street parking facilities required
for any use specified under Item D below as primarily daytime uses may be
supplied by the parking facilities provided by the following night time or
Sunday uses: auditoriums incidental to a public or parochial school, churches,
bowling alleys, theaters, bars, apartments or restaurants.
   C.   Up to eighty (80) percent of the parking facilities required by this
Section for a church or for an auditorium incidental to a public or parochial
school may be supplied by the off-street parking facilities provided by uses
specified in Item D below as primarily daytime uses.
   D.   For the purposes of this Section, the following uses are considered as
primarily daytime uses: public schools, banks, business offices, retail stores,
personal service shops, household equipment or furniture shops, clothing or
shoe repair or service shops, manufacturing, wholesale and similar uses.
   E.   Conditions Required for Joint Use.
      1.   The building or use for which application is being made to utilize
the off-street parking facilities provided by another building or use shall be
located within three hundred (300) feet of such parking facilities.
      2.   Documentation as specified by the City shall be submitted
demonstrating that there is not substantial conflict in the principal operating
hours of the two buildings or uses (for which joint use of off-street parking
facilities is proposed).
      3.   A properly drawn legal instrument, executed by the parties concerned
for joint use of off-street parking facilities, duly approved as to form and
manner of execution by the City Attorney, shall be filed with the City Clerk
and recorded with the Wright County Recorder.
Subd. 11.   Off-Site Parking.
   A.   Any off-site off-street parking which is used to meet the requirements
of this Chapter shall be a conditional use as regulated by Section
1001.03, Subd. 06 of this Chapter.
   B.   Off-site parking shall be developed and maintained in compliance with
all requirements and standards of this Chapter.
   C.   The parking lot is to be used only for the parking of passenger
automobiles of employees, customers or guests of the person or firm controlling
and operating the lot, said person to be responsible for its maintenance.
   D.   The parking lot is not to be used for sales, repair work or servicing
of any kind.
   E.   Reasonable access from off-site parking facilities to the use being
served shall be provided.
   F.   No advertising sign or material is to be located on the property where
the parking lot is located.
   G.   All parking is to be kept back of the setback building line by barriers
unless otherwise specifically authorized by the City Council.
   H.   Except as provided below, the site used for meeting the off-site
parking requirements of this Section shall be under the* same ownership as the
principal use being served or under public ownership.
   I.   Off-site parking for multiple family dwellings shall not be located
more than one hundred (100) feet from any normally used entrance of the
principal use served.
   J.   Except as provided below, off-site parking for nonresidential uses
shall not be located more than three hundred (300) feet from the main public
entrance of the principal use being served.
   K.   Any use which depends upon off-site parking to meet the requirements of
this Section shall maintain ownership and parking utilization of the off-site
location until such time as on-site parking is provided or a site in closer
proximity to the principal use is acquired and developed for parking.
   L.   Compliance with off-street parking requirements provided through leased
off-street parking may be approved by the City Council, subject to the
following conditions:
      1.   The lease shall specify the total number and location of parking
spaces under contract and this number, when added to any on-site parking
required, must be equal to the total number of parking spaces required.
      2.   The lease instrument shall legally bind all parties to the lease and
provide for amendment or cancellation only upon written approval from the city.
      3.   The lease agreement shall incorporate a release of liability and any
other provisions, as recommended by the City Attorney that are deemed necessary
to ensure compliance with the intent of this Section.
   M.   Any such other conditions as may be deemed necessary by the City
Council to protect the welfare and character of the nearby land uses.
Subd. 12.   Off-Street Loading.
   A.   Purpose. The regulation of loading spaces in these zoning regulations
is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public right-of-way so as to
promote the safety and general welfare of the public, by establishing minimum
requirements for off-street loading and unloading from motor vehicles in
accordance with the specific and appropriate utilization of various parcels of
land or structure.
   B.   Location.
      1.   Off-Street. All required loading berths shall be off-street and
located on the same lot as the building or use to be served.
      2.   Distance from Intersection. All loading berth curb cuts shall be
located at a minimum sixty (60) feet from the intersection of two or more
street rights-of-way. This distance shall be measured from the property line.
      3.   Distance from Residential Use. No loading berth shall be located
closer than one hundred (100) feet from a residential district unless within a
structure.
      4.   Prohibited in Front Yards. Loading berths shall not occupy the
required front yard setbacks.
      5.   Conditional Use Permit Required. A conditional use permit shall be
required for new loading berths added to an existing structure and/or, where
the loading berth is located at the front or at the side of the building on a
corner lot.
         a.   Pedestrians. Loading berths shall not conflict with pedestrian
movement.
         b.   Visibility. Loading berths shall not obstruct the view of the
public right-of-way from off-street parking access.
      c.   General Compliance. Loading berths shall comply with all other
requirements of this Chapter.
      6.   Traffic Interference. Each loading berth shall be located with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or public alley in a manner
which will cause the least interference with traffic both on and off site.
   C.   Surfacing. Subject to exceptions established for the surfacing of
parking areas by this Section, all loading berths and accessways shall be
improved with not less than six (6) inch class five base and two (2) inch
bituminous surfacing to control the dust and drainage according to a plan
submitted to and subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
   D.   Accessory Use, Parking and Storage. Any space allocated as a required
loading berth or access drive so as to comply with the requirements of this
Chapter shall not be used for the storage of goods, inoperable vehicles, or
snow, and shall not be included as part of the space requirements to meet off-
street parking requirements.
   E.7    Screening. Except in the case of multiple family dwellings, all
loading areas shall be completely screened from view of abutting residential
uses and/or the public right-of-way through the use of fences and or
landscaping.
   F.   Size.
      1.   Non-Residential Developments. Unless otherwise specified in these
zoning regulations, the first loading berth shall be not less than seventy (70)
feet in length and additional berths required shall be not less than thirty
(30) feet in length and all loading berths shall be not less than ten (10) feet
in width and fourteen (14) feet in height, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering
space.
      2.   Multiple Family Dwellings. The size and location of the required
loading berth shall be subject to the review and approval of the Zoning
Administrator.
   G.   Number of Loading Berths Required. The number of required off-street
loading berths shall be as follows:
      1.   Commercial and Industrial Uses. All buildings shall have at least
one off-street loading berth. Buildings which are ten thousand (10,000) square
feet or more, shall have at a minimum two (2) loading berths.
      2.   Multiple Family Dwellings. One (1) off-street loading berth shall be
provided for each principal dwelling structure in excess of four (4) units.
      3.   Other Uses. Other uses not specifically mentioned herein or unique
cases shall be determined on an individual basis by the City Council. Factors
to be considered in such determination shall include (without limitation) size
of buildings, type of use, and expected frequency and number of delivery or
service vehicles.
      4.   Space Reductions. Subject to the review and processing of a
conditional use permit as regulated by Section
1001.03, Subd. 5 of this Chapter, the City may reduce the number of required
off-street loading spaces when the use can demonstrate in documented form a
need which is less than required. In such situations, the City may require land
to be reserved for loading space development should use or needs change.
1001.06 MANUFACTURED HOMES
Subd. 1.   Location of Manufactured Homes and Manufactured Home Parks.
   A.   Parking and Placement Prohibited. It shall be unlawful within the City
for any person to park any manufactured home on any street, alley or highway,
or other public place, or on any tract of land owned by any person, occupied or
unoccupied, except as provided in this section.
   B.   Emergency Parking Permitted. Emergency or temporary stopping or parking
is permitted on any street, alley or highway for not longer than three (3)
hours subject to any other and further prohibitions, regulations or limitations
imposed by the traffic and parking regulations or ordinances for that street,
alley or highway.
   C.   Temporary Placement. Temporary special permits may be issued by the
Council for use of a trailer as an office or residence by persons directly
connected with new construction in the City, providing that such person has
obtained a building permit for said construction and is proceeding with said
work. Such temporary special permits shall be limited to periods of not more
than ten (10) days following completion of the project or for twelve (12)
months, whichever is less.
   D.   Conditional Use Permit Required. No person shall construct, locate,
operate or maintain a manufactured home or manufactured home park within the
City without first obtaining a conditional use permit, and all such other
permits and licenses as shall be required and described herein.
   E.   Zoning and Sewage Requirements. No person shall construct, locate,
operate, or maintain a manufactured home park in the City unless the proposed
area is served by a public, municipal sanitary sewer, municipal water, and the
property is zoned for residential manufactured home park, R-M.
   F.   Placement Outside a Manufactured Home Park Prohibited. No person shall
park or occupy any manufactured home on either the premises of any dwelling or
on any lot which is situated outside an approved manufactured home park unless
such owner or person complies with applicable provisions of this Chapter,
including Housing Performance Standards. Manufactured homes within an approved
manufactured home park shall not be required to comply with Housing Performance
Standards but shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
Subd. 2.   Conditional Use Permit Application.  Required conditional use
permits may be applied for pursuant to the terms of this Chapter and shall be
issued if all requirements in this Chapter are met and all fees established in
Section
212 of the City Code have been paid.
Subd. 3.   Design Standards For Manufactured Home Parks.
   A.   Development Standards. All manufactured home parks shall conform to the
following minimum standards for development of the park except, and in
addition, those found in this Chapter.
      1.   Minimum Size. Every manufactured home park shall have a minimum of
ten (10) acres and a minimum width of five hundred (500) feet.
      2.   Surface Drainage. Every manufactured home park shall be located on a
well drained area and the premises shall be properly graded and equipped with
storm sewers if necessary so as to prevent the accumulation of storm or other
waters on the lots. However, runoff to adjacent properties shall not be
increased. Where there is water ponding on the site, provisions shall be taken
to retain the natural ponding features of the land and provide for the same
amount of water storage in some manner at the site.
      3.   Parks and Recreation. A park dedication will be required based on
dwelling units/acre. For parks with a density of less than five (5) units/acre,
a dedication of ten (10) percent of the total park area is required. Densities
of less than nine (9) units but greater than five (5), will require a
dedication of twelve (12) percent. Any greater densities will require a
dedication of fifteen (15) percent. The City may require park set asides to be
furnished with such amenities as: playground equipment; tennis courts;
shuffleboard, badminton or horseshoe courts; or other similar features.
      4.   Setbacks and Buffer Zones. There shall be a minimum setback of fifty
(50) feet from any highway and thirty (30) feet between the park outside
boundary line and any use within the manufactured home park. Such setback area
shall be landscaped and screened by a fence and/or screen plantings of
sufficient size and density to permit complete privacy for the residents of
both the manufactured home park and adjacent properties. The City may, at its
option, require fencing or other types of buffer in lieu of the above
requirements.
      5.   Landscaping. Every manufactured home park shall be landscaped and
maintained with seed or sod on the entire park except for areas used for
streets, sidewalks, patios, manufactured home parking areas, or vehicle parking
areas.
   B.   Lot Standards. All lots in the manufactured home park are subject to
the following regulations:
      1.   Size. Each lot in a manufactured home park intended as the location
for one unit shall contain not less than five thousand two hundred (5,200)
square feet and shall have a minimum width of fifty (50) feet except corner
lots which shall have a minimum width of sixty (60) feet and shall have a
minimum depth of eighty (80) feet measured from the curb face to the rear lot
line.
   C.   Additional Lot Regulations. All lots in the manufactured home park are
subject to the following regulations:
      1.   Guest Parking Required. Each manufactured home park shall maintain a
paved, off-street parking lot for guests of occupants in the amount of one
space for each ten (10) lots.
      2.   Overload Parking Required. Each manufactured home park shall have
not less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of area for every
twenty-five (25) lots set aside for overload parking and dead storage. This
area shall be completely enclosed with a security fence and screened from view
by dense shrubbery. The purpose of this area is for boats, trailers and other
recreational vehicles.
      3.   Concrete Patio Required. Each lot shall have a concrete patio
adjacent to each home in addition to the off-street parking area. Each patio
shall be not less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet and a minimum of
twenty-four (24) inches in width and three (3) inches in diameter.
      4.   Individual Site Preparation. Every manufactured home lot shall have
a base of at least four (4) inches of compacted gravel or aggregate on the site
where the home is to be parked, in addition to whatever foundation structures
are necessary to secure the manufactured home anchors and tie downs.
   D.   Emergency Shelters.
      1.   Shelter Required. Every manufactured home park shall provide one or
more tornado and wind storm emergency shelters with a capacity for thirty (30)
percent of the occupants of the park. Each shelter shall be constructed so as
to be dry, well ventilated, to have more than one exit, and to be capable of
withstanding the impact of a manufactured home propelled by winds of tornado
force. The entrance to the shelter shall be plainly marked by a sign with the
words “Emergency Shelter” in six (6) inch letters.
      2.   Storm Warning Device Required. Every manufactured home park shall
have a warning device for providing tornado or serious wind storm warning to
its residents. This requirement may be waived if such device is located outside
the park but is found to be servicing the park area.
   E.   Service Building and Service Facilities. Each manufactured home park
shall have one or more service buildings to provide space for the park office,
laundry facilities, sanitation facilities, and indoor community meeting and
recreational space.
      1.   Manager's Office Required. Every manufactured home park shall have a
central office for the manager or caretaker of the park.
      2.   Indoor Recreation Room Required. Indoor recreational or community
meeting space shall be provided at the minimum ratio of ten (10) square feet of
space for every four (4) lots in the manufactured home park, or section thereof
served by the building. Space provided for such requirements as emergency
shelters, laundry facilities, and other public service facilities shall not be
deemed to meet the requirements of this section.
      3.   Setbacks Required. Setbacks from internal streets for all service
buildings shall conform to the City's residential setback requirements.
   F.   Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Systems.
      1.   Water Connection Required. All manufactured home parks and the lots
thereof shall be connected to the municipal water system.
      2.   Public Municipal Sanitary Sewer Required. All manufactured home
parks shall have a sanitary sewer system connection to either a public
municipal sewer system, or an appropriate public regional sewer system. The
design and specifications of the sewer system shall meet the approval of the
City Engineer and the Minnesota Department of Health.
      3.   Underground Utilities Required. All sewer and water system lines
shall be underground.
   G.   Utilities, Fuel Supply Storage, and Lighting.
      1.   Underground Utilities Required. All utility lines for electricity,
telephone, TV cable, gas or fuel oil must be underground. There shall be no
overhead wires or supporting poles except poles for street lights or other
lighting purposes.
      2.   Fuel Storage Regulated. All fuel supply and storage systems shall be
installed and maintained in accordance with applicable state codes and
regulations governing such systems.
      3.   General Illumination Required. The manufactured home park shall
provide overhead lights to adequately illuminate the streets and thoroughfare
sidewalks of the park and all service building parking areas and entrances.
Such lighting will be shielded to prevent any light to be directed at traffic,
nearby manufactured homes, or neighboring residential property in such
brilliance as to constitute a danger or a nuisance.
Subd. 4.   Annual Inspection Fees.
   A.   Inspection.
      1.   Building Inspector. All manufactured home parks shall be inspected
annually by the City Building Inspector to ascertain that all provisions of
this Chapter, all other applicable City ordinances, and the provisions of any
conditional use permit are being observed.
      2.   Fire Inspection. All manufactured home parks shall be inspected
annually by the City Building Inspector to ascertain that no fire hazards are
present, to ascertain that fire hydrants and fire extinguishing equipment are
in working order, and to ascertain that all provisions of this Chapter and
other applicable codes and ordinances pertaining to fire protection and
prevention are being observed.
      3.   Water System Inspection. All manufactured home parks shall have the
water system inspected annually by a designated City inspector to insure that
all hydrants and other water facilities are in proper working order.
   B.   City inspectors may make more frequent inspections as they may deem
necessary.
Subd. 5.   Operation Requirements.
   A.   General Operation and Maintenance:
      1.   Manager. Every manufactured home park shall have an adult manager or
caretaker on duty in or about the park at all times, to keep the park, its
facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition, and to be
available in case of emergencies. The manager or caretaker shall be answerable
with said owner for the violations of any provisions of this Chapter.
      2.   Office. Each manufactured home park shall maintain a central office
for the use of the owner or manager, distinctly marked OFFICE.
      3.   Map. A map of the park with all lots clearly numbered, shall be
displayed at the park office. The lots themselves shall also be numbered in a
manner visible from the frontage street. The park shall be open at reasonable
times to the visiting public and a directory shall be readily available to
visitors.
      4.   Lighting. The park grounds shall be lighted as approved by the City
during all hours of darkness.
      5.   Public Address Prohibited. No public address or loud speaker system
shall be permitted.
      6.   Rules. Each park shall adopt a set of rules and regulations for
orderly operation of the park in conformance with this Chapter, and these rules
shall be made available to the residents of the park.
      7.   Pets. No domestic animals or house pets of park occupants shall be
allowed to run at large, or commit any nuisances within the limits of the park.
      8.   Clothes Drying. No exterior clothes drying shall be permitted upon
any lot or any other area of the park except in an area specifically provided.
      9.   Transient Occupancy. The use of any lot or other area within the
park for tent sites, camper trailers, pick up campers, or other transient
occupancy use is prohibited.
   B.   Lot Regulations.
      1.   Placement Restricted. No more than one unit shall be parked upon any
lot.
      2.   Occupancy Regulated. No home may be inhabited by a greater number of
occupants than that for which it was designated.
      3.   Skirts Required. The base of all manufactured homes shall be
enclosed with skirting, such skirting to be installed within ten (10) days from
the date of installation of the unit. Such enclosure must be accessible for
inspection and no obstruction shall be permitted that impedes the inspection of
the manufactured home, plumbing, electrical facilities, and related equipment.
No storage shall be permitted beneath the manufactured home.
      4.   Use Restrictions. All lots shall be used for residential purposes
only. No commercial activity or signage will be permitted unless otherwise
permitted by Zoning ordinances other than this section.
   C.   Lot Display Regulations. No homeowner nor prospective homeowner shall
be required to purchase a home from the owner or operator of the park in which
said owner desires to locate, or from someone designated by said owner of the
park. This provision, however, shall not prevent the owner of the park from
establishing certain minimal standards and conditions of quality and design as
to homes permitted in a park owned by him.
   D.   Street Maintenance and Regulations.
      1.   Snow Removal. The park operator shall remove snow from the all
streets, guest parking areas and public sidewalk areas within the park after
each snowfall and these areas shall be kept sanded and/or free of ice and snow.
      2.   Maintenance and Repair. All streets within the park shall be kept in
good repair, and kept clean and free of litter.
      3.   Speed Limit. A speed limit of ten (10) miles per hour shall be
maintained within the park limits and signs shall be posted accordingly. The
operator may use raised bumps or ridges across the road surfaces to assure
compliance with the posted limits.
   E.   Storage and Parking.
      1.   On-Site Parking Restricted. No more than two (2) vehicles may be
parked on any home lot.
      2.   On-Site Storage Prohibited. All boats, boat trailers, hauling
trailers, and all other equipment not stored within the home nor the utility
enclosure that may have been provided shall be stored in the overload parking
area, and not upon the lots occupied by homes, nor upon the streets within the
park, nor upon any other City streets.
   F.   Fire and Police Protection.
      1.   Fire Extinguisher Required. Every home occupied in the park shall be
equipped with a fire extinguisher in usable condition. The occupant of the home
shall be responsible for providing such extinguisher for his home.
      2.   Fire Extinguisher Required in Service Building(s). Portable fire
extinguishers rated for classes B and C fires, with a capacity of ten (10)
pounds dry powder, shall be kept visible in service buildings and at other
locations as approved or required by the Fire Chief, for convenient access by
all of the occupants of the park. Such fire extinguishers shall be maintained
in good operation condition.
      3.   Open Burning Prohibited. No fire shall be kindled or maintained
except in a stove, fireplace, barbecue pit, incinerator, or other equipment
intended for such purpose. No such fire shall be left unattended. No fuel shall
be used and no material burned which emits dense smoke or objectionable odors.
Open burning is prohibited.
      4.   Storage of Flammable Liquids Prohibited. Storage of flammable
liquids or materials or gases within or under the home is forbidden.
      5.   Litter and Rubbish Storage Prohibited. All areas of the park shall
be kept free of litter, rubbish, and other flammable material.
      6.   Open to Police, Fire and Emergency Vehicles. The park shall be open
to fire, police and other emergency vehicles and personnel at all times, and
the law enforcement officers and the fire department shall be provided with a
current directory showing the lot numbers and addresses.
   G.   Storm Protection.
      1.   Storm Warning Device Required. The storm warning device required for
the park shall be kept in good operating condition and tested once a month at a
designated time in a manner approved by the City.
      2.   Weather Alerts Required. The park manager shall be responsible for
obtaining weather warning information from the appropriate media, and for
alerting residents to the hazards of a storm via the warning device when any
storm with damaging winds is imminent.
      3.   Emergency Shelter Maintained. The emergency shelter area or building
shall be available for appropriate use twenty-four (24) hours a day. Entrances
shall be illuminated during all hours of darkness. The manager shall keep the
shelter area clean and sanitary, and stocked with emergency supplies and first
aid equipment.
   H.   Refuse Handling.
      1.   Management Responsible. The park shall provide for the collection
and disposal of all refuse and garbage generated within the park. The park may
contract with private garbage haulers or provide the service itself. All refuse
handling must adhere to the following standards:
      a.   Nuisance Prohibited. The storage, collection, and disposal of refuse
in the park shall be so conducted so as to create no health hazards, rodent
harborage, insect breeding, accident or fire hazards, or air pollution.
      b.   Garbage Collection Required. Garbage and refuse shall be collected
and disposed of as frequently as may be necessary to insure that garbage
receptacles shall not overflow.
   I.   Sewer and Water.
      1.   Maintenance Required. All sewer and water systems within the park
shall be kept in good operating condition in conformance with regulations of
the Minnesota Department of Health and the City. Any maintenance of water and
sewer systems within the park shall be at the owner's expense, but shall be
under the supervision of an official designated by the City, who shall have
authority to initiate necessary repairs.
      2.   Water Pressure Maintained. If the City deems it necessary, auxiliary
pumps to boost water pressure shall be installed at the expense of the park
owner to maintain needed pressure for fire protection.
      3.   Service Charges. For sewer service and water service, when
available, the City will charge the service rates established in the
appropriate district. All charges will be computed on a per unit basis.
Subd. 6.   Administration.     Enforcement by the Building Inspector: Except as
otherwise provided herein, this Chapter shall be administered and enforced by
the Building Inspector, who is hereby designated as enforcing officer. The
Building Inspector may institute in the name of the City any appropriate
actions or proceedings against a violator as provided by law.
Subd. 7.   Manufactured Homes and Manufactured Home Parks and Placement of
Travel Trailers and Travel Vehicles.
   A.   New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing mobile
manufactured home parks shall be subject to the provisions placed within the
subdivision section of this chapter. The placement of new or replacement
manufactured homes in existing manufactured home parks or on individual lots of
record that are located in flood plain districts will be treated as a new
structure and may be placed only if elevated on fill in accordance with this
Chapter. If vehicular road access for pre-existing manufactured home parks is
not provided, an elevation no lower than two (2) feet below the Regulatory
Flood Protection Elevation, then replacement manufactured homes will not be
allowed until the property owner(s) develops a flood warning emergency plan
acceptable to the Governing Body.
   B.   All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition
to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
Travel trailers and travel vehicles that do not meet the exemption criteria
specified shall be subject to the provisions of this section.
   C.   Exemption. Travel trailers and travel vehicles are exempt from the
provisions of this ordinance if they meet the following criteria:
      1.   Have current licenses required for highway use.
      2.   Are highway ready meaning on wheels or the internal lacking system,
are attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities commonly used
in campgrounds and trailer parks and the travel trailer/travel vehicle has no
permanent structural type additions attached to it.
      3.   The travel trailer or travel vehicle and associated use must be
permissible in any pre-existing, underlying zoning use district.
   D.   Areas exempted for placement of travel/recreational vehicles are:
individual lots or parcels of record, existing commercial recreational vehicle
parks or campgrounds and existing condominium type associations.
   E.   Travel trailers and travel vehicles lose this exemption when
development occurs on the parcel exceeding $5,000 for a structural addition to
the travel trailer/travel vehicle and all additions and accessory structures
will then be treated as a new structure and shall be subject to the elevation/
flood proofing requirements and the use of land restriction specified in this
section.
   F.   New commercial travel trailer or travel vehicle parks or campgrounds
and new residential type subdivisions and condominium associations and the
expansion of any existing similar use exceeding five (5) units or dwelling
sites shall be subject to the following:
      1.   Any new or replacement travel trailer or travel vehicle will be
allowed in the Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts provided said trailer or
vehicle and its contents are placed on fill above the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation and proper elevated road access to the site exists, in
accordance, an elevation no lower than two (2) feet below the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation. Any fill placed in a floodway for the purpose of
elevating a travel trailer shall be subject to requirements of this section.
      2.   All new or replacement travel trailers or travel vehicles not
meeting the criteria of (a) above may, as an alternative, be allowed as a
Conditional Use if in accordance with the following provisions and the
provisions of this section. The applicant must submit an emergency plan for the
safe evacuation of all vehicles and people during the 100-year flood. Said plan
shall be prepared by a registered engineer or other qualified individual and
shall demonstrate that adequate time and personnel exist to carry out the
evacuation. All attendant sewage and water facilities for new or replacement
travel trailers or other recreational vehicles must be protected or constructed
so as to not be impaired or contaminated during times of flooding in accordance
with this section.
1001.07 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS
Subd. 1.   Attached Accessory Buildings. In case an accessory building is
attached to the main building, it shall be made structurally a part of the main
building and shall comply in all respects with the requirements of this chapter
applicable to the main building. An accessory building, unless attached to and
made a part of the main building, shall not be closer than five feet to the
main building, except as otherwise provided in this section.
Subd. 2.   Building Type and Standards. Architectural details for accessory
buildings are to be the same or similar as for the principal building as
determined by the City Council, based upon (but not limited to) the following
criteria:
   A.   Roof pitch orientation and slop.
   B.   Building material.
   C.17   Exterior color.
Subd. 3.     Approval Required.
   A.   Zoning Approval Required: Detached accessory buildings not exceeding
two hundred (200) square feet in floor area shall be allowed without issuance
of a building permit but shall comply with all other provisions of this Chapter
subject to approval by the Zoning Administrator.
   B.   Building Permit Required: Detached accessory buildings greater than two
hundred (200) square feet in floor area shall require a building permit. The
building official shall review the site plan and construction drawings to
determine compliance with the Building Code and other applicable ordinances,
laws, and regulations. (Ordinance 18-08, adopted August 15, 2018)
Subd. 4.   Residential Accessory Buildings. Detached accessory buildings in
residential districts shall conform to the following additional regulations as
to their locations upon the lot.
   A.   Use of the building is limited to those activities accessory to the
principal residential use of the property and shall not include any home
occupations or other business activities.
   B.   Accessory building(s) shall not encroach on required front or side
yards in any district. In addition, no accessory building shall be placed in
front of the front line of principal buildings.
   C.   Accessory buildings may encroach on rear yards to a distance equal to ½
the required rear yard setback, except when the rear lot line abuts a public
street.
   D.   When a lot in a C-0, C-1, C-2, C-3, or I-1 district abuts a residential
district, the yard requirement for the lot on the abutting residential yards
shall be modified as follows: The size of the yard shall conform to the
regulation of the abutting districts which results in the largest yard.
   E.   Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to
a public street, or with access to an approved private street, and all
structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access
for servicing, fire protection and required off-street parking.
   F.   Building Size. A detached accessory building shall not occupy more than
25 percent of the area of any rear yard, nor may it be larger than 1,000 square
feet, whichever is less. The area regulations in this subdivision may be
exceeded by approval of a conditional use permit in accordance with Section
1001.07, Subd. 04.G. of this Chapter.
   G.   Building Height. Detached accessory buildings shall not exceed one
story or fifteen (15) feet in height. The height limitations may be exceeded by
approval of a conditional use permit in accordance with Section
1001.07, Subd. 4.G. of this Chapter. (Ordinance 15-01, adopted February 24,
2015)
   H.   Conditional Use Permits. Applications for a conditional use permit
under this Section shall be regulated by Section
1001.03, Subd. 5 of this Chapter. Such applications are subject to the
following conditions:
      1.   The area of the accessory building is not larger than the gross
floor area of the principal building.
      2.   The height of the accessory building shall not exceed that of the
principal building.
      3.   There is a demonstrated need for the building area or height
increase and the accessory building has an evident re-use or function related
to the principal use.
      4.17   The accessory is of a scale and design that is compatible with the
character of the property or neighborhood in which it is located. (Ordinance
18-08, adopted August 15, 2018)
Subd. 5. Residential Outdoor Storage: Except as provided in this section, all
outside storage of materials and equipment for residential uses shall be stored
within a building or fully screened so as not to be visible from adjoining
properties and the public right-of-way, except for the following:
   A.   Clothes lines pole and wire.
   B.   Not more than two (2) currently licensed recreational vehicles,
trailers and equipment provided that:
      1.    In the front yard, provided the recreational vehicles and equipment
are located on an established driveway that complies with Section
1001.05 of this Chapter and not upon any public right-of-way.
      2.    In the side yard only when abutting an attached or detached garage,
provided that:
         a.   The recreational vehicles and equipment are not closer than five
(5) feet from the side lot line.
         b.   The area on which the recreational vehicles and equipment are
stored shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete or paving brick.
         c.   The recreational vehicles and equipment shall not be within the
setback required from a public right of way for the side yard of a corner lot,
except for a side yard when abutting a major collector or arterial street and
then may not encroach into a required bufferyard.
      3.    In the rear yard not closer than ten (10) feet from the rear lot
line and/or five feet (5) feet from the side lot lines and then may not
encroach into a required bufferyard.
   C.   Off-street parking of currently registered and operable passenger
vehicles, as in accordance with Section
1001.05 of this Chapter.
   D.   Construction and landscaping material currently being used on the
premises.
   E.   Lawn furniture or furniture used and constructed explicitly for outdoor
use.
   F.   Exterior storage of firewood for use upon the property upon which it is
stored. (Ordinance 18-08, August 15, 2018)
Subd. 6.   Other Uses.7  Except as otherwise noted, accessory buildings and
uses for all principal uses other than residential uses shall conform to the
setback requirements specified for the respective zoning district in which they
are located.
1001.08 SIGN REGULATIONS28
Subd 1.   Findings, Purpose and Effect.
   A.   Findings: The City finds:
      1.   Exterior signs have a substantial impact on the character and
quality of the environment.
      2.   Signs provide an important medium through which individuals may
convey a variety of messages.
      3.   Signs can create traffic hazards, aesthetic concerns and detriments
to property values, thereby threatening the public health, safety and welfare.
      4.   The City's zoning regulations have included the regulation of signs
in an effort to provide adequate means of expression and to promote the
economic viability of the business community, while protecting the City and its
citizens from a proliferation of signs of a type, size, location and character
that would adversely impact upon the aesthetics of the community and threaten
the health, safety and welfare of the community. The regulation of the physical
characteristics of signs within the City has had a positive impact on traffic
safety and the appearance of the community.
   B.   Purpose and Intent: It is not the purpose or intent of this Section to
regulate the message displayed on any sign; nor is it the purpose or intent of
this Section to regulate any building design or any display not defined as a
sign, or any sign which cannot be viewed from outside a building. The purpose
and intent of this Section is to:
      1.   Regulate the number, location, size, type, illumination and other
physical characteristics of signs within the City in order to promote the
public health, safety and welfare.
      2.   Maintain, enhance and improve the aesthetic environment of the City
by preventing visual clutter that is harmful to the appearance of the
community.
      3.   Improve the visual appearance of the City while providing for
effective means of communication, consistent with constitutional guarantees and
the City's goals of public safety and aesthetics.
      4.   Provide for fair and consistent enforcement of the sign regulations
set for herein under the zoning authority of the City.
   C.   Effect: A sign may be erected, mounted, displayed or maintained in the
City if it is in conformance with the provisions of this Section. The effect of
this Section, as more specifically set forth herein, is to:
      1.   Allow a wide variety of sign types in commercial zones, and a more
limited variety of signs in other zones, subject to the standards set forth in
this sign ordinance.
      2.   Allow certain small, unobtrusive signs incidental to the principal
use of a site in all zones when in compliance with the requirements of this
Section.
      3.   Prohibit signs whose location, size, type, illumination or other
physical characteristics negatively affect the environment and where the
communication can be accomplished by means having a lesser impact on the
environment and the public health, safety and welfare.
      4.   Provide for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of
this Section.
Subd. 2.   Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or
phrase of this Section is for any reason held to be invalid, such invalidity
shall not affect the validity or enforceability of the remaining portions of
this Section. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted the
Section, subsection, sentence, or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that
any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be
declared invalid.
Subd. 3.   Permit Required. No sign shall be erected, altered, reconstructed,
maintained or moved in the City without first securing a permit from the City:
   A.   The content of the message or speech displayed on the sign shall not be
reviewed or considered in determining whether to approve or deny a sign permit.
   B.   Application for an administrative permit shall be filed by the property
owner or designated agent with the Zoning Administrator on forms to be provided
by the City.
   C.   Application for a permit shall contain the following information unless
waived by the City:
      1.   Names and addresses of the applicant, owners of the sign and lot.
      2.   The address at which any signs are to be erected.
      3.   The lot, block and addition at which the signs are to be erected and
the street on which they are to front.
      4.   Type and size of sign (e.g., wall sign, pylon sign).
      5.   A site plan to scale showing the location of lot lines, building
structures, parking areas, existing and proposed signs and any other physical
features.
      6.   Plans, location and specifications and method of construction and
attachment to the buildings or placement method of the ground.
      7.   Copy of stress sheets and calculations showing that the structure is
designed for dead load and wind pressure in any direction in the amount
required by this and all other laws and ordinances of the City.
      8.   Written consent of the owner or lessee of any site on which the sign
is to be erected.
      9.   Any electrical permit required and issued for the sign.
      10.   Other information to demonstrate compliance with this and all other
ordinances of the City.
   C.   The application shall be accompanied by a fee as established by City
Council resolution. Applications for amending administrative permits shall be
accompanied by a fee as established by Ordinance.
   D.   The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant, in writing, of an
incomplete application within fifteen (15) days of the date of submission.
   E.   The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and related
materials and shall determine whether the proposal is in compliance with all
applicable evaluation criteria, codes, ordinances, and applicable performance
standards set forth in this Chapter within sixty (60) days of submission of a
complete application.
Subd. 4.   Permit Not Required. The following signs shall not require a permit
and are allowed in addition to those signs allowed by Sections
1001.08, Subd. 8 and Subd. 10 of this Chapter. These exemptions, however, shall
not be construed as relieving the owner of the sign from the responsibility of
its erection and maintenance, and its compliance with the provisions of this
Section or any other law or ordinance regulating the same.
   A.   The changing of the display surface on a painted or printed sign only.
This exemption, however, shall apply only to poster replacement and/or on-site
changes involving sign painting elsewhere then directly on a building.
   B.   Two (2) signs per property not to exceed four (4) square feet.
   C.   One (1) sign not per property not to exceed nine (9) square feet.
   D.33   All noncommercial signs of any size posted in any number from forty
six (46) days before the state primary in a state general election year until
ten (10) days following the general election, and thirteen (13) weeks prior to
any special election until ten (10) days following the special election.
   E.   Signs of a public noncommercial nature including public notification
signs, safety signs, traffic signs, direction to public facilities when erected
by or on behalf of a public official or employee in the performance of official
duty.
Subd. 5.   Non-Conforming Signs and Uses:
   A.   Nonconforming Signs: A nonconforming sign lawfully existing upon the
effective date of this Section shall be regulated in accordance with Section
1001.04 of this Chapter.
   B.   Nonconforming Uses: When the principal use of land is legally
nonconforming under Section
1001.04 of this Chapter, all existing or proposed signs in conjunction with
that land use shall be considered conforming if they are in compliance with the
sign provisions for the most restrictive zoning district in which the principal
use is allowed.
Subd. 6.   Enforcement and Penalties:
   A.   Inspection. All signs for which a permit is required shall be subject
to inspection by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may order
the removal of any sign that is not maintained in accordance with the
maintenance provisions of this Section.
   B.   This Section shall be administered and enforced by the Zoning
Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may institute in the name of the City
appropriate actions or proceedings against a violator.
   C   The City reserves the right to require the removal, at the owner’s
expense, of any sign when the requirements of this section are not completely
followed and adhered to, or if a sign is not properly maintained or falls into
a state of disrepair. The City shall not have any obligation or liability to
replace any sign when removed by the City.
   D.   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with, or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this Section
shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined or penalized not more than the maximum
levels established by the state for misdemeanor offenses.
Subd. 7.   Substitution.  The owner of any sign which is otherwise allowed by
this Section may substitute non-commercial copy in lieu of any other commercial
or non-commercial copy. This substitution of copy may be made without any
additional approval or permitting. The purpose of this provision is to prevent
any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over non-commercial speech, or
favoring of any particular non-commercial message over any other non-commercial
message. This provision prevails over any more specific provision to the
contrary.
Subd. 8.   General Regulations.
   A.   All signs are defined to be an accessory use.
   B.   All freestanding signs shall be setback ten (10) feet from any property
line and no sign may be located within a drainage and utility easement.
   C.   The design and construction standards as set forth in chapter 4 of the
1997 edition of the uniform sign code as may be amended, are hereby adopted.
   D.   The installation of electrical signs shall be subject to the state’s
electrical code. Electrical service to such sign shall be underground.
   E.   No sign shall be attached or be allowed to hang from any building until
all necessary wall and roof attachments have been approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
   F.   No signs, guys, stays or attachments shall be erected, placed or
maintained on trees nor interfere with any electric light, power, telephone or
telegraph wires or the supports thereof.
   G.   Illuminated signs shall be shielded to prevent lights from being
directed at oncoming traffic in such brilliance that it impairs the vision of
the driver and may not interfere with or obscure traffic signs or signals.
Lighting may not illuminate any adjacent properties, buildings, or streets.
   H.   The use of banners, pennants and similar devices shall be allowed
subject to the following provisions:
      1.   The sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.
      2.   The sign shall not be illuminated with any flashing device.
      3.   Not more than one banner, pennant or portable sign or similar device
shall be displayed upon a property at any one time and shall be affixed to the
principal building.
   I.   The use of a temporary sign shall be allowed subject to the following
provisions:
      1.   Commercial Speech:
         a.   The sign shall not exceed forty-eight (48) square feet.
         b.   The sign shall not be illuminated or include any flashing device.
         c.   Not more than one (1) temporary sign shall be displayed upon a
property at any one time.
         d.   The sign shall not be defined as an off-premises sign as
regulated by this section.
         e.   Display of a temporary portable sign shall be limited to not more
than thirty (30) consecutive days and not more than one hundred and twenty
(120) days per calendar year.
      2.   Non-Commercial Speech:
         a.   The sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.
         b.   The sign shall not be illuminated or include any flashing device.
         c.   Not more than one (1) temporary portable sign shall be displayed
upon a property at any one time.
         d.   Display of a temporary portable sign shall be limited to not more
than thirty (30) consecutive days and not more than ninety (90) days per
calendar year. (Ordinance 12-02, June 12, 2012)
   J.   The use of a temporary off-premises signs shall be allowed subject to
the following provisions:
      1.   The sign must be located on a commercial or industrial zoned lot in
a yard abutting an arterial or major collector street as designated by the
Comprehensive Plan.
      2.   The sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet.
      3.   The sign shall not exceed a height of three (3) feet above grade.
      4.   The sign shall not be illuminated or include any flashing device.
      5.   Not more than one (1) temporary off-premises sign shall be displayed
upon a property at any one time and the sign may only be displayed between the
hours of 7:00 AM to 7:00 PM each day.
      6.   A permit issued by the Zoning Administrator for the placement of a
temporary off-premises sign shall be valid for thirty (30) days and may be
renewed for successive thirty (30) day periods.
   K.   No sign or sign structure shall be erected or maintained that prevents
free ingress or egress from any door, window or fire escape. No sign or sign
structure shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
   L.   A freestanding sign or sign structure constructed so that the faces are
not back to back, shall not have an angle separating the faces exceeding twenty
(20) degrees unless the total area of both sides added together does not exceed
the maximum allowable sign area for that district.
   M.   Except for farm buildings, at least one address sign identifying the
correct property number as assigned shall be required on each principal
building in all districts. The number shall be at least three (3) inches in
height.
   N.   The area within the frame of a sign shall be used to calculate the
square footage except that the width of a frame exceeding twelve (12) inches
shall constitute sign face, and if such letters or graphics be mounted directly
on a wall or fascia or in such way as to be without a frame the dimensions for
calculating the square footage shall be the area extending six (6) inches
beyond the periphery formed around such letters or graphics in a plane figure
bounded by straight lines connecting the outermost points thereof. Each surface
utilized to display a message or to attract attention shall be measured as a
separate sign and shall be calculated in the overall square footage. Symbols,
flags, pictures, wording, figures or other forms of graphics painted on or
attached to windows, walls, awnings, free-standing structures, suspended by
balloons, or kites or on persons, animals, or vehicles are considered a sign
and are included in calculating the overall square footage.
   O.   The top of a sign, including its superstructure, if any, shall be no
higher than the roof of the building to which such sign may be attached.
   P.   The area around freestanding signs shall be landscaped with plantings
and maintained in such a manner to accent and enhance the sign while remaining
sensitive to the natural features of the site.
   Q.   Signs for motor fuel stations shall be regulated by the sign provisions
for the zoning district in which the station is located, except that one (1)
additional sign not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet shall be allowed to
display electronic or non-electronic text identifying current fuel prices in
accordance with Minnesota State Statutes Section 239.751.
   R.   Window signs shall not exceed twenty five (25) percent of the total
area of the window in which they are displayed.
   S.   Within the POC District and on commercial and industrial zoned
properties with frontage to TH 55, changeable copy signs or electronic reader
board space may be used separately or in combination on a sign shall not exceed
fifty (50) percent of the allowable sign area, whichever is less. The message
displayed on electronic reader board signs shall be depicted in one statement
and not as scrolling, flashing or other flow of information not to change more
than once every two (2) minutes.
   T.   Multiple Occupancy Commercial And Industrial Buildings: When a single
principal building is devoted to three (3) or more commercial or industrial
uses, signs shall be allowed subject to review and approval of the Zoning
Administrator based upon the following requirements:
      1.   The maximum individual sign sizes for multiple occupancy buildings
and individual businesses that may display a sign shall not exceed the maximum
provisions in the same zoning district in Section
1001.08, Subd. 10 of this Chapter.
      2.   Commercial retail, office, or mixed use multiple occupancy buildings
may display a freestanding sign consistent with the applicable zoning district
provisions in Section
1001.08, Subd. 10 of this Chapter.
      3.   Individual tenants of a multiple occupancy building within a
commercial or industrial zoning district shall not display separate wall,
canopy, or marquee signs unless the tenant's business has an exclusive exterior
entrance and subject to the following requirements:
         a.   The number of individual wall, canopy, or marquee signs shall be
limited to one (1) per tenant space, except that not more than two (2) signs
may be displayed for the tenant of a corner suite or a suite that extends
through the building thus having two exterior walls.
         b.   Each wall, canopy or marquee sign shall be limited to an area not
to exceed sixty four (64) square feet.
         c.   The sign shall be located only on the exterior wall of the tenant
space to which the sign permit is issued, but are not required to face a public
street.
         d.   A comprehensive sign plan is submitted that includes all of the
following information:
            (1)   A site plan to scale showing the location of lot lines,
buildings, structures, parking areas, existing and proposed signs, and any
other physical features of the area included within the proposed comprehensive
sign plan.
            (2)   Elevations to scale of buildings included within the
comprehensive sign plan including the location of existing or proposed wall,
canopy, or marquee signs.
            (3)   To scale plans for all existing and proposed signs of any
type included within the comprehensive sign plan indicating area, dimensions,
height, materials, colors, and means of illumination (if any).
         f.   No permit shall be issued for a new or replacement sign for an
individual tenant except upon a determination by the Zoning Administrator that
it is consistent with the approved comprehensive sign plan.
   U.33   No sign shall be erected within the public right-of-way except for
those signs for such uses and of such area, height and construction at
locations as may be approved by the City Council as owner of said public right-
of-way.
Subd. 9.   Prohibited Signs. The following signs are prohibited:
   A.   Any sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an
imitation of or resembles any official traffic control device or railroad sign
or signal, or emergency vehicle signs, or which attempts to direct the movement
of traffic or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any
official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal.
   B.33   All signs over one hundred twenty (120) square feet in area, except
within the POC District or as allowed by Section
1001.08, Subd. 8.U of this Chapter.
   C.   Off-premises signs, except those allowed by Section
1001.08, Subd. 8.J, I and U of this Chapter. (Ordinance 02-12, adopted June 12,
2012)
   D.   Signs painted, attached or in any other manner affixed to trees, rocks,
or similar natural surfaces, or attached to public utility poles, bridges,
towers, or similar public structures.
   E.   Flashing signs.
   F.   Electronic changeable text, except as specifically allowed by this
Chapter.
   G.   Rotating signs.
   H.   Shimmering signs.
   I.   Roof signs.
   J.   Balloon signs.
Subd. 10.   District Regulations. In addition to the signs allowed by Sections
1001.04, Subd. 4 and
1001.08. Subd 6 of this Chapter, the following signs shall be allowed within
the specific Zoning Districts:
   A.   Within the A-R District, the following additional regulations apply:
      1.    One (1) sign shall be allowed provided that:
         a.   The area of the sign shall not exceed thirty two (32) square
feet.
         b.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of eight
(8) feet.
   B.   Within the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Districts, the following additional
regulations apply:
      1.   One (1) sign shall be allowed provided that:
         a.   The area of the sign shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet.
         b.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of eight
(8) feet.
      2.   In addition to the sign allowed by Section
1001.08, Subd. 10.B.1 of this Chapter, signs shall be allowed for a subdivision
having not less than five (5) lots or dwelling units at its entrance from a
major collector or arterial street defined by the Transportation Plan provided
that:
         a.   Not more than one (1) sign shall be allowed at each entrance from
a major collector or arterial street.
         b.   The area of each sign shall not exceed thirty two (32) square
feet.
         c.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of eight
(8) feet.
         d.   For sign(s) requiring regular long-term maintenance, the sign(s)
shall be located on separate or common space outlots of sufficient size and
area to accommodate said structure:
            1)   An association or other form of deed restriction and ownership
deemed acceptable by the Zoning Administrator and involving all the properties
within the subdivision shall be required, which shall own and be responsible
for the upkeep, perpetual maintenance, taxes, insurance, utilities and other
costs associated with the sign(s) and the outlot upon which it is located.
            2)   The association rules or by-laws, or similar legal document,
shall specify how the aforementioned sign responsibilities will be delegated
and paid for.
            3)   Separate or common space outlots for signs shall be considered
and planned for at the time of preliminary plat application and be included in
the final plat. The subdivision development contract between the City and the
developer shall specify the designated use of the outlot(s), its ownership and
the respective responsibilities regarding the outlot.
         f.   The area around the sign shall be landscaped in such a manner to
accent and enhance the sign while remaining sensitive to the natural features
of the site. Detailed site and landscape plans shall be included with each sign
permit application and shall be subject approval by the Zoning Administrator.
         g.   The design and construction of the sign shall be done with the
highest quality materials and workmanship to keep maintenance and upkeep costs
to a minimum and to minimize the potential for vandalism. The sign is to be
aesthetically pleasing when designed and constructed. The sign shall be
compatible with nearby structures in the area. Detailed construction plans and
a materials list shall be included with each sign permit application and shall
be subject approval by the Zoning Administrator.
      3.   Additional signs shall be allowed upon approval of a final plat for
a subdivision having not less than five (5) lots provided that:
         a.   One (1) sign shall be allowed per project or subdivision or one
(1) sign for each frontage to a major collector or arterial street, whichever
is greater.
         b.   The area of the sign shall not exceed thirty two (32) square
feet.
         c.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of eight
(8) feet.
         d.   The sign shall not be displayed for a period to exceed twenty
four (24) months from the date a permit is issued for the sign or until
building permits have been issued for eighty-five (85) percent of the lots or
dwelling units within the subdivision, whichever is less restrictive.
   C.   Within the C-O and C-1 Districts, the following additional regulations
shall apply:
      1.   The total area of all signs displayed on a lot shall not exceed ten
(10) percent of the total building façade fronting not more than two (2) public
streets.
      2.   Freestanding Sign. Except for lots with frontage to TH 55, no
freestanding signs shall be allowed within the C-O District. One (1) sign is
allowed per lot with frontage to TH 55 within the C-O District and all lots
within the C-1 District. The area of a freestanding sign may not exceed sixty-
four (64) square feet each side with a maximum height of twenty (20) feet.
      3.   Wall, Canopy, or Marquee Signs. Not more than one (1) wall, canopy,
or marquee signs shall be permitted on one (1) facade fronting a public street,
except in the case of a corner lot or through lot where wall signs may be
installed on two (2) facades fronting a public street. The area of individual
signs shall not exceed sixty four (64) square feet.
      4.   In addition to the sign area allowances established by Section
1001.08, Subd. 10.C.1 of this Chapter, a sign shall be allowed for a
subdivision having not less than three (3) lots or principal buildings at its
entrance from a major collector or arterial street defined by the
Transportation Plan provided that:
         a.   Not more than one (1) sign shall be allowed at each entrance from
a major collector or arterial street.
         b.   The area of each sign shall not exceed thirty two (32) square
feet.
         c.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of
sixteen (16) feet.
         d.   The sign(s) shall be located to accommodate said sign and related
landscaping to meet all setback requirements. If the sign(s) are to be located
on outlots, the outlots shall be designated on the preliminary plat and
detailed plans for the area identification signs shall be submitted with the
final plat.
         e.   The area around the sign(s) shall be landscaped in such a manner
to accent and enhance the sign while remaining sensitive to the natural
features of the site. Detailed site and landscape plans shall be included with
each sign permit application and shall be subject to review and approval of the
Zoning Administrator.
         f.   The design and construction of the sign(s) shall be done with the
highest quality materials and workmanship to keep maintenance and upkeep costs
to a minimum and to minimize the potential for vandalism. The signs are to be
aesthetically pleasing when designed and constructed. The sign shall be
compatible with nearby structures in the area. Detailed construction plans and
a materials list shall be included with each sign permit application and shall
be subject to the review and approval of the Zoning Administrator.
      5.   Additional signs shall be allowed upon approval of a final plat for
a subdivision having not less than three (3) lots or approval of site and
building plans for one (1) lot by the Zoning Administrator provided that:
         a.   One (1) sign shall be allowed per project or subdivision or one
(1) sign for each frontage to a major collector or arterial street, whichever
is greater.
         b.   The area of the sign shall not exceed thirty two (32) square
feet.
         c.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of eight
(8) feet.
         d.   The sign shall not be displayed for a period to exceed twenty
four months (24) months from the date a permit is issued for the sign or until
occupancy permits have been issued for eighty-five (85) percent of the tenant
spaces within the development, whichever is less restrictive.
   D.   Within the C-2, C-3 and I-1 Districts the following additional
regulations shall apply:
      1.   The total area of all signs displayed on a lot shall not exceed
fifteen (15) percent of the total building façade fronting not more than two
(2) public streets.
      2.   Freestanding Sign. One (1) sign is allowed per lot. The area of a
freestanding sign may not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet each side
with a maximum height of twenty four (24) feet.
      3.   Wall, Canopy, or Marquee Signs. Not more than one (1) wall, canopy,
or marquee signs shall be permitted on one (1) facade fronting a public street,
except in the case of a corner lot or through lot where wall signs may be
installed on two (2) facades fronting a public street. The area of individual
signs shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet.
      4.   In addition to the sign area allowances established by Section
1001.08, Subd. 10.D.1 of this Chapter, a sign shall be allowed for a
subdivision having not less than three (3) lots or principal buildings at its
entrance from a major collector or arterial street defined by the
Transportation Plan provided that:
         a.   Not more than one (1) sign shall be allowed at each entrance from
a major collector or arterial street.
         b.   The area of each sign shall not exceed sixty four (64) square
feet.
         c.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of twenty
four (24) feet.
         d.   The sign(s) shall be located to accommodate said sign and related
landscaping to meet all setback requirements. If the sign(s) are to be located
on outlots, the outlots shall be designated on the preliminary plat and
detailed plans for the area identification signs shall be submitted with the
final plat.
         e.   The area around the sign shall be landscaped in such a manner to
accent and enhance the sign while remaining sensitive to the natural features
of the site. Detailed site and landscape plans shall be included with each sign
permit application and shall be subject to review and approval of the Zoning
Administrator.
         f.   The design and construction of the sign shall be done with the
highest quality materials and workmanship to keep maintenance and upkeep costs
to a minimum and to minimize the potential for vandalism. The signs are to be
aesthetically pleasing when designed and constructed. The sign shall be
compatible with nearby structures in the area. Detailed construction plans and
a materials list shall be included with each sign permit application and shall
be subject to the review and approval of the Zoning Administrator.
      5.   Additional signs shall be allowed upon approval of a final plat for
a subdivision having not less than three (3) lots or approval of site and
building plans for one (1) lot by the Zoning Administrator provided that:
         a.   One (1) sign shall be allowed per project or subdivision or one
(1) sign for each frontage to a major collector or arterial street, whichever
is greater.
         b.   The area of the sign shall not exceed sixty four (64) square
feet.
         c.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of eight
(8) feet.
         d.   The sign shall not be displayed for a period to exceed twenty
four months (24) months from the date a permit is issued for the sign or until
occupancy permits have been issued for eighty-five (85) percent of the tenant
spaces within the development, whichever is less restrictive.
   G.   Within the POC District the following additional regulations shall
apply:
      1.   Freestanding Sign. One (1) sign is allowed per lot. The area of a
freestanding sign may not exceed one hundred (100) square feet each side with a
maximum height of twenty four (24) feet.
      2.   Wall, Canopy, or Marquee Signs. Not more than one (1) wall, canopy,
or marquee signs shall be permitted on one (1) facade fronting a public street,
except in the case of a corner lot or through lot where wall signs may be
installed on two (2) facades fronting a public street. The area of individual
signs shall not be limited.
   H.   In a Planned Unit Development district, signing restrictions shall be
based upon the individual uses and structures contained in the complex. Signs
shall be in compliance with the restrictions applied in the most restrictive
zoning district in which the use is allowed.
1001.09 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS, EXCEPTIONS, AND MODIFICATIONS
Subd. 1.   Height Regulations.
   A.   Where the average slope of a lot is greater than one foot rise or fall
in seven feet of horizontal distance from the established elevation or the
property line, one story in addition to the number permitted in the district in
which the lot is located shall be permitted on the downhill side of any
building.
   B.   Height limitations set forth elsewhere in this chapter may be increased
by one hundred (100) percent when applied to the following:
      1.   Monuments.
      2.   Flagpoles.
      3.   Cooling towers. (Ordinance 13-02, adopted May 14, 2013)
   C.   Height limitations set forth elsewhere in this Chapter may be increased
when applied to the following:
      1.   Church spires, belfries, or domes which do not contain usable space.
      2.   Water towers.
      3.   Chimneys or smokestacks.
      4.   WECS as regulated by this Chapter.
      5.   Satellite dishes, radio and television towers as regulated by this
Chapter.
      6.   Personal wireless communication towers. (Ordinance 13-02, adopted
May 14, 2013)
   D.   Height limitations set forth in this chapter may be increased to a
greater height provided the following conditions are met:
      1.   No increase in height limitations shall be allowed, except by
conditional use permit, thereby required to meet the standards set forth for
conditional uses.
      2.   The building or portion thereof with increased height shall not be
adjacent to nor closer than two hundred feet to any adjacent structure.
      3.   Where an increase in the height limitation is allowed under this
subdivision, the building or portion thereof shall be set back from all side
and rear lot lines an additional distance of one foot that the building exceeds
the height limitation of the district in which it is located.
      4.   A site plan for the proposed building shall be submitted along with
the application for conditional use permit. Such site plan shall show the
location and extent of the proposed building, parking, loading, access drives,
landscaping, and any other improvements. Upon consideration by the Planning
Commission and subsequent approval by the council, said site plan shall be
attached to and become a part of change to the site plan shall require a
resubmission to the Planning Commission and subsequent approval by the council.
   E.   Satellite dishes, television receiving antennas, and radio receiving
antennas shall be a permitted use within all zoning districts, provided that
they meet the following conditions:
      1.   The dish or antenna shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.
      2.   The dish or antenna shall not exceed twenty (20) feet above the roof
line.
      3.   No dish or antenna shall be located within the required front yard
setback or required side yard setback abutting a street.
      4.   For ground mounted satellite dishes, television antennas or radio
antennas in the A-R district shall be setback from all adjoining lots a
distance equivalent to one-half (1/2) the height of the structure; shall be
located at least ten (10) feet away from any other building or structure and
shall not be located within a utility easement.
      5   In all districts other than the A-R district, ground mounted
satellite dishes, television antennas, or radio antennas shall be setback from
all adjoining lots a distance equivalent to the height of the structure. Such
structures shall be located ten (10) feet or more from any other building or
structure and shall not be located within a utility easement.
      6.   Lighting Protection. Each satellite dish, television antenna or
radio antenna shall be grounded to protect against natural lightning strikes in
conformance with the National Electrical Code as adopted by the City of
Rockford.
      7.   Satellite dishes, television antennas or radio antennas which exceed
height limitations specified herein may be allowed by conditional use permit as
provided in Section
1001.03, Subd. 5 of this Chapter. (Ordinance 13-02, adopted May 14, 2013)
Subd. 2.   Yard Regulations.
   A.   Measurements shall be taken from the nearest point of the wall of a
building to the lot line in question, subject to the following qualifications:
      1.   Cornices, canopies, or eaves may extend into the required front yard
a distance not exceeding four (4) feet, six (6) inches.
      2.   Fire escapes may extend into the required front yard a distance not
exceeding four (4) feet, six (6) inches.
      3.   A landing place or uncovered porch may extend into the required
front yard a distance not exceeding six feet, if the landing place or porch has
its floor no higher than the entrance floor of the building. An open railing
may be placed around such place.
      4.   The above listed architectural features may also extend into any
side or rear yard to the same extent.
      5.   When a future public street alignment and/or right-of-way width is
known based on the Transportation Plan, the front yard setbacks of a proposed
structure shall be measured from the known future right-of-way.
   B.   On double frontage lots, the required front yard shall be provided on
both streets.
   D.   Visibility from any street or driveway shall be unobstructed above a
height of three (3) feet, measured from where both street or driveway
centerlines intersect within the triangle described as beginning at the
intersection of the projected curb line (or edge of shoulders for rural
sections) of two (2) intersecting streets or drives, thence forty five (45)
feet along one curb line, thence diagonally to a point forty five (45) feet
from the point of beginning along the other curb line.
   E.   The rear yard setback for any accessory building on a lot where the
rear yard opens into an alley may be reduced to not less than five (5) feet
subject to the following qualifications:
      1.   If the door of any attached or detached garage opens toward an alley
the minimum setback shall be fifteen (15) feet.
   F.   Required Buffer Yards.
      1.   Purpose. Buffer yards are required as to reduce the negative impacts
that result when incompatible uses abut one another.
      2.   The following table lists the minimum buffer yard requirements
dependent upon the intensity of the conflict of the abutting uses:
 
Intensity of      Minimum Building Minimum Landscape No. Plant Units
Conflict     Type Setback          Yard              Required 100 Feet of
                                                     Property Line
Minimal      A    30 Feet          10 Feet           40
Moderate     B    30 Feet          20 Feet           80
Significant  C    40 Feet          30 Feet           120
Severe       D    50 Feet          40 Feet           160
 
         a.   Minimum building setback measured from the abutting property
line.
         b.   Minimum landscaped yard measured as extending perpendicular from
the abutting property line and extending along length of property line. Half of
the required distance on each side of the property line and extending the
length of the property line.
         c.   Plant units are a quantitative measure of the required plantings
for the minimum landscaped yard.
            1)   Plant unit value shall be assigned as follows:
 
Vegetation                  Plant Unit Value
Evergreen Trees             15
Deciduous Trees             10
Evergreen/Coniferous Shrubs 5
Shrubs/Bushes               1
 
            2)   The number of plantings required shall equal or exceed the
number of required plant units based upon the values assigned in Section
1001.02, Subd. F.2 of this Section.
            3)   The property owners on both sides of the abutting property
line for which the buffer yard overlays shall each be responsible for fifty
(50) percent of the required planting required for the length of the abutting
property line.
      3.   Minimum Required Buffer Yard. The following table represents the
type as specified by Section
1001.09, Subd. 2.F.2 of buffer yard required for abutting incompatible uses:
      MINIMUM REQUIRED BUFFER YARD
 
Use           Low Density High Density Institutional Commercial Industrial
              Residential Residential
Low Density   None        A            B             C          D
Residential
High Density  A           None         A             B          D
Residential
Institutional B           A            None          A          C
Commercial    C           B            A             None       B
Industrial    D           D            C             B          None
 
      4.   The size and type of required plantings shall be according to
Section
1001.09, Subd. 3B.2 of this Chapter.
      5.   Existing trees or vegetation within a required minimum landscape
yard preservation may substitute for required plants. The number of plant units
required shall be proportionately reduced according to the number of trees or
vegetation preserved.
      6.   The location of an opaque fence or earth berm of at least five (5)
feet in height within a required landscaped yard shall be considered credit
toward the plant unit requirement. The number of required plant units shall be
reduced by fifty (50) percent.
         a.   All fences shall be subject to the requirements of Section
1001.09, Subd. 11 of this Chapter.
   7.   Development of Vacant Property.
         a.   The owner of a vacant property which would require a buffer yard
under the terms of this Ordinance shall be required to install one-half (1/2)
of the width and intensity of the required buffer yard along the entire length
of the abutting property line in all cases except for the following:
         b.   When a vacant property abuts property that has already developed
more than fifty (50) percent of the length of the abutting vacant property line
by footage, the owner/developer of the vacant parcel will be required to
install the entire width and intensity of buffer yard as determined in this
Ordinance.
      8.   Existing Development. Any existing development adjacent to property
developed in accordance with Section
1001.09, Subd. 2.F.7.a shall be considered exempt from the provisions of said
ordinance until such time as the property or development is substantially
altered, remodeled, or expanded. At such time, the existing development shall
provide the remaining one-half (1/2) of the buffer yard improvement.
      9.   The criteria for the submission requirements and approval of a
buffer yard landscape plan shall be according to Section
1001.01, Subd. 3 of this Chapter. (Amended by Ordinance No. 99-06, passed
October 18, 1999). (Ordinance 13-02, adopted May 14, 2013)
Subd. 3.   Yard Landscaping.
   A.   Landscaping, General Residential.
      1.   Except as may be otherwise provided by development contract or
approval by the City Council, the lot area remaining after providing for off-
street parking, off-street loading, sidewalks, driveways, building site and/or
other requirements shall be landscaped using ornamental grass, shrubs, trees or
other acceptable vegetation or treatment generally used in landscaping prior to
the date of building occupancy. Fences or trees placed upon utility easements
are subject to removal at the cost of the property owner if required for the
maintenance or improvement of the utility. Trees on utility easements
containing overhead wires shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height. (The
planting of large trees is not recommended under overhead wires.) The amount of
hard surfacing provided on a lot shall be limited to the size and area
necessary to accommodate ordinance requirements and allowances.
      2.13   For all residential lots:
         a.   At least two (2) two-inch caliper trees per unit will be required
to be planted within one (1) year following the date of occupancy following
initial construction, unless more are required as part of the development
agreement.
         b.   The builder or developer shall provide evidence that required
planting will occur within the prescribed time prior to occupancy of any
structure. Such evidence may be a landscape guarantee provided by a third
party, such as the prior owner or developer, or a contract for landscaping held
by the owner.
         c.   If two (2) or more existing significant trees are preserved in
the front yard of the lot, the landscape plan requirement of two 2) 2-inch
caliper trees is waived.
   B.   Landscaping, New Residential Subdivision, Semi-Public, and All Income
Producing Property Uses. (Excluding residential structures containing less than
four (4) dwelling units.) Prior to approval of a building permit, all above
referenced uses shall be subject to mandatory landscape plan and specification
requirements.
      1.   Said landscape plan shall be developed with an emphasis upon the
following areas:
         a.   The boundary or perimeter of the proposed site at points
adjoining other property.
         b.   The immediate perimeter of the structure.
         c.   The perimeter of parking and loading areas.
      2.7   All landscaping incorporated in said plan shall conform to the
following standards and criteria:
         a.   All plants must at least equal the following minimum size:
 Potted/Bare Root or Balled & Burlapped
                                        Potted/Bare Root or Balled & Burlapped
Shade Trees*                            2-inch diameter
Half Trees (Flowering Crab, Russian     1-1/2 inch diameter
Olive, Hawthorn, etc.)
Evergreen Trees                         6 feet high
Tall Shrubs & Hedge Material (Evergreen 6 feet high
or Deciduous)
Low Shrubs – Deciduous                24 - 30 inches
   - Evergreen                       24 - 30 inches
   - Spreading Evergreens            18 - 24 inches
* Type and mode are dependent upon time of Planting season, availability, and
site Conditions (soils, climate, ground water, man-made irrigation, grading,
etc.)
 
         b.   Spacing.
            1)   Plant material centers shall not be located closer than three
(3) feet from the fence line or property line and shall not be planted to
conflict with public plantings based on the judgment of the Zoning
Administrator.
            2)   Where plant materials are planted in two (2) or more rows,
plantings shall be staggered in rows unless otherwise approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
            3)   Where massing of plants or screening is intended, large
deciduous shrubs shall not be planted more than four (4) feet on center, and/or
evergreen shrubs shall not be planted more than three (3) feet on center.
         c.   Types of New Trees. Plantings, suitable trees include:
Botanical Name Common Name
Botanical Name                   Common Name
Quercus (varieties)              Oak
Acer platanoides (and            Norway Maple (and varieties)
                                 Schwedler, Emerald Queen, etc.)
Acersaccharum                    Sugar Maple
Celtis occidentalis              Hackberry
Betula (varieties)               Birch
Gleditsia Triacanthos            Honeylocust (Imperial, Majestic, Skyline,
                                 Sunburst & Thornless)
Tilia cordata (and varieties)    Little Leaf Linden and Redmond, Greenspire,
                                 etc.
Tilia americana                  Basswood (American Linden)
Fraxinus Pennsylvania Lanceolata Green Ash (and Summit, Marshall's)
Ginkgo biloba (male tree only)   Ginkgo
Gymnocladus dioicus              Kentucky Coffee Tree
 
         d.   Design.
            1)   The landscape plan must show some form of designed site
amenities (i.e., composition of plant materials, and/or creative grading,
decorative lighting, exterior sculpture, etc., which are largely intended for
aesthetic purposes).
            2)   All areas within the property lines (or beyond, if side
grading extends beyond) shall be treated. All exterior areas not paved or
designated as drives, parking or storage, must be planted into ornamental
vegetation (lawns, ground covers or shrubs) unless otherwise approved by the
Zoning Administrator.
            3)   Turf slopes in excess of 2:1 are prohibited unless approved by
the Zoning Administrator. (Ordinance 13-02
            4)   All ground areas under the building roof overhang must be
treated with a decorative mulch and/or foundation planting.
            5)   All buildings must have an exterior water spigot to ensure
that landscape maintenance can be accomplished.
         e.   Landscape Guarantee: All new plants shall be guaranteed for two
(2) full years from the time planting has been completed. All plants shall be
alive and in satisfactory growth at the end of the guarantee period or be
replaced.
         f.   Existing Trees:
            1)   With respect to existing trees in new developments, all trees
on the site are to be saved which do not have to be removed for street,
buildings, utilities, drainage or active recreational purposes.
            2)13   Protection of significant trees to be saved shall include,
but are not limited to the following methods:
               a)   Installation of snow fencing or polythylene laminar safety
netting at the drip line before any grading or construction begins and
remaining in place until all grading and construction is terminated.
               b)   No grade change, construction activity, or storage of fill,
materials, or equipment shall occur within the fenced area.
               c)   Installation of erosion control measures is required.
               d)   Prevention of change in soil chemistry due to concrete
washout and leakage or spillage of toxic materials such as fuels or paints is
required.
               e)   Pruning of oak trees must not take place from April 15
through July 1. If wounding of oak trees occurs, a nontoxic tree wound sealant
must be applied immediately.
Subd. 4.   Storage and Display of Materials.
   A.   In all classes of commercial and industrial districts, open storage or
display of materials in any required front, side, or rear yard shall be
prohibited. Any other outside storage shall be located or screened with an
adequate buffer so as not to be visible from any of the residential districts,
adjoining property, or public streets. (Ordinance 18-08, adopted August 15,
2018)
Subd. 5.   Seventy Percent (70%) Lot Provision.
   A.   Intent. The City recognizes that many existing platted residential lots
within the City are not able to meet the City's present requirements with
respect to lot area, depth, area, width, coverage and setbacks. Land owners
initiating plans to make improvements to, or to develop or redevelop these lots
often create the need for the City to grant variances to the Zoning Ordinance
to relieve some hardship caused by the strict enforcement of the City's Zoning
Ordinance when applied to these lots.
   B.   Criteria. A lot or parcel of land which has been platted on, or prior
to, June 1, 1989, shall be deemed a buildable lot and may be used for single
family detached dwelling purposes provided:
      1.   The lot has frontage on a public right-of-way;
      2.   The lot is within the current R-1 district and does not meet the
requirements of the city zoning ordinance, Section
1001.12, Subd. 6 and 7, as to lot area, depth, width, coverage and setbacks;
      3.   It can be demonstrated that City sewer and water has been or shall
be properly installed;
      4.   The measurements of the lot's area, depth, width, coverage and
setbacks are all within seventy percent (70%) of the requirements of of the
respective Zoning District in which the lot is located. (Ordinance 13-02,
adopted May 14, 2013)
Subd. 6.   Platted and Unplatted Property.
   A.14   Any person desiring to improve property shall submit to the Building
Official a Certificate of Survey of said premises and information on the
location and dimensions of existing and proposed buildings, location of
easements crossing the property, encroachments, and any other information which
may be necessary to ensure conformance to City Code provisions.
   B.   All buildings shall be so placed so that they will not obstruct future
streets which may be constructed by the City in conformity with existing
streets and according to the Comprehensive Plan and to the system and standards
employed by the City. Furthermore, all buildings shall be placed so that they
will not obstruct future utility routes or the potential resubdivision of the
property.
   C.   Except in the case of a PUD, Planned Unit Development District, not
more than one principal building shall be located on a lot. The words
"principal building" shall be given their common, ordinary meaning as defined
in Section
1001.02. In case of doubt or on any questions or interpretation, the decision
of the Zoning Administrator shall be final, subject to the right of appeal.
   D.14   On a through lot, both street lot lines shall be front yards for
applying the yard and parking setback regulations of this Chapter.
Subd. 7.   Dwelling Restriction. No garage, accessory building, tent or motor
home, camper, ice house or similar accessory structure or recreational vehicle
shall at any time be used as living quarters, temporarily or permanently.
Tents, playhouses or similar structures may be used for play or recreational
purposes. (Ordinance 18-08, adopted August 15, 2018)
Subd. 8.   Swimming Pools - Single & Two Family Dwelling.
   A.   Construction or installation of any pool, tank, depression or
excavation in or above ground, including swimming pools, spas and hot tubs but
not including stormwater facilities, which causes or has the capacity to retain
more than five thousand (5,000) gallons water and a depth greater than thirty
(30) inches that is intended to be used by individuals for swimming, wading or
immersion purposes shall be subject to review and approval by the Zoning
Administrator and Building Official
   B.   An application to construct or install a swimming pool as listed above
requires a building permit and shall show:
      1.   The type, size of pool, and volume of water.
      2.   A site plan indicating the following: location of pool, location of
house, garage, fencing, and other improvements on the lot, location of filter
unit, pump, and wiring indicating the type of such units, location of back
flush and drainage outlets, grading of back flush and drainage outlets, grading
plan, finished elevations and final treatment (decking, landscaping, etc.)
around the pool, location of existing overhead or underground wiring, utility
easements, trees, and similar features, and location of any water heating unit.
      3.   The swimming pool is subjected to an annual review by the Zoning
Administrator.
   C.   Construction:
      1.   All access for construction shall be over the owner’s land and due
care shall be taken to avoid damage to public streets and adjacent private or
public property.
      2.   All wiring, installation of heating units, grading, installation of
pipes, and all other installations and construction shall be subject to
inspection by the Building Official.
      3.   All pools must be inspected prior to initial use or filling.
      4.   Electrical installation shall meet State requirements.
   D.   Location:
      1.   Pools shall not be located within any required front yard and shall
not be located within ten (10) feet of any side or rear lot line or within six
(6) feet of any principal structure or frost footing.
      2.   Pools shall not be located beneath overhead lines nor over
underground utility lines of any type.
      3.   Pools shall not be located within any private or public utility,
walkway, drainage or other easement.
      4.   The filler unit, pump, heating unit, and any other noise making
mechanical equipment shall be located at least thirty (30) feet from any
adjacent or nearby residential structure and not closer than ten (10) feet to
any lot line.
      5.   Lighting for the pool shall be directed toward the pool and not
toward adjacent property.
   E.   Water Source and Drainage:
      1.   The swimming pool shall be filled only through the property owner's
water meter or at the owner’s expense. (Ordinance 13-02, adopted May 14, 2013)
      2.   Back-flush water or water from pool drainage shall be directed
toward the sanitary sewer. Water shall not drain onto adjacent or nearby
private land.
      3.   Violations of this subsection will result in doubling the water and
sewer bill for the amount of water used to fill the pool.
   F.   Access restrictions:
      1.   A structure or safety fence at least four (4) feet in height shall
completely enclose the pool at all times and any opening in the fence must
include a lockable gate; or,
      2.   A safety pool cover that meets the American Society of Testing and
Materials, as approved by the Building Official, shall be required.
      3.   For all above-ground swimming pools utilizing a ladder for pool
access, ladders shall be removed from the pool area when not in use to prevent
uncontrolled access. (Ordinance #11-08, adopted November 8, 2011)
Subd. 9.   Swimming Pools - Multiple Family Dwelling Areas.
   A.   Private swimming pools which are intended for and used by the occupants
of a multiple family dwelling and the guests of the occupants of said dwelling,
shall adhere to the following regulations:
      1.   No part of the water surface of the swimming pool shall be less than
fifty (50) feet from any lot line.
      2.   No pumps, filter or other apparatus used in connection with or to
service a swimming pool shall be located less than forty (40) feet from any lot
line.
      3.   The pool area shall be adequately fenced to prevent uncontrolled
access from the street or adjacent property. Adequate screening, including, but
not limited to, landscaping shall be placed between the pool area adjacent
single family lines district lot lines.
      4.   All deck areas, adjacent patios, or other similar areas used in
conjunction with the swimming pools shall be located at least thirty (30) feet
from any lot in an adjacent single family district.
      5.   Approval by the State Health Inspector must be obtained prior to
construction and a copy retained at city hall.
      6.   All pools within the city shall be subject to all rules and statutes
of the State of Minnesota.
Subd. 10.   Swimming Pools - All Zoning Districts.
   A.   Required structure or safety fencing shall be completely installed
within one (1) week following the installation of the pool.
   B.   Nuisances such as undue noise, lighting of adjacent property, health
and safety hazards, damage to nearby vegetation, and the like, shall not be
permitted.
   C.   Drainage of pools into public streets or other drainage ways shall not
be allowed without the sewer treatment superintendent's supervision.
Subd. 11.   Fences and Walls.
   A.   Approval Required. No person shall hereafter construct or cause to be
constructed or erected within the City any fence without first making an
application for and securing approval by the Zoning Administrator.
   B.   Location. All boundary line fences shall be located entirely within the
private property of the person, firm or corporation constructing or causing the
construction of such fence.
   C.   Installation and Maintenance.
      1.   Every fence shall be constructed in a professional and substantial
manner and of substantial material limited to maintenance free material or
weather resistant wood, such as pressure treated lumber, cedar or redwood,
reasonably suitable for the purpose for which the fence is proposed to be used.
The materials and design shall also be compatible with other structures in the
area in which the fence is located and shall not cause blight or a negative
impact.
      2.   Every fence shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair
and shall not be allowed to become and remain in a condition of disrepair or
danger, or constitute a nuisance, public or private. Any such fence which is or
has become dangerous to the public safety, health or welfare is a public
nuisance, and the City shall commence proper proceedings for the abatement
thereof.
      3.   All posts or similar supporting instruments used in the construction
of fences shall be faced inward toward the property being fenced.
      4.   All fences require approval from the Zoning Administrator prior to
installation and construction.
   D.   Access. All fences shall be provided with a gate which affords
reasonable and convenient access for public safety.
   E.   Fences Prohibited. Barbed wire fences and electric fences shall be
prohibited within the City except, within the A-R district when related to
farming, and hobby farms.
   F.   Drainage and Utility Easements. Fences may be constructed within public
and private utility and drainage easements provided that:
      1.   The fence and its design is subject to the approval of the Public
Works Supervisor.
      2.   Removal of the fence or a portion thereof for the purpose of
utilizing the easement shall be at the property owner's expense. (Amended by
Ordinance 2025-04, adopted July 8, 2025)
   G.   Residential District Fences. All residential district fences shall be
placed within the property being fenced.
      1.   Front Yards.
         a.   Within front yards or side yards of a corner lot abutting a
public right of way the fence shall not exceed forty eight (48) inches in
height and shall be at least seventy five (75) percent open space for the
passage of air and light except as provided for by Section
1001.09, Subd. 11.F.1.b of this Chapter.
         b.   A fence with a height greater than forty-eight (48) inches and/or
less than seventy-five (75) percent open space may be constructed within the
required rear yards and side yard of a corner lot abutting collector or
arterial street by administrative permit, provided that:
            (1)   The fence does not exceed six (6) feet in height.
            (2)   The fence is setback ten (10) feet from the lot line abutting
a collector or arterial street right-of-way.
            (3)   For interior lots, a gate or other opening is to be provided
in the fence to allow for maintenance of the street side boulevard.
            (4)   The fence along a side lot line abutting a collector or
arterial street right-of-way shall not extend into a required front yard and be
no closer to the front lot line than a point intersecting the front line of the
principal building.
      2.   Residential Districts - Side Yard. No fence or wall, other than a
retaining wall, along a side lot line in a residence district, shall be higher
than six (6) feet unless the adjoining lot is not in a residential district.
      3.   Residential Districts - Rear Yard. Fences having a height of six (6)
feet or less may be located within the required rear yards in any residence
district.
      4.   Fences or walls located in a yard abutting a public alley shall be
setback a minimum of ten (10) feet from the property line abutting the public
right-of-way and the height of the fence shall not exceed six (6) feet.
(Ordinance 18-08, adopted August 15, 2018)
   H.   Non-Residence Districts - Fences and Walls.
      1.   Fences extending across a required front yard or a required side
yard which abuts a street on a corner lot shall be at least seventy-five (75)
percent open for the passage of air and light and shall maintain the traffic
visibility requirements of Section 20-16-8 of this Chapter.
      2.   Business and industrial fences may be erected up to eight (8) feet
in height. Fences in excess of eight (8) feet shall require a conditional use
permit.
         3.   Fences which are primarily erected as a security measure may have
arms projecting into the property on which barbed wire can be fastened
commencing at a point at least seven (7) feet above the ground.
      4.   Required walls or fences used as screens between a residence
district and a non-residence district shall be of not less than 90% opacity and
not less than five, nor more than seven feet in height above the level of the
residential district boundary. The height regulations shall not apply to
screens of parking and loading areas.
   I.   Plantings. Screen plantings may be substituted for walls or fences,
provided such plantings are of such type as to permit a minimum of 90% opacity
during all months of the year.
   J.   Exceptions. Walls or fences of lesser or greater heights or planting
screens of lesser opacity or otherwise not conforming with the subdivision may
be permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals and Adjustments if there is a
finding that the nature of the use being screened is such that a lesser or
greater degree of screening will as adequately promote and protect the use and
enjoyment of the properties within the adjacent residential district, or there
is a finding that the screening of the type required by this chapter would
interfere with the provisions of adequate amounts of light and air to same said
properties. (Ordinance 13-02, adopted May 14, 2013)
Subd. 12.   Architectural Review.
   A.   Elevations, Architectural Design, Exterior Facing. The application for
a building permit, in addition to other information required, shall include an
exterior elevation of the proposed structure that will adequately and
accurately indicate the height, size and design and the appearance of all
elevations of the proposed building and a description of the construction and
indicate that the exterior architectural design, when erected, will not be so
at variance with, nor so similar to, the exterior architectural design of any
structure or structures already constructed or in the course of construction in
the immediate neighborhood, nor so at variance with the character of the
applicable district as established by the code of the City as to cause a
substantial depreciation in the property values of said neighborhood within
said applicable district or elsewhere or adversely affect the public health,
safety, morals or general welfare.
   B.   Useable Materials.
      1.   All Zoning Districts. Exterior building materials shall consist of
materials compatible in grade and quality to the following:
         a.   Brick.
         b.   Natural stone.
         c.   Decorative concrete block.
         d.   Cast in place concrete or pre-cast concrete panels.
         e.   Wood, provided that the surfaces are finished for exterior use
and wood of proven exterior durability is used, such as cedar, redwood or
cypress.
         f.   Glass curtain wall panels.
         g.   Stucco.
         h.   Vinyl.
         i.   Curtain wall panels of steel, fiberglass and aluminum (non-
structural, non-load bearing) provided that such panels are factory fabricated
and finished with a durable non-fade surface and their fasteners are of a
corrosion resistant design.
         j.   Other materials determined by the City Building Official, not
including galvanized or unfinished metal.
      2.   All buildings in the C-2, C-3, C-O, I-1 and POS District shall be
constructed of solid wall masonry, pre-cast concrete, aggregate panels, or wood
frame masonry veneer (excluding stucco). Wood and metal exterior may be allowed
as part of window and door frames or fascia treatment of the exterior wall
facing design. (Ordinance 13-02, adopted May 14, 2013)
      3.   In the I-1 District, the following materials, in conjunction with
the materials in Section
1001.09, Subd. 12.B.2, may be used to a maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of
the proposed area if it is coordinated into the architectural design of the
structure:
         a.   Wood, provided the surfaces are finished for exterior use and
wood of proven, exterior durability is used, such as cedar, redwood or cypress.
         b.   Curtain wall panels of steel, fiberglass, aluminum, (non-
structural; non-load bearing) and finished with a durable non-fade surface and
their fasteners are of a corrosion resistant design.
         c.   Glass curtain wall panels.
      d.   Stucco.
   C.7   Exceptions to the provisions of Section
1001.09, Subd. 12.B of this Chapter may be granted as a conditional use permit
pursuant to Section
1001.03, Subd. 5 of this Chapter, provided that:
      1.   The proposed building materials maintain the quality and value
intended by this Section.
      2.   The proposed building is compatible and in harmony with other
existing structures within the District and immediate geographic area.
      3.   The provisions of Section
1001.03, Subd. 5.C of this Chapter are considered and determined to be
satisfied.
   D.   Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the building inspector
regarding the use of certain materials or regarding questions of architectural
design shall be entitled to appeal the building inspector's decision to the
council.
Subd. 13.   Essential Services.
   A.   Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to provide for the installation
of essential services such as telephone lines, pipelines, electric transmission
lines, substations, and related structures in such a manner that the health,
safety and welfare of the City will not be adversely affected. Essential
services should also be installed in cognizance of existing and projected
demands for such services.
   B.   Administrative Approval Required. All telephone lines, pipelines for
local distribution, underground electric transmission lines, and overhead
electric transmission lines and substations less than 33kV, and related
structures, when installed in any public right-of-way in any zoning district,
shall require by the Zoning Administrator with recommendation from the City
Engineer. (Ordinance 13-02, adopted May 14, 2013)
   C.   Procedural Requirements. All telephone lines, pipelines for local
distribution, underground transmission lines, overhead electric transmission
lines less than 33kV, and related structures, which are extended to serve more
than one (1) parcel and are proposed to be installed at locations other than in
public right-of-way, shall require approval by the Zoning Administrator with
recommendation by the City Engineer based upon the information required to be
furnished as outlined in Section
1001.09, Subd. 13.D of this Section. (Ordinance 13-02, adopted May 14, 2013)
   D.   Installation Requirements.
      1.   Prior to the installation of any of the previous essential services,
the owner of such service shall file with the Zoning Administrator, all maps
and other pertinent information as deemed necessary for the City to review the
proposed project and agree to pay all costs incurred by the City in review of
the application. (Ordinance 13-02, adopted May 14, 2013)
      2.   The Zoning Administrator shall transmit the map and accompanying
information to the City Engineer and/or other staff for review and
recommendation regarding the project's relationship to the Comprehensive Plan
and/or Ordinances and parts thereof.
      3.   City Staff shall report in writing to the Zoning Administrator their
findings as to the compliance of the proposed project with the Comprehensive
Plan and Ordinances of the City.
      4.   In considering applications for the placement of essential services,
as regulated in this Section, the aforesaid City staff shall consider the
effects of the proposed project upon the health, safety and general welfare of
the City, as existing and as anticipated; and the effect of the proposed
project upon the Comprehensive Plan. In addition, the following specific
performance standards shall be reviewed as they may apply to the application:
         a.   Lot Requirements. All lots must meet the dimensional standards of
the zoning district with respect to width, area, and structure setbacks from
property lines.
         b.   Parking. The site must provide for required off-street parking in
conformance with Section
1001.05 of this Chapter.
         c.   Building Materials. The essential service buildings must be
constructed with exterior building facades that maintain a high standard of
architectural and aesthetic compatibility with surrounding properties and in
compliance with standards of this Chapter.
         d.   Screening and Landscaping. Adequate screening and landscaping
from neighboring property is provided in accordance with Sections
1001.09, Subd. 19 of this Chapter.
         e.   Site Access. Direct lot access from major collector or arterial
streets shall be discouraged and where possible, be provided access through
shared access arrangement from an existing curb cut and driveway or a
neighboring use. Direct lot access from a minor collector or local street may
be allowed, provided the curb cut access complies with the standards outlined
in Section
1001.04 of this Chapter.
         f.   Unless otherwise approved by the City Council, all equipment
shall be completely enclosed in a permanent structure with no outside storage.
      5.   Upon receiving the recommendations of the staff, the City Council
may issue a special permit for the installation and operation of the
applicant's essential services. If the staff reports regarding said permit
cause the City Council to deny its issuance, the applicant may appeal said
decision to the Board of Appeals and Adjustments under the rules and procedures
as set forth in Section
1001.03, Subd. 03 of this Chapter.
   E.   Conditional Use Permit Required.
      1.   All receiving or transmission facilities (i.e., facilities not
required for local distributing network) and overhead transmission and
substation lines in excess of 33kV and up to 100kV shall be a conditional use
in all districts subject to the following requirements:
         a.   Adherence to all applicable Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
and State performance standards.
         b.   The performance standards as specified in subsection 3 of this
Section are adhered to.
         c.   The procedural and review standards for conditional use permits
are followed as specified in Section
1001.03, Subd. 5 of this Chapter.
         d.   Any alteration of an existing use (i.e., building expansion,
change/intensification in use, etc.) involving items not identified upon
initial approved plans shall require a conditional use permit amendment.
      2.   Lots reserved specifically for essential services, whether of
record, or newly subdivided, may be less than the specified dimensions of the
applicable zoning district, both in area and width as a conditional use, under
the following stipulations:
         a.   The lot is of sufficient dimensions to allow the setbacks from
all property lines to be equal to height of the various structures on the
parcel or the setback requirements of the district, whichever are greater.
Lesser structure setbacks may be allowed by the City Council upon demonstration
that the facility's design is such that the collapse of said structure will not
endanger surrounding property. In no case shall the setbacks be reduced to less
than that required by the individual districts.
         b.   Applications for subdivision of new lots under this provision are
accompanied by the appropriate conditional use permit applications.
         c.   A restrictive covenant, removable by the City, is recorded
against a parcel which prohibits any sale, transfer, or use other than for an
essential service as defined in the City ordinances so long as the parcel is
substandard in size, according to the applicable zoning districts.
         d.   In the event of abandonment of the essential service for any
reason on the substandard lot, all equipment, structures, cables, buildings or
any other improvements to the property shall be removed from said property
within a period of three (3) months. At the end of three (3) months, if the
above listed items have not been completely removed, the City may enter said
property and remove any of the above listed items and improvements and charge
said costs to the owners) of the property, and any such unpaid charge shall be
a lien against the affected property, including any and all administrative,
legal and other fees expended by the City in enforcing this provision.
         e.   The procedural and review standards for conditional use permits
are followed as specified in Section
1001.03, Subd. 5 of this Chapter.
         f.   Any alteration of an existing use (i.e., building expansion,
change/intensification in use, etc.) involving items not identified upon
approved initial plans shall require a conditional use permit amendment.
      3.   This Section shall not apply to overhead electric transmission lines
and substations greater than 100kV. (Ordinance 13-02, adopted May 14, 2013)
Subd. 14.   Home Occupations.
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to maintain the character and
integrity of residential areas, to prevent competition with commercial
districts, to encourage telecommuting, and to provide a means through the
establishment of specific standards and procedures by which home occupations
can be conducted in residential neighborhoods without jeopardizing the health,
safety and general welfare of the surrounding neighborhood.
   B.   Application: All occupations conducted in the home shall comply with
the provisions of this section. This section shall not be construed, however,
to apply to home occupations accessory to farming, nor home offices as defined
by this Chapter.
   C.   Procedures:
      1.   Administrative Permit:
         a.   Except as required by this section, home occupations shall
require approval from the Zoning Administrator issued subject to the conditions
of this Chapter, other applicable City ordinances and State law.
         b.   The permit shall remain in full force and effect until such time
as there has been a change in conditions or until such time as the provisions
of this Section have been breached.
      2.   Declaration Of Conditions: The Zoning Administrator may impose such
conditions on the granting of an administrative permit as may be necessary to
carry out the purpose and provisions of this Section.
      3.   Effect Of Permit: An administrative permit may be issued for a
period of one (1) year, after which the permit may be reissued for periods of
up to three (3) years each.
      4.   Transferability: Administrative permits shall not run with the land
and shall not be transferable.
      5.   Lapse Of Administrative Permit By Non-use:
         a.   Whenever within one (1) year after granting an administrative
permit, the use as permitted by the permit shall not have been initiated, then
such permit shall become null and void unless a petition for extension of time
in which to complete the work has been granted by the Zoning Administrator.
         b.   Such extension shall be requested in writing and filed with the
Zoning Administrator at least thirty (30) days before the expiration of the
original permit. There shall be no charge for the filing of such petition. The
request for extension shall state facts showing a good faith attempt to
initiate the use.
      6.   Renewal Of Permits:
         a.   An applicant shall not have a vested right to renewal of an
administrative permit by reason of having obtained a previous permit.
         b.   In applying for and accepting a permit, the permit holder agrees
that their monetary investment in the home occupation will be fully amortized
over the life of the permit and that a permit renewal will not be needed to
amortize the investment.
         c.   Each application for the renewal of a permit will be considered
de novo without taking into consideration that a previous permit has been
granted. The previous granting or renewal of a permit shall not constitute a
precedent or basis for the renewal of a permit.
   D.   General Provisions: All home occupations shall comply with the
following general provisions and according to definition, the applicable
requirement provisions.
      1.   No home occupation shall produce light, glare, noise, odor or
vibration that will in any way have an objectionable effect upon adjacent or
nearby property.
      2.   No equipment shall be used in the home occupation which will create
electrical interference to surrounding properties.
      3.   Any home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the
residential use of the premises, should not change the residential character
thereof, and shall result in no incompatibility or disturbance to the
surrounding residential uses.
      4.   No home occupation shall require internal or external alterations or
involve construction features not customarily found in dwellings except where
required to comply with local and State fire and police recommendations.
      5.   All home occupations shall be conducted entirely within the living
quarters of the principal dwelling and may not be conducted in any portion of
an attached private garage or within accessory buildings.
      6.   There shall be no exterior storage of equipment or materials used in
the home occupation, except personal automobiles used in the home occupation
may be parked on the site.
      7.   The home occupation shall meet all applicable fire and building
codes.
      8.   There shall be no exterior display or exterior signs or interior
display or interior signs which are visible from outside the dwelling with the
exception of one (1) sign not to exceed four (4) square feet in area.
      9.   All home occupations shall comply with the provisions of the City
Code regarding nuisances.
      10.   No home occupation shall be conducted between the hours of ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
      11.   No person other than those who customarily reside on the premises
shall be employed by the home occupation.
      12.   Home occupations shall not create a parking demand in excess of
that which can be accommodated in an existing driveway or guest parking area
for multiple-family dwellings, where no vehicle is parked so as to obstruct a
public street, sidewalk or trail or private driveway.
      13.   Allowed home occupations:
         a.   Home occupations include and are limited to:
            1.   Business consulting service.
            2.   Hair salon.
            3.   Instructional classes with not more than one (1) pupil at a
time. Additional students receiving instruction at one time may be allowed for
single family uses subject to approval of an interim use permit.
            4.   Massage therapy.
            5.   Photography studio.
            6.   Small appliance repair.
            7.   Tailoring, sewing and alternations.
         b.   Home occupations shall not involve any of the following:
            1.   Repair service or manufacturing which requires equipment other
than found in a dwelling.
            2.   Services which consists of more than one pupil, client, or
customer at a time.
            3.   Over-the-counter retail sale of merchandise produced off the
premises.
            4.   Cannabis business or low-potency hemp business.
   E.   Inspection:   The City hereby reserves the right upon issuing any home
occupation permit to inspect the premises in which the occupation is being
conducted to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Chapter or any
conditions additionally imposed. (Ordinance 13-02, adopted May 14, 2013;
Ordinance 2025-01, adopted January 14, 2025)
Subd. 15.   Day Care Facilities.
   A.   Purpose. The regulation of day care nursery facilities in these zoning
regulations is to establish standards and procedures by which day care
facilities can be conducted within the City without jeopardizing the health,
safety and general welfare of the day care participants and/or the surrounding
neighborhood. This Section establishes the city's minimum requirements for the
establishment of a day care facility which are not defined as permitted uses by
state Statute or which are operated in uses other than single family homes. Day
care facilities defined as permitted uses by State Statutes which operate in a
single family dwelling as an accessory use shall be subject to Subd. 15 of this
Chapter and processed as a home occupation.
   B.   Application. Day care facilities shall be considered an allowed
conditional use within all business zoning districts and the Industrial
District of the City and shall be subject to the regulations and requirements
of Section 3 of this Chapter. In addition to the City regulation, all day care
facility operations shall comply with the minimum requirements of the Minnesota
Department of Health and Human Services regulations, as may be amended.
   C.   Declaration of Conditions. The Planning Commission may recommend and
the City Council may impose such conditions on the granting of a day care
facility conditional use permit as may be necessary to carry out the purpose
and provisions of this Section.
   D.   Site Plan -Drawing Necessary. All applications for a day care facility
conditional use permit shall be accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale and
dimension, displaying the information required by Section
1001.05, Subd. 3 of this Chapter.
   E.   General Provisions. Day care facilities shall be allowed as a principal
or as an accessory use, provided that the day care facilities meet all the
applicable provisions of this Section.
      1.   Lot Requirements and Setbacks - Principal Use. The proposed site for
a day care facility must have a minimum lot area as required by the applicable
zoning district in which it is located and as determined by the Minnesota
Department of Health and Human Services. The City Council may increase the
required lot area in those cases where such an increase is considered necessary
to ensure compatibility of activities and maintain the public health, safety
and general welfare. The day care facility must meet the minimum setback
requirements of the respective zoning district. The City Council may increase
setback requirements if considered necessary to ensure compatibility.
      2.   Lot Requirements and Setbacks; Accessory Use. The site of the
proposed day care facility as an accessory use shall meet all area and setback
provisions of the respective zoning district in which the facility is to be
located. The City Council may increase such standards if considered necessary
to maintain compatibility.
      3.   Sewer and Water. All day care facilities shall have access to
municipal sewer and water or have adequate private sewer and water to protect
the health and safety of all persons who occupy the facility.
      4.   Screening. A day care facility shall provide screening along shared
property boundaries. Such required fencing and screening shall comply with the
required fencing and screening provisions of Section
1001.09, Subd. 19 of this Chapter.
      5.   Parking.
         a.   For day care facilities as a principal use, there shall be
adequate off-street parking which shall be located separately from any outdoor
play area and shall be in compliance with Section
1001.05 of this Chapter. Parking areas shall be screened from view of
surrounding and abutting residential uses in compliance with Section
1001.09, Subd. 19 of this Chapter.
         b.   When a day care facility is an accessory use within a structure
containing another principal use, each use shall be calculated separately for
determining the total off-street parking spaces required.
      6.   Loading. For day care facilities as a principal use, two (2) off-
street loading spaces in compliance with Section
1001.05 of this Chapter shall be provided.
      7.   Signage. All signing and informational or visual communication
devices shall be in compliance with the provisions of Section
1001.08 of this Chapter.
      8.   Compliance with State Requirements. The structure and operation
shall be in full compliance with State of Minnesota, Department of Health and
Human Services regulations and be licensed accordingly.
   F.   Non-Conforming Use. Existing day care facilities lawfully existing on
the effective date of this Chapter may continue as non-conforming uses. They
shall, however, be required to obtain permits for their continued operation.
Any existing day care facility that is discontinued for a period of more than
one hundred eighty (180) days, or is in violation of the provisions of the
ordinance under which it was initially established, shall be brought into
conformity with the provisions of this Section.
   G.   Inspection. At any and all reasonable hours, with or without notice,
the City hereby reserves the right upon issuing any day care facility
conditional use permit to inspect the premises in which the occupation is being
conducted to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Section, Chapter, or
any conditions additionally imposed.
Subd. 16.   Model Homes.
   A.   Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to provide for the erection of
model homes in new subdivisions without adversely affecting the character of
surrounding residential neighborhoods or creating a general nuisance. As model
homes represent a unique temporary commercial use, special consideration must
be given to the peculiar problems associated with them and special standards
must be applied to ensure reasonable compatibility with their surrounding
environment.
   B.23   Procedure. The erection of a model home(s) shall require approval of
the Zoning Administrator subject to compliance with the provisions of this
Section.
   C.   Special Requirements.
      1.   Temporary parking facilities equal to four (4) spaces per model home
dwelling unit shall be provided. The overall location, design, drainage, and
surfacing of the temporary parking facility shall be subject to the approval of
the City Engineer and zoning Administrator.
      2.   Traffic generated by the model home shall be directed away from
residential neighborhoods to the greatest extent possible.
      3.   No model home shall incorporate outside lighting which creates a
nuisance due to glare or intensity.
      4.   All model home signage shall comply with the sign regulations as
contained in the provisions of this Chapter relating to signs.
Subd. 17.   Standards for Residence Districts.
   A.   Site Plan. For all permitted developments in the residence districts,
except those containing only permitted single family detached dwellings, a site
plan must be reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved by the Council as
set forth in this Chapter.
   B.   Projecting Air Conditioning and Heating Units Multiple Dwellings. Air
conditioning or heating units projecting through exterior walls or windows
shall be located and designed so that they neither unnecessarily generate or
transmit sound nor disrupt the architectural amenities of the building. Units
projecting more than twelve inches beyond the exterior finish of a building
wall shall be permitted only with the written consent of the building official,
which shall be given only if structural systems prevent compliance.
   C.7   Trash and Refuse Disposal - Multiple Dwellings.
      1.   Except for residences with private entrances, one trash receptacle
for each apartment structure shall be required.
      2.   The storage of trash shall be pursuant to the provisions of Section
1001.09, Subd. 19.B of this Chapter.
   D.   Elevators. Except for residences with private entrances, multiple
residence buildings of three stories or more shall be equipped with at least
one public elevator and lobby for each structure.
   E.   Accessory Buildings - Multiple Dwellings. Accessory buildings shall
observe the same setback requirements established for the residence building
except that accessory buildings located within the rear yard of the multiple
residence building may be located to within five feet of the rear or interior
side property line. The council may require common walls for accessory
buildings where common walls will eliminate unsightly and hazardous areas.
Exteriors of accessory buildings to multiple dwellings shall have the same
exterior finish as the main structure. Additional regulations applicable to
main structures shall apply to accessory buildings.
   F.   Housing-Performance Standards. Except for mobile or manufactured homes
located in an approved mobile home park, all dwelling within the city shall:
      1.   Be firmly anchored to a permanent foundation consisting of poured
concrete, concrete block or treated wood, the latter as defined in the
Minnesota Building Code. All such permanent foundations shall be built in
accordance with standards set forth in the Minnesota Building Code.
      2.   Be at least twenty-two (22) feet in width.
   G.   Manufactured Home. No manufactured home may be placed on any lot,
whether within or without an approved mobile home park, within the city unless
such manufactured home is built in conformance with Minnesota Statutes 327.31
to 327.35 as in effect on the date of the passage of this code, and any
successor provisions to those statutes and any superseding statutes.
   H.   Secondary Living Quarters and Accessory Apartments.
      1.   Secondary Living Quarters. Secondary living quarters that include
kitchen facilities for housing multiple generations may be allowed an accessory
use within a single family dwelling provided that:
         a.   The design and construction of the principal building is not a
two-family dwelling as defined by this Chapter.
         b.   There shall be an interior connection between the main living
area and accessory living quarters that is able to be unlocked from each side
of the connection and that is not secured by a deadbolt or keyed lockset.
      2.   Accessory Apartments. Accessory apartments constitutes a small
renters apartment in a single family home which is subordinate to the principal
residential use and requires approval of a conditional use permit. The purpose
of permitting temporary accessory apartments is to:
         a.   Provide older homeowners with a means of obtaining, through
tenants, in accessory apartments, rental income, companionship, security, and
services, and thereby to enable them to stay more comfortably in homes and
neighborhoods they might otherwise be forced to leave.
         b.   Add inexpensive rental units to the housing stock to meet the
needs of smaller households, both young and old.
         c.   Make housing units available to moderated income households who
might otherwise have difficulty finding homes within the town.
         d.   Develop housing units and single family neighborhoods that are
appropriate for households at a variety of stages in the life cycle, thereby
lessening fluctuations in the neighborhood demand for particular services such
as education.
         e.   Protect stability, property values, in the single family
residential character of the neighborhood by ensuring that temporary accessory
apartments are installed only in a owner-occupied house and under such
additional conditions as may be appropriate to further the purposes of this
ordinance.
      3.   Performance Standards. Secondary living quarters and accessory
apartments shall comply with the following requirements:
         a.   The principal building shall be served by single municipal water,
sanitary sewer, gas and/or electric utility service lines each with a single
meter for the respective utility where applicable.
         b.   The principal building shall have one (1) heating and air
conditioning system.
         c.   There shall be three (3) garage stalls having directed exterior
access (not in a tandem arrangement) attached to the principal building with a
driveway access in front of each stall so as to allow direct vehicle
maneuvering to each of the stalls. (Ordinance 13-02, adopted May 14, 2013)
   I.   The City opts-out of the requirements of Minnesota Statute §462.3593,
which defines and regulates Temporary Family Health Care Dwellings, pursuant to
authority granted by Minnesota Statutes, Section 462.3593, Subdivision 9.
(Ordinance 16-03, adopted August 23, 2016)
Subd. 18.   Sexually Oriented Uses.
   A.   Intent. The purpose of this section is to establish provisions for the
opportunity as well as controls of Sexually oriented uses within the City of
Rockford.
   B.   Sexually Oriented Use - General. Sexually oriented uses, as defined in
this Chapter, shall be subject to the following general provisions:
      1.   Activities classified as obscene under Minnesota State Law are not
permitted and are strictly prohibited.
      2.   Sexually oriented uses, either principal or accessory, shall be
prohibited from locating in any building which is also utilized for residential
purposes.
      3.   Sexually oriented uses, either principal or accessory, shall be
prohibited from locating in any place which is also used to dispense or consume
alcoholic beverages.
      4.   Sexually oriented uses-principal as defined in this Chapter which
deal solely in the retail sales of Sexually oriented materials only for off-
premises consumption shall be exempt from the requirements of Section
1001.09, Subd. 18.C of this Chapter.
      5.   A Sexually oriented use which does not qualify as an accessory use
shall be classified as a Sexually oriented use-principal.
   C.   Sexually Oriented Uses - Principal.
      1.   Sexually oriented use-principal shall be located at least three
hundred (300) feet from the property line of any zoning district in which
residential uses are allowed, either as permitted or conditional uses, and at
least three hundred (300) feet as measured in a straight line from the closest
point of the property line of the building upon which the sexually oriented
use-principal is located from any sensitive use provided below:
         a.   Public or private school facility.
         b.   Public park.
         c.   Licensed day care facility.
         d.   On-sale or off-sale liquor facilities.
         e.   Places of religious worship and cemeteries.
         f.   Another existing Sexually oriented use-principal.
      2.   Sexually oriented use-principal activities, as defined by this
Chapter, shall be classified as one use. No two (2) Sexually oriented uses-
principal shall be located in the same building or upon the same property and
each use shall be subject to Section
1001.09, Subd. 18.C.1.
   D.   Sexually Oriented Uses - Accessory.
      1.   Sexually oriented uses-accessory shall:
         a.   Comprise no more than ten (10) percent of the floor area of the
establishment in which they are located; and
         b.   Comprise no more than two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor
area in total; and
         c.   Comprise no more than twenty (20) percent of the gross receipts
of the entire business operation; and
         d.   Not involve or include any activity except the sale or rental of
merchandise.
      2.   Sexually oriented business-accessory shall be restricted from and
prohibit access to minors by the physical separation of such items from areas
of general public access:
         a.   Movie Rentals. Display areas shall be restricted from general
view and shall be located within a separate room, the access of which is in
clear view and under the control of the persons responsible for the operation
or shall be in catalogs under the direct control and distribution of the
operator.
         b.   Magazines. Publications classified or qualifying as Sexually
oriented shall not be physically accessible to minors and shall be covered with
a wrapper or other means to prevent display of any material other than the
publication title.
      3.   Sexually oriented business-accessory activities shall be prohibited
at any public show, movie, caravan, circus, carnival, theatrical or other
performance or exhibition presented to the general public where minors are
admitted.
   E.5   Violation. Any person violating any provision of this Ordinance shall
be punished as prescribed in Section
1001.03, Subd. 09 of the Rockford Zoning Code.
Subd. 19.   Required Screening.
   A.   Mechanical Equipment: All mechanical equipment, such as heating and air
conditioning units, erected on the roof of any structure shall be screened so
as not to be visible.
   B.   Refuse and Recyclable Material:
      1.   For all residential, commercial, and industrial land uses except for
Single Family, Two Family, and Three Family Residential structures, all refuse,
recyclable materials and necessary handling equipment, including but not
limited to, garbage cans, recycling bins and dumpsters shall be stored within
the principal structure, within an accessory structure or totally screened from
eye-level view from all neighboring uses and the public right-of-way.
      2.   For all residential, commercial, and industrial land uses except for
Single Family, Two Family, and Three Family Residential structures, exterior
storage of garbage cans, recycling bins, dumpsters and other refuse containers
shall require the following:
         a.   Exterior wall or fence treatment shall be similar and/or
complement the principal building.
         b.   The enclosed trash and/or recycling receptacle area shall be
located in the rear or side yard and shall observe all applicable setback
requirements and easements.
         c.   The trash and/or recycling enclosure must be accessible for trash
hauling vehicles.
         d.   The trash and/or recycling receptacles must be fully screened
from view of adjacent properties and the public right-of-way by a fence or wall
of at least six (6) feet in height and a minimum opaqueness of eighty (80)
percent.
         e.   All dumpsters, recycling bins, garbage cans, handling equipment
and enclosures shall be kept in a good state of repair with tight-fitting lids
to prevent spilling and spread of debris.
         f.   The construction of trash and recycling enclosures shall be per
standards established by the City Building Official and all designs and
construction of such enclosures shall be subject to the Building official's
approval.
Subd. 20.   Wetlands.
   A.   Purpose. Work in and around wetlands must be guided by the following
principles in descending order of priority:
      1.   Avoid both the direct and indirect impact of the activity that may
destroy or diminish the wetland.
      2.   Minimize the impact by limiting the degree or magnitude of the
wetland related activity and its implementation.
      3.   Rectify the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the
affected wetland environment with one of at least equal public value.
      4.   Reduce or eliminate the adverse impact over time by preservation and
maintenance operations during the life of the activity.
      5.   Compensate for the impact by replacing or providing approved
substitute wetland resources or environments.
   B.   Stormwater Drainage. Runoff must not be discharged directly into
wetlands without appropriate quality and quantity runoff control, depending on
the individual wetland’s vegetation sensitivity, subject to approval of the
City Engineer.
   C.   Wetland Impacts. Wetlands must not be drained or filled, wholly or
partially, unless replaced by either restoring or creating wetland areas of at
least equal public value. Compensation, including the replacement ratio and
quality of replacement should be consistent with the requirements outlined in
the rules adopted by the Board of Water and Soil Resources to implement the
Wetland Conservation Act of 1991, as may be amended.
   D.   Vegetated Buffer Protection.
      1.   Except for wetland areas impacted and mitigated in accordance with
Section
1001.09 Subd. 20C. A protective buffer of natural vegetation at least twenty
(20) feet wide from the delineated edge at the time of development shall
surround all wetlands within parcels preliminary platted, developed, or
redeveloped after October 14, 2003. The City Engineer may require a larger
buffer than the minimum based upon site specific design issues. The design
criteria should follow common principles and the example of nearby natural
areas. The site should be examined for existing buffer zones and mimic the
slope structure and vegetation as much as possible.
 
Wetland Size        Width of Buffer Area From Delineated Wetland Boundary
0-3 acres           20 feet
Great than 3 acres  25 feet
DNR protected water 35 feet
 
      2.   A principal building setback of fifty (50) feet from the delineated
edge of all wetlands or twenty (20) feet from the edge of a buffer easement,
whichever is greater, shall be provided within parcels preliminary platted,
developed, or redeveloped after October 14, 2003. Open and uncovered decks
attached to the principal building may encroach within the setback from a
buffer easement but shall not be closer than ten (10) feet from the easement
line. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24, 2015)
      3.   Grading, construction, or vegetation alteration/disturbance within
this buffer is prohibited. Buffer design and protection during construction
shall accomplish any or all of the following:
         a.   Slow water runoff.
         b.   Enhance water infiltration.
         c.   Trap sediment, fertilizers, pathogens, heavy metals, blowing snow
and soil, and act as corridors for wildlife.
         d.   All drain tiles shall be identified on the subject property and
adjacent properties if they extend across property boundaries. Drain tile lines
must be rendered inoperable unless the applicant determines it and is approved
by the City engineer that properties located outside the subject property may
experience inundation where it did not previously occur. It is the
responsibility of the applicants engineer to show how rendering drain tiles
inoperable will impact the existing site and adjacent properties.
      4.   The buffer shall be overlaid by a perpetual conservation easement
and maintained by the property owner and marked by permanent signs to prevent
encroachment.
      5.   Ponding areas established for storm water drainage purposes are
exempt from the provisions of this section.
   E.    Wetland Buffer Acceptance.
      1.   Buffer area vegetation shall be considered adequate when the buffer
has a continuous, dense layer of perennial grasses, flowers, trees and/or
shrubs that have been undisturbed for at least 10 consecutive years. Based on
information provided by the applicant the City will determine if the Wetland
Buffer is acceptable or if it needs to be replaced or re-established. The City
will utilize the following guidelines to determine if vegetation shall be
considered unacceptable:
         a.   It has 30% or more of its vegetation composed of grass, common
buckthorn, purple loosestrife, leafy spurge, bull thistle, and other noxious
weeds). or
         b.   Has bare or disturbed soil that is greater than 10% of the area.
or
         c.   Contain Turf grass (Kentucky bluegrass) that is greater than 10%
of the area.
      2.   The following shall be part of the required submittal to the City.
         a.   A wetland buffer landscaping plan will need to be submitted to
the Local Government Unit WCA Agent for approval. At a minimum, this plan shall
include the following:
         b.   A plan sheet that shows the location of the buffers within the
subdivision. This sheet should also show buffers that are considered acceptable
in their current state and identify them as areas that shall not be disturbed
during grading.
         c.   For buffer areas that are not acceptable, a plan shall be
developed that provides species and planting and/or seeding locations. Planting
plans shall include native shrub and/or trees and/or grasses and/or forbs found
within this part of the state.
         d.   The following maintenance will be required for seeded areas.
            Establishment (spring seeding):
            1) Prepare site – Late April – May.
            2) Seed – May 1 – July 1.
            Maintenance:
            1) Mow - 6-10 inches (can not be less then 6”) July 15 – August 15.
            2)   Mow – September 1 (optional)
            3)   Weed Control – mowing should keep annual weeds down. Spot
spray thistles, etc.
            Establishment (fall seeding):
            1)   Prepare site – Late August –early September
            2)   Seed – late September to freeze
            Maintenance (following season):
            1)   Mow (6-10) inches – June 15 – August 15
            2)   Mow – September 1 (optional)
            3)   Weed Control – mowing should keep annual weeds down. Spot
spray thistles, etc.
         e.   Applicants may obtain from the City a set of standard seeding and
planting specifications for buffer areas that meet all the City requirements.
   F.   Wetland buffer Mitigation and Averaging:
      1.   If an authorized regulatory authority (DNR, city) approves a wetland
permit that impacts wetlands the applicant will be required to replace the
buffer on the fill slope. The applicant will not be allowed to increase the
proposed fill to accommodate the required buffer.
      2.   In instances where the required buffer width is greater than 20 feet
the City may allow averaging. When allowed by the City the applicant will be
able to reduce the width along a portion of the buffer below the required width
if:
         a.   The width of the buffer is expanded along another portion of the
wetland, and
         b.   The total acres of the required buffer width are met, and
         c.   The buffer width is not less than 20 feet along any portion of
the wetland.
      3.   When a wetland is completely filled under an approved permit, the
buffer area requirement associated with the size of the wetland that was filled
will be required for the replacement wetlands unless replacement is occurring
adjacent to a larger wetland. A landscaping plan for the buffer replacement
site will need to be provided to meet the requirements of Section E.2 of this
ordinance.
Subd. 21.37   Alternative Energy Systems.
   A.   Wind Energy Conversion Systems.
      1.   Purpose. This ordinance is established to regulate the installation
and operation of Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS) within the City of
Rockford not otherwise subject to siting and oversight by the State of
Minnesota under the Minnesota Power Plant Siting Act (MS 116C.51 – 116C.697).
      2.   Application. Wind conversion systems may be allowed as an interim
use within certain zoning districts of the City, subject to the regulations and
requirements of this Section, provided the property upon which the system is to
be located is agricultural, commercial or industrial and is constructed and
maintained on any parcel of land of at least five (5) acres in size.
      3.   Declaration of Conditions. The City Council may impose such
conditions on the granting of WECS conditional use permit as may be necessary
to carry out the purpose and provisions of this Section and to maintain
compatibility.
      4.   Site Plan Drawings. In addition to the information required by
Section
1001.03 of this Chapter, an application for all WECS shall include the
following information:
         a.   A description of the project including: Number, type, name plate,
generating capacity, tower height, rotor diameter, and total height of all wind
turbines and means of interconnecting with the electrical grid.
         b.   Detailed site plans drawn to scale and dimensioned including:
            (1)   Lot lines and dimensions.
            (2)   Location and height of all existing and proposed buildings,
structures, above ground utilities, guy wires anchors, electrical wires,
interconnection points with the electrical grid, and trees.
            (3)   Locations and height of all adjacent buildings, structures,
above ground utilities and trees located within three hundred (350) feet of the
exterior boundaries of the property.
            (4)   Existing and proposed setbacks of all structures located on
the property.
            (5)   Sketch elevation of the premises accurately depicting the
proposed WECS and its relationship to structures on adjacent lots.
            (6)   Location of wetlands, scenic, and natural areas and bluffs
within one (1) mile of the proposed WECS.
            (7)   The location of any other WECS within ten (10) rotor
distances of the proposed WECS.
         c.   Engineer’s certification of site plans.
         d.   A Noise Profile.
         e.   FAA Permit Application.
         f.   Location of all known Communications Towers within five (5) miles
of the proposed WECS.
         g.   Decommissioning Plan.
         h.   Description of potential impacts on nearby WECS and wind
resources on adjacent properties.
      5.   Compliance with State Building Code. Standard drawings of the
structural components of the wind energy conversion system and support
structures, including base and footings shall be provided along with the
engineering data and calculations to demonstrate compliance with the structural
design provisions of the State Building Code especially with regards to wind
and icing loads. Drawings and engineering calculations shall be certified by a
registered engineer.
      6.   Compliance with National Electrical Code. WECS electrical equipment
and connections shall be designed and installed in adherence to the National
Electrical Code as adopted by the City.
      7.   Manufacturer Warranty. The applicant shall provide documentation or
other evidence from the dealer or manufacturer that the WECS has been
successfully operated in atmospheric conditions similar to the conditions
within the City. The WECS shall be warranted against any system failures
reasonably expected in severe weather operation conditions.
      8.   Design Standards.
         a.   Height. The permitted maximum height of a WECS shall be
determined in one of two ways. In determining the height of the WECS, the total
height of the system shall be included. System height shall be measured from
the base of the tower to the highest possible extension of the rotor. The
shortest height of the two following methods shall be used in determining the
maximum allowable height of a WECS system. The height of a WECS must also
comply with FAA Regulation Part 77 “Objects Affecting Navigable Air Space” and/
or Mn/DOT Rule 14, MCAR 1.3015 “Criteria for Determining Obstruction to Air
Navigation.”
            (1)   A ratio of one (1) foot to one (1) foot between the distance
of the closest property line to the base of WECS to the height of the system.
            (2)   A maximum system height of one hundred fifty (150) feet.
         b.   Setbacks. No part of a WECS (including guy wire anchors) shall be
located within or above any required front, side or rear yard setback and no
part of the system shall be within ten (10) feet of any property line,
whichever is greater. WECS towers shall be setback from the closest property
line one foot for every one foot of system height, unless a structural engineer
specifies in writing that the collapse of the tower will occur within a lesser
distance under all foreseeable circumstances and the property abuts land zoned
for industrial or commercial use. WECS shall not be located within fifty (50)
feet of an above ground utility line.
         c.   Rotors.
            (1)   All WECS rotors shall not have rotor dimensions greater than
thirty (30) feet.
            (2)   Blade-arcs created by the WECS shall have a minimum of thirty
(30) feet of clearance over any structure or tree within a two hundred (200)
foot radius.
            (3)   Each WECS shall be equipped with both a manual and automatic
braking device capable of stopping WECS operation in high wind (forty (40)
miles per hour or greater) or in conditions of imbalance.
         d.   Lightning Protection. Each WECS shall be grounded to protect
against natural lightning strikes in conformance with the National Electrical
Code as adopted by the City.
         e.   Tower Access. To prevent unauthorized climbing, WECS towers must
comply with one of the following provision:
            (1)   Tower climbing apparatus shall not be located within twelve
(12) feet of the ground.
            (2)   A locked anti-climb device shall be installed on the tower.
            (3)   Tower capable of being climbed shall be enclosed by a locked,
protective fence at least eight (8) feet high.
         f.   Signs: For all WECS, a sign or signs shall be posted on the
tower, transformer and substation warning of shall contain the following
information:
            (1)   Warning high voltage.
            (2)   Manufacturer’s name.
            (3)   Emergency phone number.
            (4)   Emergency shutdown procedures.
         g.   Safety. For all guyed towers, visible and reflective objects,
such as plastic sleeves, reflectors or tape shall be placed on the guy wire
anchor points and along the outer and innermost guy wires up to a height of
eight (8) feet above the ground. Visible fencing shall be installed around
anchor points or guy wires.
         h.   Color and Finish. All wind turbines and towers shall be white,
grey or another non-obtrusive color. Finishes shall be matte or non-reflective.
         i.   Lighting: WECS shall not have affixed or attached any lights,
reflectors, flashers or any other illumination, except for illumination devices
required by FAA Regulations Part 77 “Objectives Affecting Navigable Air Space”
and Lighting.”
         j.   Electromagnetic Interference: WECS shall be designed and
constructed so as not to cause radio and television interference.
         k.   Noise Emissions: Noises emanating from the operation of WECS
shall be in compliance with and regulated by the State of Minnesota Pollution
Control Standards, Minnesota Regulations NPC 1 and 2, as amended.
         l.   Utility Company Interconnection: No WECS shall be interconnected
with the local electrical utility company until the utility company and the
City Engineer have commented upon such proposal. The interconnection of the
WECS with the utility company shall adhere to the National Electrical Code as
adopted by the City.
      9.   Building Permit Required. A building permit shall be required for
the installation of a WECS in the City.
       10.   Inspection. The City hereby reserves the right upon issuing any
interim use permit to inspect the premises on which the WECS is located. If a
WECS is not maintained in operational condition and poses a potential safety
hazard, the owner shall upon written notice from the City, take expeditious
action to correct the situation.
      11.   Decommissioning: Each Commercial WECS shall have a Decommissioning
Plan outlining the anticipated means and cost of removing WECS at the end of
their serviceable life or upon becoming a discontinued use. The cost estimates
shall be made by a competent party; such as a Professional Engineer, a
contractor capable of decommissioning or a person with suitable expertise or
experience with decommissioning. The plan shall also identify the financial
resources that will be available to pay for the decommissioning and removal of
the WECS and accessory facilities.
      12.   Discontinuation: A WECS shall be considered a discontinued use and
the interim use permit void after one (1) year without energy production,
unless a plan is developed and submitted to the Zoning Administrator outlining
the steps and schedule for returning the WECS to service. All WECS and
accessory facilities shall be removed to four feet below ground level within
ninety (90) days of the discontinuation of use.
   B.   Solar Energy Systems:
      1.   Accessory Use.
         a.   Solar energy systems shall be allowed as accessory in all zoning
districts in accordance with the standards in this Section.
         b.   The following systems shall be exempt from the requirements of
this section and shall be regulated as any other building element:
            (1)   Building integrated solar energy systems that are an integral
part of a principal or accessory building, rather than a separate mechanical
device, replacing or substituting for an architectural element or structural
component including, but not limited to, photovoltaic or hot water solar energy
systems contained within roofing materials, windows, skylights and awnings.
            (2)   Passive solar energy systems that capture solar light or heat
without transforming it into another form of energy or transferring the heat
via a heat exchanger.
      2.   System Standards:
         a.   Electrical:
            (1)   All utilities shall be installed underground.
            (2)   An exterior utility disconnect switch shall be installed at
the electric meter serving the property.
            (3)   Solar energy systems shall be grounded to protect against
natural lightning strikes in conformance with the National Electrical Code as
adopted by the City.
            (4)   No solar energy system shall be interconnected with a local
electrical utility company until the utility company has reviewed and commented
upon it. The interconnection of the solar energy system with the utility
company shall adhere to the National Electrical Code as adopted by the City.
         b.   Maximum Area: Ground mounted solar energy systems shall be
limited to a maximum area of:
            (1)   Residential Uses:       120 square feet.
            (2)   Non-Residential Uses:    Five (5) Percent of Lot Area
         c.   Color: All roof-mounted solar energy systems shall use colors
that are the same or similar with the color of the roof material of the
building on which the system is mounted.
      3.   Location and Height Standards:
         a.   Roof mounting of solar energy systems shall be a permitted
accessory use subject to the following:
            (1)   The solar energy system shall comply with the maximum height
requirements of the applicable zoning district.
             (2)   The solar energy system shall not extend beyond the
perimeter of the exterior walls of the building on which it is mounted.
         b.   Ground mounting of accessory solar energy systems shall be a
conditional use subject to the following:
            (1)   No solar energy system within the C-O District shall be
ground mounted.
            (2)   Yards:
               (a)   The solar energy system shall only be located in the rear
yard within residential districts.
               (b)   Within all other zoning districts, the solar energy system
may be located in any yard.
            (3)   Setbacks: All components of the solar energy system shall
comply with the following minimum setbacks from property lines:
               (a)   Front Yard:      Applicable principal building setback of
the respective zoning district.
               (b)   Side Yard:      Ten (10) feet
               (c)   Rear Yard:      Ten (10) feet
            (4)   Solar energy systems shall not encroach upon drainage and
utility easements.
            (5)   The solar energy system shall comply with the maximum height
requirements for accessory buildings for the applicable zoning district.
      4.   Screening: Solar energy systems shall be screened from view of
adjacent residential zoning districts to the extent possible without affecting
their function.
      5.   Certification. The solar energy system shall be certified by
Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. and comply to the requirements of the
International Building Code.
      6.   Abandonment: Any solar energy system which is inoperable for twelve
(12) successive months shall be deemed to be abandoned and shall be deemed a
public nuisance. The owner shall remove the abandoned system at their expense
after obtaining a demolition permit.
      7.   Building Permit. A building permit as may be required by the
Building Code shall be obtained for any solar energy system prior to
installation.
Subd. 22.   Temporary Sales. Temporary, outdoor sales events may be allowed in
the C-1 and C-3 Districts by approval of the Zoning Administrator provided
that:
   A.   Such activity is directed towards the general public and includes grand
openings, warehouse sales, sidewalk sales, inventory reduction or liquidation
sales, distressed merchandise sales, and seasonal merchandise sales, sales of
produce or other licensed transient sales and displays of materials that are
typically not sold or serviced on the site.
   B.   The following specific standards shall apply to all proposed temporary
outdoor sales activities allowed by this subsection and by city code business
licensing provisions in addition to other applicable building and safety code
requirements as determined by the zoning administrator:
      1.   The maximum total time for temporary outdoor sales activities shall
be the period specified in the administrative permit and, in no case, shall be
limited to no more than ninety (90) days per calendar year.
      2.   There shall be no more sales activities than those specified in the
administrative permit and, in no case, and no more than one outdoor sales
activity shall occur at any one time.
      3.   Sales activities may be conducted within a required yard provided
the area is paved and the activity does not interfere with parking, traffic
circulation or emergency vehicle access. Temporary sales on unpaved landscaped
areas is prohibited.
   C.   Tents, stands, and other similar temporary structures may be utilized,
provided they are clearly identified on the submitted plan and provided that it
is determined by the zoning administrator that they will not impair the parking
capacity, emergency access, or the safe and efficient movement of pedestrian
and vehicular traffic on or off the site.
   D.   The submitted plan shall clearly demonstrate that adequate off street
parking for the proposed event can and will be provided for the duration of the
event. Determination of compliance with this requirement shall be made by the
zoning Administrator who shall consider the nature of the event and the
applicable parking requirements of this Chapter. Consideration shall be given
to the parking needs and requirements of other occupants in the case of
multiple-tenant buildings. Parking on public right of way and streets is
prohibited; except that parking on local streets may be allowed on Saturday and
Sunday only, provided that the petitioner arranges for traffic control by
authorized enforcement officers, as approved in writing by the Hennepin or
Wright County Sheriff’s office, at the petitioner's expense.
   E.   Signage related to the event shall be in compliance with the temporary
sign standards of this Ordinance and shall be allowed for the duration of the
event. Special signage for purposes of traffic direction and control may be
authorized by the zoning administrator; the erection and removal of such
signage shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
   F.   The approved permit shall be displayed on the premises for the duration
of the event.
   G.   Subject to compliance with the requirements of this section, the Zoning
Administrator shall issue the permit for the temporary sales within not more
than (60) days of a complete application being submitted including payment of
fees as established by Section
212 of the City Code. (Ordinance 12-02, adopted June 12, 2012)
Subd. 23.   Antennas.
   A.   Purpose.   The purpose of this Section is to establish predictable and
balanced regulations for the siting and screening of wireless communications
equipment, including technology associated with amateur radio service,
satellite dishes, personal wireless service, radio or television transmitting
antennas, public safety communication, and public utility microwave equipment,
in order to accommodate the growth of wireless communication systems within the
City while protecting the public against any adverse impacts on the City's
aesthetic resources and the public welfare. The provisions of this Section are
intended to maximize the use of existing towers, structures, buildings, and
collocations to accommodate new wireless telecommunication antennas in order to
minimize the number of towers needed to serve the community.
   B.   General Provisions: The following standards shall apply to all cellular
telephone, public utility, microwave, radio and television broadcast
transmitting, radio and television receiving, satellite dish and shortwave
radio transmitting and receiving antennas:
      1.   All obsolete and unused antennas shall be removed by the property
owner within twelve (12) months of cessation of operation at the site, unless
an exemption is granted by the Zoning Administrator.
      2.   All antennas shall be in compliance with all building and electrical
code requirements and as applicable shall require related permits.
      3.   Structural design, mounting and installation of the antenna shall be
in compliance with manufacturer's specifications, and as may be necessary as
determined by the zoning administrator and building official, shall be verified
and approved by a structural engineer.
      4.   When applicable, written authorization for antenna erection shall be
provided by the property owner.
      5.   No advertising message shall be affixed to the antenna structure or
tower.
      6.   The height of the antenna shall be the minimum necessary to function
satisfactorily, as verified by an engineer or other qualified professional.
      7.   Antennas shall not be artificially illuminated unless required by
law or by a governmental agency to protect the public's health and safety.
      8.   When applicable, proposals to erect new antennas shall be
accompanied by any required federal, state, or local agency licenses or
permits.
      9.   If a new tower is to be constructed, it shall be designed
structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to accommodate both the
applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for at least one additional use,
including, but not limited to, other cellular communication companies, local
police, fire and ambulance companies. Towers must be designed to allow for
future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas mounted
at varying heights.
      10.   Towers under two hundred (200) feet in height shall be painted a
non-contrasting color consistent with the surrounding area such as: blue, gray,
brown, or silver, or have a galvanized or oxidized finish to reduce visual
impact.
      11.   Provide documentation or studies utilized to determine the
necessary location and height of the antenna, including the following analysis:
         a.   Existing service area of the provider.
         b.   Service area of the provider including the area at the height
limits for an antenna established by this Section.
         c.   Location, height and ability to collocate on other existing
antenna support structures owned by the applicant or other provider capable of
providing service to all or a portion of the proposed service area.
      12.   Tower Design:
         a.   Wireless communication towers shall be of a monopole design
unless the City Council determines that an alternative design requested by the
applicant would better blend into the surrounding environment. This provision
does not apply to amateur radio towers or commercial and public radio or
television towers.
         b.   Except for amateur radio towers, a proposal for a new tower shall
not be approved unless the zoning administrator finds that the antennas cannot
be accommodated on an existing or approved tower, building, or structure within
one mile search radius (1/2 mile search radius for towers under one hundred
(100) feet in height) of the proposed tower due to one or more of the following
reasons:
            (1)   The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of
the existing or approved tower, building, or structure as documented by a
structural engineer, and the existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced,
modified, or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a
reasonable cost.
            (2)   The planned equipment would cause interference materially
impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower or
building as documented by a qualified engineer and interference cannot be
prevented at a reasonable cost.
            (3)   Existing or approved towers, buildings, or structures within
the search radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height
necessary to function reasonably as documented by a qualified engineer.
            (4)   Other unforeseen reasons that make it unfeasible to locate
the antennas upon an existing or approved tower or structure.
            (5)   Existing or approved towers, buildings, or other structures
do not exist in the service area, or do not meet the needs of the user.
Documentation shall be provided at the time of application clearly
demonstrating why existing structures do not meet the needs of the users.
            (6)   The applicant shall demonstrate in writing that a good faith
effort to collocate on existing towers or structures was made, but an agreement
could not be reached.
      13.   Setbacks. All towers shall comply with each of the minimum setback
requirements:
         a.   Towers shall meet the principal structure setbacks of the
underlying zoning district with the exception of industrial zoning districts,
where the tower may encroach into the rear setback area, provided that the rear
property line abuts another industrial use and zoning district and the tower
does not encroach upon any easements.
         b.   Setback requirements for all personal wireless service or
commercial and public radio and television transmitting antennas, public safety
communication antennas, and public utility towers, may be reduced or its
location in relation to a public street modified at the discretion of the City
Council, to allow the integration of the structure into an existing or proposed
structure, such as a light standard, power line support device, or similar
structure.
   C.   Accessory and Secondary Use Antennas: The following standards shall
apply to all accessory and secondary use antennas including radio and
television receiving antennas, satellite dishes, TVROs (television receive
only) two meters (2 m) or less in diameter, shortwave radio dispatching
antennas, or those necessary for the operation of electronic equipment
including radio and television receivers, but not including antennas used in
the amateur radio service regulated by this Section.
      1.   Single satellite TVROs accessory to a residential use shall not
exceed one meter (1 m) in diameter.
      2.   Accessory or secondary use antennas shall not be erected in any
required yard (except a rear yard) or within public or private utility and
drainage easements, or buffer yard, and shall be set back a minimum of ten (10)
feet from all lot lines.
      3.   Guywires or guywire anchors shall not be erected within public or
private utility and drainage easements, and shall be set back a minimum of five
(5) feet from all lot lines.
      4.   Height:
         a.   The height of accessory or secondary use antennas and necessary
support structures or towers, whether freestanding or mounted on another
structure, may extend a maximum of fifteen (15) feet above the height
restriction for the affected zoning district.
         b.   A height greater than fifteen (15) feet above the height
restriction for the affected zoning district may be allowed by approval of an
interim use permit provided that the additional height is the minimum required
for the antenna to function properly.
   D.   Amateur Radio Service Antennas. The following standards shall apply to
all accessory use antennas and towers used in the amateur radio service:
      1.   Exempt Provisions: Antennas and support structures for federally
licensed amateur radio stations and used in the amateur radio service shall be
exempt from the requirement of subsections Subd. 23.C.3, 6, 9 and 11 of this
chapter.
      2.   Installation Requirements: Antennas and towers used in the amateur
radio service shall be installed in accordance with the instructions furnished
by the manufacturer of the antenna or tower. Because of the experimental nature
of the amateur radio service, antennas mounted on such towers may be modified
or changed at any time so long as the published allowable load on the tower is
not exceeded and the structure of the tower remains in accordance with the
manufacturer's specifications.
      3.   Location:
         a.   Amateur radio service antennas and towers shall not be erected in
any required yard (except a rear yard) or within a public or private utility
and drainage easement, and shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from
all lot lines.
         b.   Guywires or guywire anchors shall not be erected within public or
private utility and drainage easements or required buffer yard, and shall be
set back a minimum of five (5) feet from all lot lines.
      4.   Tower Design:
         a.   Height:
            (1)   Except as provided for in subsection 4.a(2) of this section,
antennas and towers used in the amateur radio service may extend a maximum of
two (2) times the maximum height restriction for the specific zoning district
when in use. When not in use, such equipment shall be restricted to a height
not greater than the height of the principal structure or thirty five (35)
feet, whichever is higher.
            (2)   Vertical pole antennas not exceeding three (3) inches in
diameter that are utilized in the amateur radio service may extend to a maximum
height of forty five (45) feet.
         b.   Fail Points: Amateur radio towers shall have fail points so as to
assure that the structure will collapse on the subject site and not extend to
and jeopardize life or adjacent property.
      5.   More Than One Tower: The installation of more than one tower or
support structure per property shall require approval of an interim use permit.
   E.   Personal Wireless Service Antennas.
      1.   Antennas Located Upon A Public Or Quasi-Public Structure Or Existing
Tower: Personal wireless service antennas located upon public structures or
existing towers shall require approval of the Zoning Administrator and shall
comply with the following standards:
         a.   The applicant shall demonstrate by providing a coverage/
interference analysis and capacity analysis prepared by a qualified engineer
that location of the antennas as proposed is necessary to meet the frequency
reuse and spacing needs of the personal wireless service system and to provide
adequate wireless coverage and capacity to areas not currently served.
         b.   Transmitting, receiving and switching equipment shall be housed
within an existing structure whenever possible. If a new equipment building is
necessary for transmitting, receiving and switching equipment, it shall be
situated in the rear yard of the principal use and shall be screened from view
by landscaping where appropriate.
         c.   The antennas shall comply with the following standards:
            (1)   Antennas mounted on public structures shall not extend more
than fifteen (15) feet above the structural height of the structure to which
they are attached.
            (2)   Roof mounted antennas shall not extend more than ten (10)
feet above the roof, and shall be set back at least the height of the antenna
structure from the roof edge.
            (3)   Wall or facade mounted antennas may not exceed more than five
(5) feet above the roof line and must be constructed of a material or color
which matches the exterior of the building.
            (4)   Antennas may be mounted to quasi-public structures that are
allowed to exceed the maximum height requirements of the base district pursuant
to subsection Subd. 23.C.12.b of this Section. The location of antennas on such
structures may not exceed the height of the structure and must be
architecturally compatible in form and color.
      2.   Antennas Not Located Upon A Public Structure Or Existing Tower:
Personal wireless service antenna not located upon a public or quasi-public
structure or existing tower shall require the processing of an interim use
permit and shall comply with the following standards:
         a.   The applicant shall demonstrate by providing a coverage/
interference analysis and capacity analysis prepared by a qualified engineer
that location of the antennas as proposed is necessary to meet the frequency
reuse and spacing needs of the wireless system and to provide adequate portable
coverage and capacity to areas not currently adequately served.
         b.   If no existing structure which meets the height requirements for
the antennas is available for mounting purposes, the antennas may be mounted on
a single ground mounted pole provided that:
            (1)   The pole does not exceed seventy five (75) feet in height,
except as may be allowed by approval of an interim use permit.
            (2)   The setback of the pole from the nearest residential property
line is not less than the height of the antenna. Exceptions to such setback may
be granted if a qualified engineer specifies in writing that any collapse of
the pole will occur within a lesser distance under all foreseeable
circumstances.
         c.   Transmitting, receiving and switching equipment shall be housed
within an existing structure whenever possible. If a new equipment building is
necessary for transmitting, receiving and switching equipment, it shall be
situated in the rear yard of the principal use and shall be screened from view
by landscaping where appropriate.
         d.   At the discretion of the City, a security fence not greater than
eight (8) feet in height with a maximum opacity of fifty (50) percent shall be
provided around the support structure.
   F.   Radio, Television and Utility Microwave Antennas: Commercial and public
radio and television transmitting and public utility microwave antennas shall
comply with the following standards:
      1.   Such antennas shall be considered an allowed interim use within the
industrial districts.
      2.   The antennas, transmitting towers, or array of towers shall be
located on a continuous parcel having a setback equal to the height of the
antenna, transmitting tower, or array of towers measured between the base of
the antenna or tower located nearest a property line and said property line,
unless a qualified structural engineer specifies in writing that the collapse
of any antenna or tower will occur within a lesser distance under all
foreseeable circumstances.
      3.   Unless the antenna is mounted on an existing structure, at the
discretion of the City, a fence not greater than eight (8) feet in height with
a maximum opacity of fifty (50) percent shall be provided around the support
structure and other equipment.
      4.   Towers in excess of one hundred fifty (150) feet may be of a lattice
design.
   G.   Additional Submittal Requirement: In addition to the information
required elsewhere in this Chapter, development applications for towers,
excluding amateur radio towers, shall include the following supplemental
information:
      1.   A letter of intent committing the tower owner and their successors
to allow the shared use of the tower if an additional user agrees in writing to
meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use.
      2.   A copy of the relevant portions of a signed lease which requires the
applicant to remove the tower and associated facilities when they are
abandoned, unused or become hazardous shall be submitted to the City.
   H.   Processing: Applications required by this Section to locate a personal
wireless service antenna shall be processed in accordance with FCC rules where
more restrictive than Minnesota statutes 15.99:
      1.   The City Council shall act on wireless facility requests within a
period not longer than ninety (90) days from submission of the request for
collocations of a personal wireless service antenna upon an existing tower or
structure.
      2.   The time frames for action by the City Council may be extended by
mutual consent of the applicant and Zoning Administrator.
      3.   An application under this chapter shall not be denied solely on the
basis that service is available from another provider..(Ordinacne 13-02,
adopted May 14, 2013)
Subd. 24 Cannabis Business Uses.
   A.   Findings and Purpose. The City makes the following legislative
findings:
      1.   The purpose of this chapter is to implement the provisions of
Minnesota Statutes, chapter 342, which authorizes the City to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare of residents by regulating cannabis
businesses within the City.
      2.   The City finds that the proposed provisions are appropriate and
lawful regulations for the City, that the proposed amendments will promote the
interests of the community in reasonable stability in zoning for now and in the
future, and that the proposed provisions are in the public interest and for the
public good.
   B.   Authority. The City has the authority to adopt this chapter pursuant
to:
      1.   Minnesota Statutes, section 342.13(c), regarding the authority of a
local unit of government to adopt reasonable restrictions of the time, place,
and manner of the operation of a cannabis business provided that such
restrictions do not prohibit the establishment or operation of cannabis
businesses.
      2.   Minnesota Statutes, section 342.22, regarding the local registration
and enforcement requirements of state licensed cannabis retail businesses and
lower potency hemp edible retail businesses.
      3.   Minnesota Statutes, section 152.0263, Subd. 5, regarding the use of
cannabis in public places.
      4.   Minnesota Statutes, section 462.357, regarding the authority of a
local authority to adopt zoning ordinances.
   C.   License and Registration:
      1.   State License. Operation of a cannabis business of the types
established by Minnesota Statues, section 324.10 shall require a state license
in accordance with Minnesota Statutes, section 342.14.
      2.   Retail Registration. No individual or entity may operate a cannabis
retail business within the City without first obtaining approval of a
registration from Wright County or Hennepin County, as applicable, in
accordance with Minnesota Statutes, section 342.22.
      3.   Number of cannabis businesses. The City limits the number of
cannabis retail businesses to allow one (1) registration to a private entity
and one (1) registration to the municipal entity within City limits.
   D.   Buffer Zone Required:
      1.   Operation of a retail cannabis business shall be prohibited within:
         a.   One thousand feet (1,000 feet) of a school.
         b.   Five hundred feet (500 feet) of a day care.
         c.   Five hundred feet (500 feet) of a residential treatment facility.
         d.   Five hundred feet (500 feet) of an attraction within a public
park that is regularly used by minors, including a playground or athletic
field.
      2.   For purposes of this section, the distance of a required buffer
between a cannabis retail business and a use identified in Section
1001.09, Subd. 24.D.1 of this chapter shall be measured in a straight line,
without regard to the intervening structures or objects or political
boundaries, from the closest exterior wall of the structure the cannabis
business is located to the property line of said use.
      3.   Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, section 462.367, subd. 14, a
registered cannabis business established in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter or a cannabis business seeking registration from continuing
operation at the same site shall not be prohibited if a use identified within
Section
1001.09, Subd. 24.D.1 of this chapter moves within the minimum required buffer
zone.
   E.   Performance Standards. Operation of a registered cannabis business of
the types established by Minnesota Statues, section 324.10 within the City
shall comply with the provisions of this title and the following:
      1.   Building Code. The cannabis business shall comply with the
provisions of Section
1003.01 of this City Code.
      2.   Fire Code. The cannabis business shall comply with the provisions of
Section
1006.01 of this City Code.
      3.   Allowed Hours:
         a.   Retail sale of cannabis, cannabis flower, cannabis products,
lower potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products shall be limited
to occur between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00)
P.M each day, unless extended by approval of an interim use permit.
         b.   Temporary cannabis events shall be limited to occur between the
hours established by Section
1001.09, Subd. 24.F.3.a of this chapter.
         c.   Hours of operation for cannabis businesses other than those
specified by Section
1001.09, Subd. 24.E.3.a and Section
1001.09, Subd. 24.F.3.b of this chapter shall be allowed subject to other
applicable provisions of this City Code.
      4.   Ventilation. A cannabis business shall be ventilated so that the
odor of marijuana cannot be detected by a person with a normal sense of smell
at the exterior of the cannabis business at the property line.
      5.   Age Limitations. No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall
be within the cannabis business premises.
      6.   Public View:
         a.   All activities of a cannabis business businesses, including,
without limitation, cultivating, growing, processing, displaying,
manufacturing, selling, and storage, shall be conducted out of public view.
         b.   No cannabis or paraphernalia shall be displayed or kept in a
business so as to be visible from outside the licensed premises.
      7.   Prohibited Activities:
         a.   Consumption or use of cannabis products onsite of a cannabis
retail business is prohibited.
         b.   There shall be no outdoor events or sales associated with a
cannabis business; all such activities shall occur within a principal or
accessory building, including temporary structures, as allowed in compliance
with Title 1001 of this City Code.
         c.   No cannabis business shall occupy a residential dwelling unit.
      8.   Signs: Cannabis businesses are subject to Section
1001.08, Subd.10 District Regulations of this chapter and all other signs are
prohibited. Signs shall only contain words and shall not depict a cannabis
flower, cannabis product, hemp edibles, hemp derived edible consumer product,
or any other logo, picture, image or symbol intended to denote or suggest
cannabis, hemp or related paraphernalia. Additionally, a business logo
containing the above depictions shall not be displayed as part of any exterior
signage. No products, interior signage, advertisements, or like attention
getting items shall be placed or displayed that may be visible from the
exterior of the cannabis business.
   F.   Temporary Cannabis Events: In addition to the provisions of Section
1001.09, Subd. 24.E of this chapter, the following conditions shall be required
for temporary cannabis events:
      1.   No sales of cannabis products, except for lower-potency hemp
edibles, shall be allowed at temporary cannabis events.
      2.   No on-site consumption of cannabis products, except for lower-
potency hemp edibles, shall be allowed at temporary cannabis events.
   G.   Lower Potency Edibles: The retail sale of lower potency edibles and
beverages shall be allowed, subject to the conditions within this section:
      1.   Age Restrictions. The sale of lower potency edibles is permitted
only in places that admit persons twenty-one (21) years of age or older.
      2.   Product Storage. Lower potency edibles shall only be sold behind a
counter and shall be stored in a locked case.
   H.   Use in Public Places. No person shall use cannabis flower, cannabis
products, lower potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products in a
public place or a place of public accommodation unless the premises is an
establishment, or an event licensed to permit on-site consumption of cannabis
products. (Ordinance 2025-01, adopted January 14, 2025)
1001.10 CLASSIFICATION OF USE DISTRICTS
Subd. 1.   Establishment of Districts. For the purpose of this chapter, the
City is hereby divided into the classes of districts which shall be designated
as follows:
   A.2   Residential Districts.
      1.   “A-R”, Agricultural Residential
      2.   “R-1”, Single Family Residential
      3.   “R-2”, Medium Density Residential
      4.   “R-3”, Multiple Family Residential
      5.   “R-4”, Senior Residential
      6.   “R-6”, Residential Manufactured Home Park
   B.   Non-Residential Districts.
      1.   “C-O”, Downtown Commercial
      2.   “C-1”, Commercial Service
      3.   “C-2”, Commercial Shopping Center
      4.   “C-3”, Commercial Highway
      5.   “I-1”, Industrial
   C.   Special Districts.
      1.   “PUD”, Planned Unit Development
      2.   “FP”, Floodplain District
      3.3   “POC”, Public/Open/Conservation District
Subd. 2.   Zoning Map. The location and boundaries of the districts established
by this text are hereby set forth on the “Rockford, Minnesota Zoning Map”; said
map and all notations, references, and data shown thereon are hereby
incorporated by reference into this chapter and shall be as much a part of it
as if all were fully described herein. It shall be the responsibility of the
Zoning Administrator to maintain said map, and amendments thereto shall be
recorded on said zoning map within thirty days after official publication of
amendments. The official zoning map shall be kept on file in the City Hall.
Reference in this chapter to “A-R”, “POC”, “R”, “C”, and “I” Districts shall
refer to the use district groups set forth above, and reference to specific use
districts shall be by reference to the individual districts listed above as “R-
1”, “C-1”, etc. The Planned Unit Development (PUD), created in this chapter and
the “Floodway Overlay District”, “Flood Fringe Overlay District”, and
“Floodplain Overlay District” created in other portions of the code, contain
specific zoning regulations superimposed upon the other zoning districts and
supersede the underlying zoning district regulations only to the extent
expressed in the provisions of the overlay zoning district regulations. In all
other respects, the regulations in the underlying zoning use districts are
applicable.
Subd. 3.   Zoning District Boundaries. The boundaries between districts are,
unless otherwise indicated, either the center line of streets, alleys, or
railroad rights-of-way, or lot lines, or section lines or such center lines or
lot lines extended or lines parallel or perpendicular thereto.
Subd. 4.   Future Annexations. Any land annexed to the City in the future shall
be placed in the “AR”, Agricultural Single Family Residential District until
another zoning district is approved by action of the City Council after receipt
of the recommendation of the Planning Commission.
Subd. 5.   Residence Districts. Residence districts are established to
accomplish the general purposes of this chapter and for the following specific
purposes:
   A.   To preserve the existing living qualities of residential neighborhoods.
   B.   To insure future high quality amenities, including, but not limited to,
the provision of adequate light, air, privacy, freedom from noise, and
convenience of access to property.
   C.   To insure that new developments and residences are provided with the
required public services and facilities without placing any undue financial
burden upon existing city residents and taxpayers.
   D.   To increase convenience and comfort by providing usable open space and
recreation space on the same lot as the housing units or within close proximity
in a neighborhood park.
   E.   To prevent additions or alterations of structures which would damage
the character or desirability of existing residential areas.
   F.   To protect residential areas to the extent possible and appropriate in
each area against unduly heavy traffic volumes.
   G.   To encourage a variety of dwelling types and wide range of population
densities consistent with the comprehensive plan.
   H.   To preserve and enhance the natural environment as land becomes
urbanized.
   I.   To preserve, maintain, and increase the value of real property.
Subd. 6.   Conditions. A conditional use permit will be granted for use to be
known as Temporary Accessory Apartment Rental and Owner Occupied Single-Family
dwellings, provided that the following standards and criteria are met:
   A.   The apartment will be a complete, separate housekeeping unit, including
kitchen and bathroom facilities that can be isolated from the original unit.
   B.   Only one apartment will be created within a single-family house.
   C.   The owners of the residence in which the accessory unit is created
shall occupy at least one of the dwelling units on the premises, except for
bona fide temporary absences.
   D.   The accessory apartment shall be designed so that, to the degree
reasonably feasible the appearance of the building remains that of a single-
family residence. In general, any new entrances shall be located on the side or
in the rear of the building, and any additions in relationship to the accessory
apartment shall not increase the square footage of the original house by more
than ten percent (10%).
   E.   The design inside and size of the apartment shall conform with all
applicable standards in the zoning, health, building, and other applicable
ordinances.
   F.   At least three off-street parking spaces are available and sufficiently
screened for use by the owner-occupants) and tenants (s) and additional parking
may be required by the planning commission per ordinance requirements.
   G.   Any appropriate or more stringent conditions deemed necessary by the
City Council, Planning Commission, and/or Zoning Board of Appeals to protect
health, safety and welfare, and the single-family character of the
neighborhood.
   H.   The conditional use permit shall be reviewed annually and/or be subject
to complaints.
Subd. 7.   Commercial Districts. Commercial districts are established to
accomplish the general purpose of this chapter and the comprehensive plan and
for the following specific reasons:
   A.   To group compatible uses which will tend to draw trade that is
naturally interchangeable and so promotes the business prosperity and public
convenience.
   B.   To provide an adequate supply of businesses and professional services
to meet the needs of the residents.
   C.   To promote a high quality of total commercial design and development
that produces a positive visual image and minimizes the effects of traffic
congestion, noise, odor, glare, and similar safety problems.
Subd. 8.   Industrial Districts. The planned industrial district is established
to accomplish the general purpose of this chapter and the Comprehensive Plan
and for the following specific reasons:
   A.   Develop major centers of complexes in separate areas to allow for
distribution of peak period traffic, efficient access, effective distribution
of primary water and sewage facilities, and proper utilization of land suited
for industrial development.
   B.   Present expansion of scattered industrial operations.
   C.   Allow mining and extraction operations by conditional use permits to
assure planning for maintenance of the land for subsequent use.
   D.   Limit most industrial uses to planned industrial parks where uniform
performance standards and land use regulations can be applied.
   E.   Protect industrial areas from encroachment by non-industrial uses.
   F.   Allow a limited amount of service/business uses, by conditional use
permit, which are essential to the operation of the planned industrial district
and which provide essential services to employees within the district.
   G.   To preserve, maintain, and increase the value of real property.
Subd. 9.   Administrative Procedure For Development Of Non-residence Districts.
   A.   A complete general development plan as herein required shall be filed
with petitions for rezoning to establish or expand a non-residence district as
set forth in this Chapter.
   B.   Upon finding that the proposed zoning district will constitute a
district of sustained desirability, will be consistent with long range
comprehensive plans for the City and meet the requirements of the district, the
council may establish such district. The general development plan, together
with such covenants, deed restrictions, controls, or special conditions, or
conditional use permits as may be attached to it, shall be filed and recorded
by the owner or developer in the office of the Hennepin/Wright County Register
of Deeds and shall become a part of this chapter establishing the zoning
change. Any substantial change to the general development plan will require re-
submission to the Planning Commission for review and the council for approval.
   C.   The final platting of such land shall be subject to such requirements
for approval, recording, and the installation of improvements as required by
this and other city regulations.
   D.   Prior to obtaining a building permit or constructing any building
improvements on an individual lot or site within any non-residence district, a
site plan as herein required shall be submitted to and reviewed by the Planning
Commission and approved by the council.
   E.   If a zoning change is approved, the first phase of construction must
begin and reasonable progress made within two years after approval of the
general development plan and zoning change by ordinance or the district maybe
zoned back to its original zoning district classification or other appropriate
zoning district classification.
Subd. 10.   Performance Standards.
   A.   Intent. It is the intent of this subdivision to provide that all non-
residential uses and related activities shall be established and maintained
with proper appearance from streets and adjoining properties and to provide
that each such use shall not interfere with the reasonable enjoyment of
adjoining properties by the control of the following items.
   B.   Standards.
      1.7   Landscaping. All yards shall either be open landscaped and green
areas or be left in a natural state, in compliance with Section
1001.09, Subd. 3. Yards to be landscaped shall be landscaped attractively with
lawn, trees, shrubs, etc. Any areas left in a natural state shall be kept free
of litter, debris and noxious weeds. Buffer yards shall be provided where
required per Section
1001.09, Subd. 2. (
      2.   Glare. Glare, whether direct or reflected, such as from floodlights
or high temperature processes, and as differentiated from general illumination,
shall not be visible at any property line.
      3.   Exterior Lighting. Any lights used for exterior illumination shall
not be visible at any property line.
      4.   Vibration. Vibration shall not be discernible at any property line
to the human sense of feeling for three minutes or more duration in any one
hour. Vibration of any kind shall not produce at any time an acceleration of
more than 0.1 gravities nor shall result in any combination of amplitudes and
frequencies beyond the "safe" range of Table VII United States Bureau of Mines
Bulletin No. 422, “Seismic Effects of Quarry Blasting,” on any structure. The
methods and equations of said Bulletin No. 422 shall be used to compute all
values for the enforcement of this provision. Said Bulletin is incorporated
herein by reference.
      5.   Noise Odors, Smoke, Dust, Fumes, Water and Waste.
         a.   The design, construction and performance of all non-residential
uses shall be in conformance with city, county, and State of Minnesota
standards and regulations.
         b.   The storage of trash shall be within the principal buildings or
otherwise shall be within an accessory enclosure complete with roof and walls
of the same exterior finish as the main structure and screened from all
residence districts with an adequate buffer.
      6.   Compliance. In order to insure compliance with the performance
standards set forth above, the council may require the owner or operator of any
use to have made such investigations and/or tests as may be required to show
adherence to the performance standards. Such investigation and/or tests as are
required to be made shall be carried out by an independent testing organization
as may be selected by the city. The costs incurred in such investigation or
testing shall be ordered by the owner or operator and shared equally by the
owner or operator and the city unless the investigation and tests disclose
noncompliance with the performance standards, in which case the investigation
or testing shall be paid by the owner or operator.
1001.11. “A-R”, AGRICULTURAL RESIDENTIAL
Subd. 1.   Purpose. The A-R, Agricultural Residential is for annexed land and
is the first zoning designation preliminary to a rezoning. It is intended for
agricultural and single family uses.
Subd. 2.   Permitted Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter,
the following are permitted uses in an A-R District:
   A.   Agriculture, the keeping of livestock and poultry, nurseries,
greenhouses for growing only, landscape gardening and tree farms, including
sale of products grown on premises.
   B.   Golf courses (except club houses, miniature courses and driving tees
operated for commercial purposes.
   C.   Residential care facilities licensed by the state and regulated,
located and operated per state statutes.
   D.   Single family detached dwellings.
Subd. 3.   Interim Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are interim uses in the A-R District and are governed by Section
1001.03, Subd. 6 of this Chapter.
   A.   Non-farm related seasonal produce sales as a principal use provided
that:
      1.   Retail produce sales may only be conducted on the subject site
between April 1st and October 31st of any given year.
      2.   The sales area devoted to produce not grown on the subject site
shall be limited to not more than ten (10) percent of the gross floor area of
the principal use.
      3.   The area devoted to retail sales of non-produce good shall be
limited to not more than five (5) percent of the gross floor area of the
principal use.
      4.   Municipal sanitary sewer and water services is not presently
available to the subject site.
      5.   The use has frontage to an arterial or collector street and direct
access from a paved City street.
      6.   Adequate off-street parking space and surface is provided and no
parking related to such sales occurs on the public right-of-way.
      7.   Signs.
         a.   Are located only on the subject site and are not more than one
hundred (100) feet from the point of sale.
         b.   Are limited to no more than two (2) structures totally not more
than sixteen (16) square feet.
         c.   Are erected and removed daily and are not to be displayed at
times when the sales operation is closed.
   B.   Dog kennels provided that:
      1.   No person shall maintain or operate any kennel or shelter without a
license as regulated by the City Code.
      2.   A minimum lot size of one (1) acre is required to be licensed for
operation of a kennel or shelter.
      3.   Every kennel or shelter shall be enclosed or fenced in such manner
as to prevent the running at large or escape of animals confined therein.
      4.   Both dog kennels and cat shelters shall be open for inspection by
the City authorities at any time.
      5.   It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep three (3) or more
dogs and/or cats over six (6) months of age on his/her premises in the City
without obtaining a kennel license pursuant to this Section and the City Code.
   C.   Farm wineries with tasting rooms. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February
24, 2015)
Subd. 4.   Accessory Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter,
the following are permitted accessory uses in the “A-R” District:
   A.   Barns, stables, silos, other agricultural buildings.
   B.   Fences as herein regulated.
   C.   Keeping of not more than two (2) boarders or roomers by a resident
family.
   D.   Living quarters of persons employed on the premises.
   E.   Parking as herein regulated.
   F.   Private garage.
   G.   Secondary uses customarily incident to the permitted or conditional
uses allowed in the district.
   H.   Signs as herein regulated.
   I.37   Accessory solar energy systems (roof mounted) as provided for by
Section
1001.09, Subd. 21.B of this Chapter.
   J.   Home occupations subject to Section
1001.09, Subd. 14 of this Chapter. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24,
2015)
Subd. 5.   Conditional Uses.23 Subject to applicable provisions of this
Chapter, the following are conditional uses allowed in an A-R District:
(Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section
1001.03, Subd. 5 of this Chapter.)
   A.   Cemeteries, provided that:
      1.   The site accesses on a major collector.
      2.   The site is landscaped in accordance with Section
1001.09 of this Chapter.
      3.   The provisions of this Chapter are considered and determined to be
satisfied.
   B.   Municipal, administrative or service buildings or uses including public
and semi-public institutions, libraries, museums, post offices, etc., except
industrial type uses provided that:
      1.   When abutting a residential use in a residential use district, the
property is screened and landscaped in compliance with Section
1001.09 of this Chapter.
      2.   The provisions of Section
1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and determined to be satisfied.
   C.   Private recreation including golf club house, country club, swimming or
tennis club provided that:
      1.   The principal use, function or activity is open, outdoor in
character.
      2    Not more than five (5) percent of the land area of the site shall be
covered by buildings or structures.
      3.   When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the
property is screened and landscaped for the protection of the abutting use,
according to the provisions of Section
1001.09 of this Chapter.
      4.   The land area of the property containing such use or activity meets
the minimum established for the district.
      5.   The use will not negatively impact the natural setting intended for
this district or neighboring residential uses.
      6.   The traffic generated by the use can be adequately accommodated
(volume and weight) upon City streets serving the use.
      7.   An adequate septic system and well can be established on the site.
   D.   Public or semi-public recreational buildings and neighborhood or
community centers; public and private educational institutions limited to
elementary, junior high and senior high schools; and religious institutions
such as churches, chapels, temples and synagogues provided that:
      1.   Side yards shall be double that required for the district.
      2.   Adequate screening from abutting residential uses and landscaping is
provided in compliance with Section
1001.09 of this Chapter.
      3.   Adequate off-street parking and access is provided on the site in
compliance with section
1001.05 of this chapter and that such parking is adequately screened and
landscaped from surrounding and abutting residential uses in compliance with
Section
1001.09 of this Chapter.
      4.   Adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided and
regulated where applicable by section
1001.05 of this Chapter.
      5.   The provisions of Section
1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and determined to be satisfied.
   E.37   Accessory solar energy systems (ground mounted) as provided for by
Section
1001.09, Subd. 21.B of this Chapter.
Subd. 6.   Lot Area and Setback Requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in an A-R District, subject to additional
requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Chapter.
   A.   Lot Area Requirements.
      1.   Lot area: Not less than five (5) acres.
      2.   Lot width: Not less than three hundred (300) feet.
      3.   Lot depth: Not less than three hundred (300) feet.
   B.   Principal Structure Setback Requirements.
      1.   Front Yard:
         a.   One or Two Family: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
         b.   Other Uses: Not less than one hundred (100) feet.
      2.   Side Yard:
         a.   One or Two Family: Not less than fifteen (15) feet, nor less than
fifty (50) feet abutting a street.
         b.   Other Uses abutting residences: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
         c.   Other Uses: Not less than thirty (30) feet.
         d.   Detached access uses: Not less than fifteen (15) feet.
         e.   Attached access uses: Not less than fifteen (15) feet.
      3.   Rear Yard:
         a.   One or Two Family: Not less than twenty-five (25) feet, nor less
than fifty (50) feet abutting a street.
         b.   Other Uses abutting residences: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
         c.   Other Uses: Not less than forty (40) feet.
         d.   Detached access uses: Not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
         e.   Abutting an Arterial Street: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
Subd. 7.   Other Requirements.
   A.   Any development in the A-R district shall be required to submit a plan
indicating further subdivision of the property to include public sanitary sewer
and water.
   B.   All unsewered development in the A-R must meet state and local on-site
sewer requirements.
1001.12 “R-1” SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
Subd 1.    Purpose.  The purpose of the R-1, Single Family Residence District
is for low density single family dwelling development as an extension of
existing residential areas and to allow low density development at about two or
three dwelling units per acre within the areas indicated as low density
residential in the comprehensive plan. A full range of public services and
facilities must be made available to these developments.
Subd. 2.   Permitted Use. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are permitted uses in an R-1 District:
   A.33   Day care serving fourteen (14) or fewer persons in a single-family
detached dwelling.
   B.   Essential services.
   C.   Golf courses (except club houses, miniature courses and driving tees
operated for commercial purposes).
   D.   Public parks, playgrounds, recreational uses, wildlife areas, and game
refuges.
   E.33   Residential care facilities serving six (6) or fewer persons in a
single-family detached dwelling.
   F.   Single family detached dwellings.
Subd. 3.   Interim Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are interim uses in the R-1 District and are governed by Section
1001.03, Subd. 6 of this Chapter.
   A.   Dog kennels provided that:
      1.   No person shall maintain or operate any kennel or shelter without a
license as regulated by the City Code.
      2.   A minimum lot size of one (1) acre is required to be licensed for
operation of a kennel or shelter.
      3.   Every kennel or shelter shall be enclosed or fenced in such manner
as to prevent the running at large or escape of animals confined therein.
      4.   Both dog kennels and cat shelters shall be open for inspection by
the City authorities at any time.
      5.   It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep three (3) or more
dogs and/or cats over six (6) months of age on his/her premises in the City
without obtaining a kennel license pursuant to this Section and the City Code.
(Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24, 2015)
Subd. 4.   Accessory Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter,
the following are permitted accessory uses in the R-1 District:
   A.   Private garages and off-street parking.
   B.   Fences as herein regulated.
   C.   Living quarters within the principal structure of persons employed on
the premises.
   D.   Keeping of not more than 2 boarders or roomers by a resident family.
   E.   Signs as herein regulated.
   F.33   Day care center and nursery school when operated in churches or
public or private schools.
   G.37   Accessory solar energy systems (roof mounted) as provided for by
Section
1001.09, Subd. 21.B of this Chapter.
   H.   Home occupations subject to Section
1001.09, Subd. 14 of this Chapter. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24,
2015)
Subd. 5.   Conditional Uses.23 Subject to applicable provisions of this
Chapter, the following are conditional uses in an R-1 District. (Requires a
conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by
Section
1001.03, Subd. 5 of this Chapter.)
   A.   Accessory temporary apartments provided that:
      1.   All provision within Section
1001.09 Subd. 17 are considered and determined to be satisfied.
      2.   The provisions of Section
1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and determined to be satisfied.
   B.   Municipal, administrative or service buildings or uses including public
and semi-public institutions, libraries, museums, post offices, etc., except
industrial type uses provided that:
      1.   When abutting a residential use in a residential use district, the
property is screened and landscaped in compliance with Section
1001.09 of this Chapter.
      2.   The provisions of Section
1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and determined to be satisfied.
   C.   Private recreation including golf club house, country club, swimming or
tennis club provided that:
      1.   The principal use, function or activity is open, outdoor in
character.
      2.   Not more than five (5) percent of the land area of the site shall be
covered by buildings or structures.
      3.   When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the
property is screened and landscaped for the protection of the abutting use,
according to the provisions of Section
1001.09 of this Chapter.
      4.   The land area of the property containing such use or activity meets
the minimum established for the district.
      5.   The use will not negatively impact the natural setting intended for
this district or neighboring residential uses.
      6.   The traffic generated by the use can be adequately accommodated
(volume and weight) upon City streets serving the use.
      7.   An adequate septic system and well can be established on the site.
   D.37   Accessory solar energy systems (ground mounted) as provided for by
Section
1001.09, Subd. 21.B of this Chapter.
   E.   Public or semi-public recreational buildings and neighborhood or
community centers; public and private educational institutions limited to
elementary, junior high and senior high schools; and religious institutions
such as churches, chapels, temples and synagogues provided that:
      1.   Side yards shall be double that required for the district.
      2.   Adequate screening from abutting residential uses and landscaping is
provided in compliance with Section
1001.09 of this Chapter.
      3.   Adequate off-street parking and access is provided on the site in
compliance with section
1001.05 of this Chapter and that such parking is adequately screened and
landscaped from surrounding and abutting residential uses in compliance with
Section
1001.09 of this Chapter.
      4.   Adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided and
regulated where applicable by Section
1001.05 of this Chapter.
      5.   The provisions of Section
1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and determined to be satisfied.
Subd. 6.   Lot Area and Setback Requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in an “R-1” District, subject to additional
requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Chapter.
   A.   Lot Area Requirements.
      1.   Lot Area.
         a.   Single Family: Not less than 14,500 square feet.
         b.   Other Uses: Not less than three (3) acres.
      2.   Lot Width:
         a.24   Single Family: Not less than ninety (90) feet for interior lots
and not less than one hundred ten (110) feet for corner lots.
         b.   Other Uses: Not less than two hundred (200) feet.
      3.   Lot depth:
         a.   Single Family: Not less than one hundred twenty (120) feet.
      b.   Other Uses: Not less than two hundred (200) feet.
   B.   Principal Structure Setback Requirements:
      1.   Front Yard:
         a.   Dwellings abutting an Arterial Street: Not less than fifty (50)
feet.
         b.24   One or Two Family: Not less than thirty (30) feet for the
principal building, except that the door of an attached garage facing a public
right-of-way shall be set back not less than thirty-five (35) feet.
         c.   Other Uses: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
      2.   Side Yard:
         a.   One or Two Family: Not less than fifteen (15) feet.
         b.   Other Uses abutting residences: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
         c.   Other Uses: Not less than thirty (30) feet.
         d.   Detached accessory uses: Not less than eight (8) feet.
         e.   Attached accessory uses: Not less than ten (10) feet.
      3.   Rear Yard:
         a.   One or Two Family: Not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
         b.   Other Uses abutting residences: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
         c.   Other Uses: Not less than forty (40) feet.
         d.   Detached accessory uses: Not less than eight (8) feet.
         e.   Abutting an Arterial Street: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
         f.36   Attached Accessory Uses on Corner Lots: Not less than twenty
(20) feet.
Subd. 7.   Lot Coverage and Height. The following lot coverage and height
requirements shall be observed in an R-1 District.
   A.31   Maximum impervious surface coverage on a lot shall not exceed thirty
(30) percent.
   B.   All principal structures shall be limited to a maximum height of
thirty-five (35) feet.
   C.   All accessory structures shall be limited to a maximum height of
fifteen (15) feet.
1001.13 R-2, MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
Subd. 1.    Purpose.24 The purpose of the R-2, Medium Density Residence
District is for medium density of four (4) to eight (8) units per acre to
provide a variety of housing types and ownership/rental options while keeping
the low densities associated with single family districts.
Subd. 2.    Permitted Use. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter,
the following are permitted uses in an R-2 District:
   A.33   Day care serving fourteen (14) or fewer persons in a single-family
detached dwelling.
   B.   Essential services.
   C.   Golf courses (except club houses, miniature courses and driving tees
operated for commercial purposes.
   D.33   Residential care facilities serving sixteen (6) or fewer persons.
   E.   Single family detached dwellings.
   F.   Two family dwellings.
   G.   Townhouses (not to exceed four (4) units per building).
Subd. 3.   Interim Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are interim uses in the R-2 District and are governed by Section
1001.03, Subd. 6 of this Chapter.
   A.   Dog kennels provided that:
      1.   No person shall maintain or operate any kennel or shelter without a
license as regulated by the City Code.
      2.   A minimum lot size of one (1) acre is required to be licensed for
operation of a kennel or shelter.
      3.   Every kennel or shelter shall be enclosed or fenced in such manner
as to prevent the running at large or escape of animals confined therein.
      4.   Both dog kennels and cat shelters shall be open for inspection by
the City authorities at any time.
      5.   It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep three (3) or more
dogs and/or cats over six (6) months of age on his/her premises in the City
without obtaining a kennel license pursuant to this Section and the City Code.
(Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24, 2015)
Subd. 4.   Accessory Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter,
the following are permitted accessory uses in the R-2 District:
   A.   Private garages and off-street parking.
   B.   Fences as herein regulated.
   C.   Living quarters within the principal structure of persons employed on
the premises.
   D.   Keeping of not more than 2 boarders or roomers by a resident family.
   E.   Signs as herein regulated.
   F.   Day care center and nursery school when operated in churches or public
or private schools.
   G.   Accessory solar energy systems (roof mounted) as provided for by
Section
1001.09, Subd. 21.B of this Chapter.
   H.   Home occupations subject to Section
1001.09, Subd. 14 of this Chapter. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24,
2015)
Subd. 5.   Conditional Uses.23 Subject to applicable provisions of this
Chapter, the following are conditional uses in an R-2 District. (Requires a
conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by
Section
1001.03, Subd. 5 of this Chapter.)
   A.   Municipal, administrative or service buildings or uses including public
and semi-public institutions, libraries, museums, post offices, etc., except
industrial type uses provided that:
      1.   When abutting a residential use in a residential use district, the
property is screened and landscaped in compliance with Section
1001.09 of this Chapter.
      2.   The provisions of Section
1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and determined to be satisfied.
   B.   Private recreation including golf club house, country club, swimming or
tennis club provided that:
      1.   The principal use, function or activity is open, outdoor in
character.
      2.   Not more than five (5) percent of the land area of the site shall be
covered by buildings or structures.
      3.   When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the
property is screened and landscaped for the protection of the abutting use,
according to the provisions of Section
1001.09 of this Chapter.
      4.   The land area of the property containing such use or activity meets
the minimum established for the district.
      5.   The use will not negatively impact the natural setting intended for
this district or neighboring residential uses.
      6.   The traffic generated by the use can be adequately accommodated
(volume and weight) upon City streets serving the use.
      7.   An adequate septic system and well can be established on the site.
   C.37   Accessory solar energy systems (ground mounted) as provided for by
Section
1001.09, Subd. 21.B of this Chapter.
   D.   Public or semi-public recreational buildings and neighborhood or
community centers; public and private educational institutions limited to
elementary, junior high and senior high schools; and religious institutions
such as churches, chapels, temples and synagogues provided that:
      1.   Side yards shall be double that required for the district.
      2.   Adequate screening from abutting residential uses and landscaping is
provided in compliance with Section
1001.09 of this Chapter.
      3.   Adequate off-street parking and access is provided on the site in
compliance with section
1001.05 of this Chapter and that such parking is adequately screened and
landscaped from surrounding and abutting residential uses in compliance with
Section
1001.09 of this Chapter.
      4.   Adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided and
regulated where applicable by Section
1001.05 of this Chapter.
      5.   The provisions of Section
1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and determined to be satisfied.
   E.   Townhouses (five to eight units) provided that:
      1.   When abutting a single family residential use or a single family
residential district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance
with Section
1001.09 of this Chapter.
      2.   The provisions of Section
1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and determined to be satisfied.
Subd. 6.   Lot Area and Setback Requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in an R-2 District subject to additional
requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Chapter.
   A.   Lot Area Requirements:
      1.   Lot area:
         a.   Single Family: Not less than ten thousand eight hundred (10,800)
square feet.
         b.   Two Family: Not less than six thousand two hundred (6,200) square
feet.
         c.   Other Uses: Not less than three (3) acres.
      2.   Lot Width:
         a.24   Single Family: Not less than eighty (80) feet for interior lots
and not less than one hundred five (105) feet for corner lots.
         b.24   Two Family: Not less than one hundred (100) feet for interior
lots and not less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet for corner lots.
         c.   Other Uses: Not less than two hundred (200) feet.
      3.   Lot depth:
         a.   Single-Family: Not less than one hundred twenty (120) feet.
         b.   Two Family: Not less than one hundred thirty (130) feet.
         c.   Other Uses: Not less than two hundred (200) feet.
   B.   Principal Structure Setback Requirements:
      1.   Front Yard:
         a.   Dwellings Abutting an Arterial Street: Not less than fifty (50)
feet.
         b.24   One or Two Family: Not less than thirty (30) feet for the
principal building, except that the door of an attached garage facing a public
right-of-way shall be set back not less than thirty-five (35) feet.
         c.   Other Uses: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
      2.   Side Yard:
         a.   One or Two Family: Not less than ten (10) feet.
         b.   Other Uses abutting residences: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
         c.   Other Uses: Not less than thirty (30) feet.
         d.   Detached accessory uses: Not less than eight (8) feet.
         e.   Attached accessory uses: Not less than ten (10) feet.
      3.   Rear Yard:
         a.   One or Two Family: Not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
         b.   Other Uses abutting residences: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
         c.   Other Uses: Not less than thirty-five (35) feet.
         d.   Detached accessory uses: Not less than eight (8) feet.
         e.   Abutting an Arterial Street: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
Subd. 7.   Lot Coverage and Height. The following lot coverage and height
requirements shall be observed in an R-2 District.
   A.31   Maximum impervious surface coverage on a lot shall not exceed thirty-
five (35) percent.
   B.   All principal structures shall be limited to a maximum height of
thirty-five (35) feet.
   C.   All accessory structures shall be limited to a maximum height of
fifteen (15) feet.
1001.14 R-3, MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
Subd. 1.   Purpose. The purpose of the R-3, Multiple Family Residence District
is to provide for multi-family use at higher densities up to fifteen (15)
dwelling units per acre for both permanent and more transient families. It is
intended to allow for townhouses, apartment buildings, condominiums, and other
types of mufti-family residential dwelling units to be individually owned or
rented.
Subd. 2.   Permitted Use. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are permitted uses in the R-3 District:
   A.   Townhomes and quadraminiums not to exceed four (4) units per building.
   B.   Multiple Family (five to eight units).
   C.33   Residential care facilities serving six (16) or fewer persons.
Subd. 3.   Interim Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are interim uses in the R-3 District and are governed by Section
1001.03, Subd. 6 of this Chapter.
   A.23   None.
Subd. 4.   Accessory Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this chapter,
the following are permitted accessory uses in the R-3 District:
Subd. 4.   Accessory Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this chapter,
the following are permitted accessory uses in the R-3 District:
   A.   Private garages and off-street parking.
   B.   Fences as herein regulated.
   C.   Signs as herein regulated.
   D.   Day care center and nursery school when operated in churches or public
or private schools.
   E.   Accessory solar energy systems (roof mounted) as provided for by
Section
1001.09, Subd. 21.B of this Chapter.
   F.   Home occupations subject to Section
1001.09, Subd. 14 of this Chapter. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24,
2015)
Subd. 5.   Conditional Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter,
the following are conditional uses in an R-3 District. (Requires a conditional
use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by this Chapter.)
   A.   All conditionally permitted uses within an R-2 District, not expressly
permitted in the R-3 District.
   B.   Single Family detached dwelling provided that:
      1.   The lot is of inadequate area to allow a more intensive residential
land use.
      2.   The provisions of Section
1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and determined to be satisfied.
   C.   Multiple Family Dwelling (nine units or more) provided that:
      1.   When abutting a single family residential district, the property is
screened and landscaped in compliance with Section
1001.09 of this Chapter.
      2.   The provisions of Section
1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and determined to be satisfied.
   D.37   Accessory solar energy systems (ground mounted) as provided for by
Section
1001.09, Subd. 21.B of this Chapter.
Subd. 6.   Lot Area and Setback Requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in an R-3 District subject to additional
requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Chapter.
   A.   Lot Area Requirements.
      1.   Lot Area:
         a.   Single Family: Not less than eight thousand seven hundred (8,700)
square feet.
         b.   Two Family: Not less than six thousand two hundred (6,200) square
feet.
         c.   Over Two Family: Not less than four thousand (4,000) square feet.
         d.   Other Uses: Not less than three (3) acres.
         e.   Minimum total lot area for more than two (2) units per structure:
Not less than one (1) acre.
      2.   Lot Width:
         a.   Single Family: Not less than ninety (90) feet.
         b.   Two Family: Not less than one hundred (100) feet.
         c.   Over Two Family: Not less than one hundred thirty (130) feet.
         d.   Other Uses: Not less than two hundred (200) feet.
      3.   Lot Depth:
         a.   Single Family: Not less than one hundred twenty (120) feet.
         b.   Two Family: Not less than one hundred twenty (120) feet.
         c.   Over Two Family: Not less than one hundred thirty (130) feet.
         d.   Other Uses: Not less than two hundred (200) feet.
   B.   Principal Structure Setback Requirements.
      1.   Front Yard:
         a.   Dwellings abutting, an Arterial Street: Not less than fifty (50)
feet.
         b.   One or Two Family: Not less than thirty five (35) feet.
         c.   Over Two Family: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
         d.   Other Uses: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
      2.   Side Yard:
         a.   One or Two Family: Not less than ten (10) feet.
         b.   Over Two Family: Not less than fifteen (15) feet.
         c.   Other Uses abutting residences: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
         d.   Other Uses: Not less than thirty (30) feet.
         e.   Detached accessory uses: Not less than ten (10) feet.
         f.   Attached accessory uses: Not less than ten (10) feet.
      3.   Rear Yard:
         a.   One or Two Family: Not less than fifteen (15) feet.
         b.   Over Two Family: Not less than twenty (20) feet.
         c.   Other Uses abutting residences: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
         d.   Other Uses: Not less than thirty (30) feet.
      e.   Detached accessory uses: Not less than fifteen (15) feet.
      f.   Abutting an Arterial Street: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
Subd. 7.   Lot Coverage and Height. The following lot coverage and height
requirements shall be observed in an R-3 District.
   A.31   Maximum impervious surface coverage on a base lot shall not exceed
fifty (50) percent.
   B.   All principal structures shall be limited to a maximum height of
thirty-five (35) feet.
   C.   All accessory structures shall be limited to a maximum height of
twenty-five (25) feet.
1001.15 R-6, RESIDENTIAL MANUFACTURED HOME PARK
Subd. 1.   Purpose. The purpose of the R-6, Residential Manufactured Home Park
is to create, preserve, and enhance areas for manufactured home park
development at densities of six to nine dwelling units per acre for both
permanent and more transient families. No other structures of a residential
type are allowed, except as provided for in the manufactured home section. It
is appropriate only in areas served by public utilities, with good
accessibility to thoroughfares, and where such development is within the
manufactured home residential areas in the comprehensive plan.
Subd. 2.   Permitted Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter,
the following are permitted uses in the R-6 District:
   A.   Convalescent and nursing homes.
   B.   Day care center and nursery school when operated in churches or public
or private schools.
   C.   Golf courses (except club houses, miniature courses and driving tees
operated for commercial purposes).
   D.   Manufactured home parks.
   E.   Two family dwellings.
Subd. 3.   Interim Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are interim uses in the R-6 District and are governed by Section
1001.03, Subd. 6 of this Chapter.
   A.23   None.
Subd. 4.   Accessory Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter,
the following are permitted accessory uses in the R-6 District:
   A.   Private garages and off-street parking.
   B.   Fences as herein regulated.
   C.   Signs as herein regulated.
   D.   Day care center and nursery school when operated in churches or public
or private schools.
   E.   Accessory solar energy systems (roof mounted) as provided for by
Section
1001.09, Subd. 21.B of this Chapter.
   F.   Home occupations subject to Section
1001.09, Subd. 14 of this Chapter. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 2015)
Subd. 5.   Conditional Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter,
the following are conditional uses in an R-6 District. (Requires a conditional
use permit based upon procedures set forth and regulated by this Chapter.)
   A.   All conditionally permitted uses within an R-3 District.
   B.33   Outdoor sales and display of manufactured homes on manufactured home
lots provided that:
      1.   The number of manufactured home lots used for outdoor sales area
shall not exceed five (5) percent of the total manufactured home lots within
the manufactured home park. This does not include private homeowners.
      2.   The manufactured homes offered for sale shall be located upon
manufactured home lots and shall comply with applicable minimum lot area
requirements.
      3.   The manufactured homes offered for sale shall comply with all
setback requirements.
      4.   The manufactured homes offered for sale shall comply with all
applicable building codes.
      5.   No additional signage other than that allowed by Section
1001.08 of this Chapter.
      6.   Provision shall be made for off-street parking of customer parking
so as not to affect access and circulation within the site or on the public
street.
   C.12   Accessory solar energy systems (ground mounted) as provided for by
Section
1001.09, Subd. 21.B of this Chapter.
Subd. 6.   Lot Area and Setback Requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in an R-6 District subject to additional
requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Chapter.
   A.   Lot Area Requirements:
      1.   Lot Area:
         a.   Single Family: Not less than five thousand two hundred (5,200)
square feet.
         b.   Other Uses: Not less than three (3) acres.
      2.   Lot Width:
         a.   Single Family: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
         b.   Other Uses: Not less than two hundred (200) feet.
      3.   Lot Depth:
         a.   Single Family: Not less than one hundred (100) feet.
         b.   Other Uses: Not less than two hundred (200) feet.
   B.   Principal Structure Setback Requirements.
      1.   Front Yard:
         a.   Dwellings abutting an Arterial Street: Not less than fifty (50)
feet.
         b    One or Two Family: Not less than fifteen (15) feet.
         c.   Over Two Family: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
         d.   Other Uses: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
      2.   Side Yard:
         a.   One or Two Family: Not less than ten (10) feet.
         b.   Over Two Family: Not less than twenty (20) feet.
         c.   Other Uses abutting residences: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
         d.   Other Uses: Not less than thirty (30) feet.
         e.   Detached accessory uses: Not less than ten (10) feet.
         f.   Attached accessory uses: Not less than ten (10) feet.
      3.   Rear Yard:
         a.   One or Two Family: Not less than fifteen (15) feet.
         b.   Over Two Family: Not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
         c.   Other Uses abutting residences: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
         d.   Other Uses: Not less than thirty (30) feet.
         e.   Detached accessory uses: Not less than fifteen (15) feet.
         f.   Abutting an Arterial Street: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
Subd. 7.   Lot Coverage and Height. The following lot coverage and height
requirements shall be observed in an R-6 District.
   A.   Maximum lot coverage of all structures shall not exceed thirty (30)
percent.
   B.   All principal structures shall be limited to a maximum height of
thirty-five (35) feet.
   C.   All accessory structures shall be limited to a maximum height of
twenty-five (25) feet.
1001.16 C-0, DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
Subd. 1.   Purpose. The purpose of the C-0, Downtown Commercial District is to
provide a district which will allow for the preservation of the unique historic
character of the City's downtown commercial area, and will accommodate
commercial development and growth within the confined spaces of the area. The
uses allowed in the district shall be offices and service businesses in which
there is contact with the public, and retail sales of merchandise to the
general public. Such district will be located within the area indicated for
such use in the comprehensive plan and shall be developed in accordance with
the general development plan for the downtown area, as contained in the
comprehensive plan.
Subd. 2.   Permitted Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter,
the following are permitted uses in a C-0 District:
   A.   Appliance showrooms
   B.   Business, commercial or trade schools
   C.   Cannabis businesses; retail businesses, medical cannabis retailer, and
lower potency hemp edible retailer only, subject to the provisions of Section
1001.09, Subd. 24 of this chapter. (Ordinance 2025-01, adopted January 14,
2025)
   D.   Clinics, medical offices
   E.   Commercial recreational uses (indoor)
   F.   Daycare and nursery school
   G.   Dry cleaning and laundry establishments with no more than four (4)
employees for cleaning or pressing.
   H.15a   Dry cleaning and laundry collection stations, and self service.
   I.   Essential service and essential service buildings.
   J.   Financial institutions.
   K.   Funeral homes. (Ord. 2025-05, adopted November 25, 2025)
   L.   Government office or services.
   M.   Laboratories - medical, dental.
   N.   Municipal, administrative or service buildings, or uses including
public and semi-public institutions, libraries, museums, post offices, etc.
except industrial type uses.
   O.   Off-sale liquor stores.
   P.   On-Sale liquor establishments
   Q.   Offices, administrative executive, professional, medical, research.
   R.   Personal service and repair establishments such as barber and beauty
shops, shoe repair, etc.
   S.   Pet and animal shops, taxidermists
   T.   Plumbing and heating showrooms and shops.
   U.   Printing services, publishing and related distribution agencies.
   V.   Private clubs and lodges.
   W.   Restaurants (Class I).
   X.   Repair and service uses when secondary to the allowable use.
   Y.   Retail shops and stores (excluding autos, boats, machinery, etc.) such
as apparel, appliance, beverage, book, carpet, drugs, furniture, grocer,
hardware, jewelry, paint, pawn, tobacco, sporting goods.
   Z.   Schools and studios - artist, music, photo, decorating, dancing,
health, etc.
   AA.5,18   Sexually oriented use - accessory.
   BB.   Temporary cannabis events in accordance with Section
1001.09, Subd. 24 of this chapter. (Ordinance 2025-01, adopted January 14,
2025)
   CC.   Video arcade and accessory uses such as pool, pinball, etc.
   DD.   Brew on premises. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24, 2015)
   EE.   Brewpub. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24, 2015)
Subd. 3.   Interim Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are interim uses in the C-0 District and are governed by this
Chapter.
   A.   None.
Subd. 4.   Accessory Uses. The following are permitted uses in a C-0 District:
   A.   Off-street parking and loading as herein regulated.
   B.   Signs as herein regulated.
   C.   Secondary uses customarily incident to the permitted or conditional
uses allowed in the district.
   D.37   Accessory solar energy systems (roof mounted) as provided for by
Section
1001.09, Subd. 21.B of this Chapter.
Subd. 5.   Conditional Uses. The following are conditional uses in a C-
0 District. (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth
in and regulated by this Chapter.)
   A.   Nursing homes, residential care facilities, continuing care retirement
communities and senior housing with services establishments licensed by the
Minnesota department of health. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24, 2015)
   B.10   Mixed Uses (commercial/residential) buildings provided that:
      1.   Residential uses shall be limited and may be permitted only where
they do not create conflicts, present or future, between non-residential and
residential uses and activities, both on and off the subject property.
      2.   Residential and non-residential uses shall not be located on the
same floor and no residential use shall be located on the first or street-level
floor.
      3.   Residential and non-residential uses shall be provided separate
entrances.
      4.   Residential uses shall provide adequate off-street parking in
conformance with that required of multifamily uses by Section
1001.06, Subd. 09 of this Chapter.
      5.   Open and outside storage associated with the residential use shall
be prohibited.
      6.   Residential uses shall be governed by all applicable provisions of
the Zoning Ordinance. Building Code, Housing Code and Fire Code.
      7.   The provisions of Section
1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and determined to be satisfied.
   C.   Multiple principal uses on one lot.
   D.   Open or Outdoor Commercial Recreation (not including activities which
are temporary in nature), provided that:
      1.   The activity is accessory to a permitted or conditionally permitted
principal use, and located on the same parcel thereof.
      2.   The activity is fully screened from surrounding residential uses to
a minimum height of six (6) feet above the highest ground elevation of the
outdoor use.
      3.   The activity is fully screened from adjacent public streets.
      4.   Additional parking demand generated by the outdoor use is properly
accounted for in the entire property's parking supply.
      5.   Lights required for the outdoor use are hooded and directed away
from adjacent streets and properties so as to avoid any view of the light
source.
      6.   Noise generated by the outdoor use does not become a nuisance as
defined by the City's nuisance and noise ordinances.
      7.   No signage, beyond that which is permitted for the principal use and
building, is allowed as a result of the outdoor activity.
      8.   The provisions of Section
1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and determined to be satisfied.
      9.   The proposed use complies with the performance standards outlined in
Section
1001.09 and all other applicable provisions of this Chapter.
      10.   Other conditions are met which are reasonably related to the
assurance that the use will not be, or become, a nuisance to surrounding public
or private property, including, but not limited to, hours of operation, access,
and scope of activities.
   E.18   Veterinary clinics
   F.   Microdistilleries with tasting rooms. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted
February 24, 2015)
   G.   Small breweries with tap rooms. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February
24, 2015)
Subd. 6.   Lot Requirements And Setbacks. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed in a C-0 District, subject to additional requirements,
exceptions and modifications set forth in this Chapter.
   A.   Lot Area Requirements:
      1.   Lot Area: None
      2.   Lot Width: None
      3.   Lot Depth: None
   B.   Principal Structure Setback Requirements:
      1.   Front Yard:
         a.   To other commercial district: Zero (0) feet.
         b.   To any residence district: Not less than ten (10) feet.
      2.   Side Yard:
         a.   To other commercial district: Zero (0) feet.
         b.   To any residence district: Not less than ten (10) feet.
      3.   Rear Yard:
         a.   To other commercial district: Zero (0) feet.
         b.   To any residence district: Not less than ten (10) feet.
Subd. 7.   Lot Coverage and Height. The following lot coverage and height
requirements shall be observed in a C-0 District.
   A.   Maximum Lot Coverage by All Structures: One hundred (100) percent.
   B.   All principal structures shall be limited to a maximum height of three
(3) stories or thirty-five (35) feet.
Subd. 8.29   Design Standards. All new development or expansion, remodeling,
rehabilitation or redevelopment of existing uses, buildings and parcels within
the C-O District shall comply with the design guidelines adopted by the City
Council.
1001.17 RESERVED
(Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24, 2015)
1001.18 RESERVED
1001.19 C-3, Highway Commercial District
Subd. 1.22     Purpose. The purpose of the C-3 Highway Commercial District is
to provide for the establishment of a broad mix of commercial retail and
service businesses and activities that attract and serve patrons from the City
of Rockford or region based upon access to and visibility of the Minnesota
Trunk Highway 55 corridor.
Subd. 2.18     Permitted Uses. The following are permitted uses in the C-
3 District:
   A.   Appliance showrooms.
   B.   Banks.
   C.   Business or trade school.
   D.   Bus/transit station or terminal.
   E.   Commercial recreation (indoor).
   F.   Conference store with gas sales.
   G.   Convalescent and nursing homes.
   H.   Convenience store with gas sales.
   I.   Day care center and nursery school.
   J.   Dry clean or laundry.
   K.   Essential services.
   L.   Government office or services.
   M.   Greenhouse or nurseries w/retail sales.
   N.   Medical offices.
   O.   Funeral homes. (Ord. 2025-05, adopted November 25, 2025)
   P.   Motel, hotel.
   Q.   Municipal, administrative or service buildings, or uses including
public and semi-public institutions, libraries, museums, post offices, etc.
except industrial type uses.
   R.   Off sale liquor stores.
   S.   On sale liquor stores. (Ordinance 18-03, adopted January 23, 2018)
   T.   Offices, administrative executive, professional, governmental,
government, medical, research, without merchandising services.
   U.   Offices (as above) with merchandising services.
   V.   Personal service and repair establishments (barber, beauty shop, shoes
report), (excludes auto repair).
   W.   Plumbing and heating showrooms.
   X.   Printing services.
   Y.   Private clubs and lodges.
   Z.   Repair and service shops (includes small appliance and personal service
repair; excludes automotive repair.
   AA.   Restaurants (Class I and Class II).
   BB.   Retail stores.
   CC.   Sexually oriented use – accessory and principal (subject to area
analysis).
   DD.   Studio – art, music, dance, photo, etc.
   EE.   Theaters (indoor).
   FF.   Veterinary clinics.
   GG.   Video arcade accessory uses such as pool, pinball, etc.
   HH.   Wholesale showrooms.
   II.   Brew on premises.(Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24, 2015)
   II.   Brewpub. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24, 2015)
Subd. 3.   Interim Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are interim uses in the C-3 District and are governed by Section
1001.03, Subd. 6 of this Chapter.
   A.30   Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS) as regulated by Section
1001.09, Subd. 21 of this Chapter.
   B.   Single family dwellings existing as of February 13, 2018 shall be
designated as interim uses provided that:
      1.   Not more than one (1) principal use shall be allowed upon the
property.
      2.   Commercial uses as provided for within this District shall not be
allowed until such time as the interim residential use ceases and the property
complies with all requirements of this Chapter applicable to commercial uses;
once converted to an allowed commercial use in conformance with the
requirements of this Chapter, the residential use shall not be re-established.
(Ordinance 18-04, adopted February 13, 2018)
Subd. 4.   Accessory Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter,
the following are permitted accessory uses within the C-3, Highway Commercial
District:
   A.18   All accessory uses allowed within a C-1 District.
Subd. 5.22     Conditional Uses.  The following are conditional uses in a C-3,
Highway Commercial District. (Requires a conditional use permit based upon
procedures set forth in and regulated by this Chapter.)
   A.   Nursing homes, residential care facilities, continuing care retirement
communities and senior housing with services establishments licensed by the
Minnesota department of health. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24, 2015)
   B.   Auto, marine, RV, trailer or other vehicle sales.
   C.   Crematories, provided that:
      1.   The use shall maintain a license issued by the Minnesota Department
of Health, Minnesota Department of Animal Health, and/or Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency, as applicable and comply with all Minnesota Rules.
      2.   The use shall not be located:
         a.   On any lot abutting Trunk Highway 55; or
         b.   Within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a residential use. (Ord.
2025-05, adopted November 25, 2025)
   D.   Auto repair – major and minor.
   E.   Commercial recreation (outdoor).
   F.   Hospitals.
   G.   Laboratories.
   H.   Medical laboratories.
   I.   Multiple principal uses on one lot.
   J.26   Outdoor sales and display (maximum of five percent gross land area).
   K.37   Accessory solar energy systems (ground mounted) as provided for by
Section
1001.09, Subd. 21.B of this Chapter.
   L.   Microdistilleries with tasting rooms. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted
February 24, 2015)
   M.   Small breweries with tap rooms. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February
24, 2015)
   N.   Animal kennels, provided that:
      1.   The number of animals boarded shall be twenty (20) unless otherwise
approved by the City Council.
      2.    All areas in which animals are confined are located indoors and are
properly soundproofed from adjacent properties.
      3.   There shall be adequate physical separation within a multiple
occupancy building between the animal kennel and other individual tenant spaces
to protect public health and safety.
      4.    Outdoor exercise areas:
         a.   Use of an outdoor exercise area shall be limited to the hours of
6:00AM to 10:00PM each day.
         b.   Staff shall be present at all times to control barking so as not
to cause a public nuisance.
         c.   The outdoor exercise area shall be screened from view of adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way by a minimum six (6) foot tall privacy
fence enclosure.
         d.   Animal waste shall be removed from the area not less than once
(1) per day or as necessary so as protect public health, safety, and welfare.
      5.   A ventilation system shall be designed so that no odors or organisms
will spread between kennels or to the outside air and will be capable of
completely exchanging internal air at a rate of at least twice per hour.
      6.   Air temperature must be maintained between sixty degrees (60°) and
eighty degrees Fahrenheit (80°F).
      7.   A room separate from the kennel area shall be provided of sufficient
size to adequately separate animals that are sick or injured from healthy
animals.
      8.    Indoor animal kennel floors and walls shall be made of nonporous
materials or sealed to make it nonporous.
      9.   Animal wastes shall be flushed down an existing sanitary sewer
system or enclosed in a container of sufficient construction to eliminate odors
and organisms and shall be properly disposed of at least once (1) per day.
      10.   All State requirements, rules, and laws for such facilities are
met. (Ordinannce 18-02, adopted January 23, 2018)
Subd. 6.   Lot Requirements and Setbacks. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed in a C-3 Highway Commercial District, subject to additional
requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Chapter.
   A.9   Lot Area Requirements:
      1.   Lot area: Not less than one (1) acre for newly annexed parcels after
the effective date of the Ordinance.
      2.   Lot Width: Not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet.
      3.   Lot Depth: Not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet.
   B.   Principal Structure Setback Requirements:
      1.   Front Yard: Not less than thirty-five (35) feet. (Ordinance 2015-01,
adopted February 24, 2015)
      2.   Side Yard:
         a.   To other commercial district: Not less than fifteen (15) feet.
         b.   To any residence district: Not less than forty (40) feet.
      3.   Rear Yard:
         a.   To other commercial district: Not less than twenty-five (25)
feet.
         b.   To any residential district: Not less than forty (40) feet.
Subd. 7.   Lot Coverage and Height. The following lot coverage and height
requirements shall be observed in a C-3 District.
   A.   Maximum Lot Coverage by All Structures: Thirty-five (35) percent.
   B.18   All principal structures shall be limited to a maximum height of
three (3) stories or thirty-five (35) feet.
1001.20 I-1, INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Subd. 1.   Purpose. It is the intent of the I-1, Industrial District to allow
for industrial operations with high standards for site development and use
performance. Permitted and conditional uses shall be compatible with the
character of development in proximate areas. The development types and
locational criteria of the I-1 District shall be as set forth in the
comprehensive plan.
Subd. 2.18     Permitted Uses. The following are permitted uses within an I-
1 District:
   A.   Commercial recreation (indoor)
   B.   Any manufacturing, production, processing, cleaning, storage,
servicing, repair or testing of materials, goods, or products that is wholly
contained within the building and which meets and maintains all environmental
standards established by the State of Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
   C.   Cannabis businesses; delivery, medical cannabis retailer, and
transporter only, subject to the provisions of Section
1001.09, Subd. 24 of this chapter. (Ordinance 2025-01, adopted January 14,
2025)
   D.   Printing services.
   E.   Sexually Oriented Uses – accessory.
   F.   Warehousing.
   G.   Microdistilleries with tasting rooms. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted
February 24, 2015)
   H.   Small breweries with tap rooms. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February
24, 2015)
Subd. 3.   Interim Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are interim uses in an I-1 District and are governed by this Chapter.
   A.   Single family dwellings existing as of February 13, 2018 shall be
designated as interim uses provided that:
      1.   Not more than one (1) principal use shall be allowed upon the
property.
      2.   Uses as provided for within this District shall not be allowed until
such time as the interim residential use ceases and the property complies with
all requirements of this Chapter applicable to industrial uses, except as a
home extended business subject to the following:
         a.   The residential dwelling upon the property shall be owner
occupied.
         b.   Any buildings used for industrial uses shall:
            (1)   Not exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet.
            (2)   Have an exterior finish comprised of materials as allowed by
Section
1001.09, Subd. 12, B. of this Chapter.
         c.   There shall be no outdoor storage of vehicles, equipment, or
materials related to the home extended business.
         d.   Hours of operation for the home extended business shall be
limited to seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. unless
extended by the City Council.
         e.   Impervious surfaces upon the property shall not exceed thirty-
five (35) percent.
         f.   All accesses, driveways, and off-street parking areas shall be
paved with asphalt or concrete.
         g.   Signs for the home extended business shall be limited to one (1)
freestanding sign not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.
      3.   Once converted to an allowed commercial use in conformance with the
requirements of this Chapter, the residential use shall not be re-established.
(Ord. 23-04, adopted September 26, 2023)
   B.18,30   Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS) as regulated by Section
1001.09, Subd. 21 of this Chapter.
Subd. 4.   Accessory Uses. The following are permitted accessory uses within an
I-1 District:
   A.   All secondary uses customarily incident to the permitted or conditional
uses listed.
   B.   Off-street parking and loading as herein regulated.
   C.   Signs as herein regulated.
   D.37   Accessory solar energy systems (roof mounted) as provided for by
Section
1001.09, Subd. 21.B of this Chapter.
Subd. 5.   Conditional Uses. The following are conditional uses in an I-
1 District. (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth
in and regulated by this Chapter.)
   A.   Cannabis businesses; combination medical cannabis, cultivator, delivery
service, manufacturer, medical cannabis combination, mezzobusiness,
microbusiness, temporary cannabis event, testing facility, transporter, and
lower potency hemp manufacturer only, provided that:
      1.   City Code. The cannabis business shall comply with the provisions of
Section 1001 of this City Code.
      2.   Indoor Operations:
         a.   A cannabis business shall be conducted entirely within a
principal or accessory building as allowed by this title; all outside storage
is prohibited.
         b.   All waste and recycling containers shall be kept within a
principal or accessory building.
      3.   Minimum Buffer Zone. All principal and accessory buildings occupied
by a cannabis business shall be setback a minimum of five hundred feet (500')
from any residential district established by Section
1001.10 of this chapter.
      4.   Allowed Hours:
         a.   Retail sale of cannabis, cannabis flower, cannabis products,
lower potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products shall be limited
to occur between the hours set forth by Section
1001.09, Subd. 24.E.3.a of this chapter.
         b.   The hours of operation for a cannabis business other than those
specified by Section
1001.09, Subd. 24.E.3.a of this chapter shall be limited to the hours of seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M each day, unless extended by the
City Council.
      5.   Emissions. An emissions plan shall be submitted with application for
a conditional use permit describing the emissions(s) anticipated to originate
at the premises and the methods to be used to prevent such odor(s) from leaving
the premises, subject to the following:
         a.   Sufficient measures and means of preventing any gas, vapors,
odors, smoke, odors, debris, dust, fluids, or other substances from exiting a
cannabis business shall be provided at all times.
         b.   In the event that any gas, vapors, odors, debris, dust, fluids,
or other substances exit a cannabis business, the cannabis business and the
owner of the subject property shall be jointly and severally liable for such
conditions and shall be responsible for immediate, full clean-up and correction
of such condition.
         c.   The cannabis business shall properly dispose of all such
materials, items, and other substances in a safe, sanitary, and secure manner
and in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local laws and
regulations.
      6.   Cultivation:
         a.   Cannabis cultivation shall not be perceptible from the exterior
of the building in which the cultivation occurs.
         b.   Lighting:
            (1)   The use of any lighting for indoor marijuana cultivation
shall be limited to light-emitting diodes (LEDs), compact fluorescent lamps
(CFLs), or other fluorescent lighting.
            (2)   Use of high-intensity discharge (HID) lighting, including,
but not limited to, mercury-vapor lamps, metal-halide (MH) lamps, ceramic MH
lamps, sodium-vapor lamps, high-pressure sodium (HPS) lamps and xenon short-arc
lamps, shall be prohibited.
      7.   Utilities. The use shall be connected to public sanitary sewer and
water utility systems.
         a.   Sanitary Sewer:
            (1)   There shall be adequate capacity within the sanitary sewer
system, including collection pipes, lift stations, forcemains, and wastewater
treatment facilities serving the property to accommodate the cannabis business.
            (2)   Discharges to the sanitary sewer system be subject to
approval of the City Engineer in accordance with
Chapter 401 of this Code.
         b.   Public Water:
            (1)   There shall be adequate capacity within the public water
system, including wells, pump houses, water towers, pressure valves, and
distribution pipes serving the property to accommodate the cannabis business.
            (2)   Connection to the public water system shall comply with
Chapter 402 of this Code, including provision of cross connection controls
subject to approval of the City Engineer.
      8.   Security:
         a.   Burglary alarm systems with audible and sheriff notification
components that are professionally monitored and maintained in good working
condition shall be installed on all doors, windows, and access points.
         b.   Surveillance cameras shall be installed and operate twenty-four
(24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week, with thirty (30) day video storage, to
monitor all entrances and trash receptacles, along with the interior and
exterior of the premises shall be required.
         c.   Exterior lighting shall be required sufficient for observers to
see and for cameras to record, that is either constantly on or activated by
motion detectors.
         d.   Deadbolt locks shall be installed and utilized on all exterior
doors and locks shall be installed on all other windows or access points.
         e.   Additional security requirements including, but not limited to,
security guards, steel doors, and steel window coverings shall be required as
determined by the City Council.
      9.   Retail sale of products other than cannabis products as an accessory
use shall be allowed subject to approval of separate conditional use permit.
(Ordinance 2025-01, adopted January 14, 2025)
   B.   Any permitted or accessory industrial use not conducted within a
building including storage of materials, products and vehicles provided that:
      1.   The storage area is landscaped, fenced, and screened from view of
neighboring uses and abutting Residential Districts.
      2.   Storage is landscaped and screened from view from the public right-
of-way.
      3.   Storage area is blacktopped or concrete surfaced.
      4.   All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source
shall not be visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring
residences.
      5.   The storage area does not take up parking space or loading space as
required for conformity to this Chapter.
      6.   The provisions of Section
1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and determined to be satisfied.
   C.   Multiple principal use buildings on one lot.
   D.   Outdoor sales and display (maximum of five (5) percent gross land
area).
   E.   Public garages.
   F.   Retail and service establishments accessory to a permitted or
conditionally permitted principal use, and providing goods and services which
are primarily for the use of persons employed in the district provided that:
      1.   Such use is allowed as a permitted use in a Commercial District.
      2.   Such use does not constitute more than fifty (50) percent of the
gross floor area of the principal building.
      3.   Adequate off-street parking and off-street loading in compliance
with Section
1001.05 of this Chapter is provided.
      4.   All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall
be in conformance with the provisions of Section
1001.08 of this Chapter.
      5.   The provisions of Section
1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and determined to be satisfied.
      6.   Residential structures and related residential uses necessary for
security and safety reasons in relation to a principal use.
      7.   The proposed use complies with the performance standards outlined in
Section
1001.09 and all other applicable provisions of this chapter.
      8.   The provisions of Section
1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and determined to be satisfied.
   G.18   Recycling processing center.
   H.37   Accessory solar energy systems (ground mounted) as provided for by
Section
1001.09, Subd. 21.B of this Chapter.
   I.   Self-Storage Facilities, Indoor subject to the following:
      1.   Buildings shall be limited to 300 feet in width/length to ensure
adequate fire access.
      2.   Drive aisle abutting individual exterior storage space doors shall
be a minimum of 28 feet wide to allow unloading at the building and maintain a
fire access lane.
      3.   Drive aisles for interior self-storage facilities shall be a minimum
of 24 feet wide separate of loading areas used to access the interior of the
building.
      4.   Outdoor storage and parking areas shall be limited to 30 percent of
the lot area, shall comply with principal building setbacks, shall be paved
with perimeter curb, and shall be screened from residential properties and
public rights-of-way.
      5.   Off-street parking stalls shall be required only for ancillary
office or retail uses.
      6.   Landscaping shall be required at the perimeter of the property and
the facilities must be screened from view of any abutting residential
districts.
      7.   Fences shall be installed inside of the required landscape areas.
      8.   Fences that include gates shall be setback 50 feet from the public
right-of-way at the site entrance to ensure that vehicles waiting at the gate
do not obstruct traffic on the public street. (Ordinance 2025-04, adopted July
8, 2025)
   J.   Breweries with or without taprooms. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted
February 24, 2015)
   K.   Distilleries with or without tasting rooms. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted
February 24, 2015)
Subd. 6.   Lot Requirements and Setbacks. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed in an I-1 District, subject to additional requirements,
exceptions and modifications set forth in this Chapter.
   A.   Lot Area Requirements:
      1.   Lot Area: Not less than two (2) acres.
      2.   Lot Width: Not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet.
      3.   Lot Depth: Not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet.
   B.   Principal Structure Setback Requirements:
      1.   Front Yard: Not less than thirty-five (35) feet. (Ordinance 2015-01,
adopted February 24, 2015)
      2.   Side Yard:
         a.   To other commercial district: Not less than twenty-five (25)
feet.
         b.   To any residence district: Not less than seventy-five (75) feet.
      3.   Rear Yard:
         a.   To other commercial district: Not less than thirty-five (35)
feet.
         b.   To any residence district: Not less than seventy-five (75) feet.
Subd. 7.7     Lot Coverage and Height. The following lot coverage and height
requirements shall be observed in an I-1 District.
   A.   Maximum Lot Coverage by All Structures: Fifty (50) percent.
   B.   Landscaping. All lots in the I-1 District shall have not less than
twenty-five (25) percent of the lot area dedicated to landscaped green area in
compliance with Section
1001.09, Subd. 3 of this Chapter.
   C.   All principal structures shall be limited to a maximum height of four
(4) stories or forty-eight (48) feet.
1001.21 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) REGULATIONS
Subd. 1. Purpose.     The purpose of the PUD, Planned Unit Development District
is to provide comprehensive procedures and standards intended to allow
flexibility in the development of residential neighborhoods and/or
nonresidential areas than would be possible under a conventional zoning
district. The decision to zone property to PUD is a public policy decision for
the City Council to make in its legislative capacity. The intent of this
Chapter is to:
   A.   Provide for the establishment of PUD (planned unit development) zoning
districts in appropriate settings and situations to create or maintain a
development pattern that complies with the City's Comprehensive Plan.
   B.   Allow for the mixing of land uses within a development when such mixing
of land uses could not otherwise be accomplished under this Chapter.
   C.   Provide for variations to the strict application of the land use
regulations in this Chapter in order to improve site design and operation,
while at the same time incorporating design elements (e.g., construction
materials, landscaping, lighting, etc.) that exceed the City's standards to
offset the effect of any variations.
   D.   Promote a more creative and efficient approach to land use within the
City, while at the same time protecting and promoting the health, safety,
comfort, aesthetics, economic viability, and general welfare of the City.
   E.   Preserve and enhance natural features and open spaces.
   F.   Maintain or improve the efficiency of public streets and utilities.
   G.   Ensure the establishment of appropriate transitions between differing
land uses. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24, 2015)
Subd. 2. Allowed Uses. All permitted uses, permitted accessory uses,
conditional uses, interim uses, and uses allowed by administrative permit
contained in the various zoning districts defined in Chapter shall be treated
as potentially allowable uses within a PUD District, provided they would be
allowable on the site under the Comprehensive Plan. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted
February 24, 2015)
Subd. 3. Setbacks and Building Height.  The various setback and height
regulations of the most closely related conventional zoning district shall be
considered presumptively appropriate, but may be departed from to accomplish
the purposes described in Section
1001.21, Subd 1 of this Chapter. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24, 2015)
Subd. 4.   Integrated Design. A PUD shall consist of a harmonious arrangement
and selection of land uses in groupings of buildings that are planned and
designed as an integrated unit. The integrated design shall include elements
such as building orientation and materials, utilities, parking areas, traffic
and pedestrian circulation, landscaping, and open spaces. (Ordinance 2015-01,
adopted February 24, 2015)
Subd. 5.   Development Stage Plan.  Development stage submissions shall depict
and outline the proposed implementation of the proposed development for the
PUD. The development stage submissions shall include, but not be limited to,
the submission requirements stipulated in Section
1001.03 of this Chapter. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24, 2015)
Subd. 6.   Final Plan.  After approval of the development stage plan, the
applicant may apply for final plan approval for all or a portion of the PUD.
The applicant shall submit the following material for review by and approval of
the Zoning Administrator prior to issuance of any building permit(s):
   A.   If the PUD will be developed in different phases, the applicant shall
submit a phasing plan for construction of the various elements of the entire
PUD.
   B.   Development plans in final form based on the approved development stage
plan, covering that portion of the PUD where building permits will be requested
under the phasing plan.
   C.   Proof of recording any easements and restrictive covenants prior to the
sale of any land or dwelling unit within the PUD and of the establishment and
activation of any entity that is to be responsible for the management and
maintenance of any public or common open space or service facility.
   D.   All certificates, seals and signatures required for the dedication of
land and recordation of documents.
   E.   Final architectural working drawings of all structures.
   F.   A final plat and final engineering plans and specifications for
streets, utilities and other public improvements, together with a development
contract agreement for the installation of such improvements and financial
guarantees for the completion of such improvements.
   G.   Any other plan, agreements, or specifications necessary for the Zoning
Administrator to review the proposed final plan. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted
February 24, 2015)
Subd. 7.   Process.
   A.   Preapplication Conference: Prior to the filing of an application for
PUD, the applicant of the proposed PUD is encouraged to arrange for and attend
a conference with the Zoning Administrator. The primary purpose of the
conference shall be to provide the applicant with an opportunity to gather
information and obtain guidance as to the general suitability of his proposal
for the area for which it is proposed and its conformity to the provisions of
this Title before incurring substantial expense in the preparation of plans,
surveys and other data.
   B.   Development Stage:
      1.    Application Procedure: PUD zoning applications shall be processed
according to the evaluation criteria and procedures outlined in Section
1001.03 of this Chapter.
      2.    Zoning Enactment: A rezoning of a parcel of land to PUD shall not
become effective until such time as the City Council approves an ordinance
reflecting said amendment, which shall take place at the time the City Council
approves the development stage plan.
   C.   Final Stage Plan: After approval of a development stage plan for all or
a portion of the proposed PUD, the applicant shall submit the materials
outlined in Section
1001.21 Subd 6 of this Chapter for review by the Zoning Administrator prior to
issuance of a building permit(s). (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24,
2015)
Subd. 8.   Amendment of a PUD. The same review procedure shall be allowed for
an amendment of a PUD as was followed with respect to the development stage
plan. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24, 2015)
Subd. 9.   General Requirements:
   A.   Records: The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of all PUD
zones approved by the City, including information on a project's allowed uses,
all pertinent project plans, any conditions imposed on a project by the City
Council, and such other information as the Zoning Administrator may deem
appropriate.
   B.   Withdrawal Of An Application: Any application under this Chapter may be
withdrawn by an applicant without prejudice at any time prior to final City
Council action thereon.
   C.   Platting Of A PUD: In the event that a PUD is to be subdivided into
lots or parcels for the purpose of separate ownership, such PUD shall be
platted under the platting procedures of the Subdivision Ordinance and the
related requirements of Wright County. The preliminary plat shall be processed
in conjunction with the development stage plan. A separate action on the final
plat shall be processed before the City Council prior to or in conjunction with
the final stage of the PUD.
   D.   Conveyance Of Property Within A PUD: In the event that any real
property within an approved PUD is conveyed in total or in part, the buyer(s)
thereof shall be bound by all provisions of the PUD and the general plan for
that project. However, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as to make
such conveyed property nonconforming with regard to normal zoning standards as
long as the conveyed property conforms with the approved PUD and the
development plan for a project.
   E.   Agreement/Financial Guarantee: Following the approval of the
development plan but prior to final plan approval, the applicant shall enter
into an agreement with the City relating to the terms of the PUD, and shall
also provide such financial guarantees as the City requires or deems necessary.
Such agreement may take the form of:
      1.    A development contract; and/or
      2.    Site improvement performance agreement; and/or
      3.    Another form of legally binding instrument as may be required by
the City. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24, 2015)
1001.22 FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT
Subd. 1.   Statutory Authorization:  The legislature of the State of Minnesota
has, in Minnesota Statutes Chapter 103F and Chapter 462 delegated the
responsibility to local government units to adopt regulations designed to
minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City of Rockford, Minnesota does ordain
as follows:
   A.   Findings of Fact. The flood hazard areas of Rockford, Minnesota, are
subject to periodic inundation which results in potential loss of life, loss of
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental
services, extraordinary public expenditures or flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety, and general welfare.
   B.   Methods Used to Analyze Flood Hazards. This Ordinance is based upon a
reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards, which is consistent with the
standards established by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
   C.   National Flood Insurance Program Compliance. This Ordinance is adopted
to comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance
Program codified as 44 Code of Federal Regulations Parts 59 -78, as amended, so
as to maintain the community’s eligibility in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
   D.   Statement of Purpose: It is the purpose of this Ordinance to promote
the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize those losses
described in Subdivision 1.21 by provisions contained herein.
Subd. 2.   General Provisions:
   A.   Lands to Which Ordinance Applies: This Ordinance shall apply to all
lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Rockford shown on the official
zoning map.
   B.   Official Zoning Map: The Official Zoning Map adopted in accordance with
Section
1001.10, Subd. 2 of this Chapter shall include the Flood Insurance Study for
Hennepin County, Minnesota dated November 4, 2016, for Wright County, Minnesota
dated August 18, 1992, and incorporated areas, and the following Flood
Insurance Rate Maps prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency therein
numbered:
2705340033B
2705340042C
27053C0109F
27053C0126F
27053C0128F
27053C1ND18
(Ordinance 16-04, adopted September 25, 2016)
   C.   Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation: The regulatory flood protection
elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one foot above the elevation of
the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by
encroachments on the flood plain that result from designation of a floodway.
   D.   Interpretation: In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this Ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be
liberally construed in favor of the Governing Body and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes.
The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be determined by scaling distances
on the Official Zoning Map. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact
location of the boundaries of the district as shown on the Official Zoning Map,
as for example where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary
and actual field conditions and there is a formal appeal of the decision of the
Zoning Administrator, the Board of Adjustment shall make the necessary
interpretation. All decisions will be based on elevations on the regional (100-
year) flood profile, the ground elevations that existed on the site at the time
the Community adopted its initial floodplain ordinance, and other available
technical data. Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present their case to the Board of
Adjustment and to submit technical evidence.
   E.   Abrogation and Greater Restrictions: It is not intended by this
Ordinance to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or
deed restrictions. However, where this Ordinance imposes greater restrictions,
the provisions of this Ordinance shall prevail. All other ordinances
inconsistent with this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of the
inconsistency only.
   F.   Warning and Disclaimer of Liability: This Ordinance does not imply that
areas outside the flood plain districts or land uses permitted within such
districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Ordinance shall not
create liability on the part of City of Rockford or any officer or employee
thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Ordinance or
any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
   G.   Severability: If any subdivision, clause, provision, or portion of this
Ordinance is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this Ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
   H.   Definitions: Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used
in this Ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as
they have in common usage and so as to give this Ordinance its most reasonable
application.
      1.    Accessory Use or Structure - a use or structure on the same lot
with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal
use or structure.
      2.    Basement - means any area of a structure, including crawl spaces,
having its floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides,
regardless of the depth of excavation below ground level.
      3.    Conditional Use - means a specific type of structure or land use
listed in the official control that may be allowed but only after an in-depth
review procedure and with appropriate conditions or restrictions as provided in
the official zoning controls or building codes and upon a finding that; Certain
conditions as detailed in the zoning ordinance exist. The structure and/or land
use conform to the comprehensive land use plan if one exists and are compatible
with the existing neighborhood.
      4.    Equal Degree of Encroachment - a method of determining the location
of floodway boundaries so that flood plain lands on both sides of a stream are
capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.
      5.    Flood – a temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in
the stage of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry
areas.
      6.    Flood Frequency – the frequency for which it is expected that a
specific flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
      7.    Flood Fringe – that portion of the flood plain outside of the
floodway. Flood fringe is synonymous with the term “floodway fringe” used in
the Flood Insurance Study.
      8.    Flood Plain – the beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland,
lake or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional
flood.
      9.    Flood Proofing – a combination of structural provisions, changes,
or adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for
the reduction or elimination of flood damages.
      10.    Floodway – the bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a
watercourse and those portions of the adjoining flood plain which are
reasonably required to carry or store the regional flood discharge.
      11.    Lowest Floor – the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely
for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor.
      12.    Manufactured Home – a structure, transportable in one or more
subdivisions, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term “manufactured home” does not include the term “recreational vehicle.”
      13.    Obstruction – any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building,
wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across,
or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory flood plain which
may impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in
itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water.
      14.    Principal Use or Structure – means all uses or structures that are
not accessory uses or structures.
      15.    Reach – a hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal
segment of a stream or river influenced by a natural or man-made obstruction.
In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive
bridge crossings would most typically constitute a reach.
      16.    Recreational Vehicle - a vehicle that is built on a single
chassis, is 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection, is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck, and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the term recreational vehicle shall be
synonymous with the term travel trailer/travel vehicle.
      17.    Regional Flood - a flood which is representative of large floods
known to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of
what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the
100-year recurrence interval. Regional flood is synonymous with the term "base
flood" used in a flood insurance study.
      18.    Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation - The regulatory flood
protection elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one foot above the
elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by
encroachments on the flood plain that result from designation of a floodway.
      19. Structure - anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached
to the ground or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings,
factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, recreational
vehicles not meeting the exemption criteria specified in Subdivision 9.31 of
this Ordinance and other similar items.
      20.    Substantial Damage - means damage of any origin sustained by a
structure where the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
      21. Substantial Improvement - within any consecutive 365-day period, any
reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair),
repair after damage, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before
the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures
that have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum
necessary to assure safe living conditions.
Any alteration of an “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an “historic structure.”
For the purpose of this Ordinance, “historic structure” shall be as defined in
Code of Federal Regulations, Part 59.1.
      22.    Variance - means a modification of a specific permitted
development standard required in an official control including this Ordinance
to allow an alternative development standard not stated as acceptable in the
official control, but only as applied to a particular property for the purpose
of alleviating a hardship, practical difficulty or unique circumstance as
defined and elaborated upon in a community's respective planning and zoning
enabling legislation.
Subd. 3.    Establishment of Zoning Districts:
   A.   Floodway District. The Floodway District shall include those areas
designated as floodway on the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in Subdivision
2.2.
   B.   Flood Fringe District. The Flood Fringe District shall include those
areas designated as floodway fringe. The Flood Fringe District shall include
those areas shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map as adopted in Subdivision 2.2
as being within Zone AE, Zone A0, or Zone AH but being located outside of the
floodway.
   C.   Compliance: No new structure or land shall hereafter be used and no
structure shall be constructed, located, extended, converted, or structurally
altered without full compliance with the terms of this Ordinance and other
applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this
Ordinance. Within the Floodway and Flood Fringe Districts, all uses not listed
as permitted uses or conditional uses in Subdivisions 4.0 and 5.0 that follow,
respectively, shall be prohibited. In addition, a caution is provided here
that:
      1.    New manufactured homes, replacement manufactured homes and certain
travel trailers and travel vehicles are subject to the general provisions of
this Ordinance and specifically Subdivision 9.0.
      2.    Modifications, additions, structural alterations, normal
maintenance and repair, or repair after damage to existing nonconforming
structures and nonconforming uses of structures or land are regulated by the
general provisions of this Ordinance and specifically Subdivision 11.0.
      3.    As-built elevations for elevated or flood proofed structures must
be certified by ground surveys and flood proofing techniques must be designed
and certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as specified
in the general provisions of this Ordinance and specifically as stated in
Subdivision 10.0 of this Ordinance.
Subd. 4.   Floodway District (FW):
   A.   Permitted Uses:
      1. General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.
      2.    Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas, and airport
landing strips.
      3.    Private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges,
archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks,
wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves,
target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, and single or
multiple purpose recreational trails.
      4.   Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas.
   B.   Standards for Floodway Permitted Uses:
      1.   The use shall have a low flood damage potential.
      2.   The use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district if
one exists.
      3.   The use shall not obstruct flood flows or increase flood elevations
and shall not involve structures, fill, obstructions, excavations or storage of
materials or equipment.
   C.   Conditional Uses:
      1.   Structures accessory to the uses listed in 4.A above and the uses
listed in 4.C2 - 4.C8 below.
      2.   Extraction and storage of sand, gravel, and other materials.
      3.   Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves, and water control
structures.
      4.   Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines, and
pipelines.
      5.   Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or materials.
      6.   Placement of fill or construction of fences.
      7.   Recreational vehicles either on individual lots of record or in
existing or new subdivisions or commercial or condominium type campgrounds,
subject to the exemptions and provisions of Subdivision 9.C of this Ordinance.
      8.   Structural works for flood control such as levees, dikes and
floodwalls constructed to any height where the intent is to protect individual
structures and levees or dikes where the intent is to protect agricultural
crops for a frequency flood event equal to or less than the 10-year frequency
flood event.
   D.   Standards for Floodway Conditional Uses:
      1.    All Uses. No structure (temporary or permanent), fill (including
fill for roads and levees), deposit, obstruction, storage of materials or
equipment, or other uses may be allowed as a conditional use that will cause
any increase in the stage of the 100-year or regional flood or cause an
increase in flood damages in the reach or reaches affected.
      2.    All floodway conditional uses shall be subject to the procedures
and standards contained in Subdivision 10.D of this Ordinance.
      3.   The conditional use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning
district if one exists.
      4.   Fill:
         a.   Fill, dredge spoil, and all other similar materials deposited or
stored in the flood plain shall be protected from erosion by vegetative cover,
mulching, riprap or other acceptable method.
         b.   Dredge spoil sites and sand and gravel operations shall not be
allowed in the floodway unless a long-term site development plan is submitted
which includes an erosion/sedimentation prevention element to the plan.
         c.   As an alternative, and consistent with Sub-subdivision (b)
immediately above, dredge spoil disposal and sand and gravel operations may
allow temporary, on-site storage of fill or other materials which would have
caused an increase to the stage of the 100-year or regional flood but only
after the Governing Body has received an appropriate plan which assures the
removal of the materials from the floodway based upon the flood warning time
available. The conditional use permit must be title registered with the
property in the Office of the County Recorder.
      5.    Accessory Structures:
         a.   Accessory structures shall not be designed for human habitation.
         b.   Accessory structures, if permitted, shall be constructed and
placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow
of flood waters: Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the
longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow; and so far as
practicable, structures shall be placed approximately on the same flood flow
lines as those of adjoining structures.
         c.   Accessory structures shall be elevated on fill or structurally
dry flood proofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 flood proofing
classifications in the State Building Code. As an alternative, an accessory
structure may be flood proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 flood proofing
classification in the State Building Code provided the accessory structure
constitutes a minimal investment, does not exceed 500 square feet in size at
its largest projection, and for a detached garage, the detached garage must be
used solely for parking of vehicles and limited storage. All flood proofed
accessory structures must meet the following additional standards:
            1)   The structure must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure and shall be designed
to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls;
            2)   Any mechanical and utility equipment in a structure must be
elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or properly
flood proofed; and
            3)   To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there
must be a minimum of two “automatic” openings in the outside walls of the
structure having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. There must be openings on at
least two sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings must be no
higher than one foot above the lowest adjacent grade to the structure. Using
human intervention to open a garage door prior to flooding will not satisfy
this requirement for automatic openings.
      6.    Storage of Materials and Equipment:
         a.   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of
flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or
plant life is prohibited.
         b.   Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily
removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning and in
accordance with a plan approved by the Governing Body.
      7.    Structural works for flood control that will change the course,
current or cross subdivision of protected wetlands or public waters shall be
subject to the provisions of Minnesota Statute, Chapter 103G. Community-wide
structural works for flood control intended to remove areas from the regulatory
flood plain shall not be allowed in the floodway.
      8.    A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the floodway shall not
cause an increase to the 100-year or regional flood and the technical analysis
must assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a stream.
Subd. 5.   Flood Fringe District (FF):
   A.   Permitted Uses: Permitted uses shall be those uses of land or
structures listed as permitted uses in the underlying zoning use district(s).
If no pre-existing, underlying zoning use districts exist, then any residential
or non residential structure or use of a structure or land shall be a permitted
use in the Flood Fringe District provided such use does not constitute a public
nuisance. All permitted uses shall comply with the standards for Flood Fringe
District “Permitted Uses” listed in Subdivision 5.B and the "Standards for all
Flood Fringe Uses" listed in Subdivision 5.D.
   B.   Standards for Flood Fringe Permitted Uses:
      1.    All structures, including accessory structures, must be elevated on
fill so that the lowest floor including basement floor is at or above the
regulatory flood protection elevation. The finished fill elevation for
structures shall be no lower than one (1) foot below the regulatory flood
protection elevation and the fill shall extend at such elevation at least
fifteen (15) feet beyond the outside limits of the structure erected thereon.
      2.    As an alternative to elevation on fill, accessory structures that
constitute a minimal investment and that do not exceed 500 square feet at its
largest projection may be internally flood proofed in accordance with
Subdivision 4.D5 (c).
      3.    The cumulative placement of fill where at any one time in excess of
one-thousand (1,000) cubic yards of fill is located on the parcel shall be
allowable only as a conditional use, unless said fill is specifically intended
to elevate a structure in accordance with Subdivision 5.B1 of this ordinance.
      4.    The storage of any materials or equipment shall be elevated on fill
to the regulatory flood protection elevation.
      5.    The provisions of Subdivision 5.D of this Ordinance shall apply.
   C.   Conditional Uses: Any structure that is not elevated on fill or flood
proofed in accordance with Subdivision 5 B1 and or any use of land that does
not comply with the standards in Subdivision 5.B3 - 5.B4 shall only be
allowable as a conditional use. An application for a conditional use shall be
subject to the standards and criteria and evaluation procedures specified in
Subdivisions 5.C-5.D and 10.4 of this Ordinance.
   D.   Standards for Flood Fringe Conditional Uses:
      1.    Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill may be
utilized to elevate a structure's lowest floor above the regulatory flood
protection elevation. These alternative methods may include the use of stilts,
pilings, parallel walls, etc., or above-grade, enclosed areas such as crawl
spaces or tuck under garages. The base or floor of an enclosed area shall be
considered above-grade and not a structure's basement or lowest floor if: 1)
the enclosed area is above-grade on at least one side of the structure; 2) it
is designed to internally flood and is constructed with flood resistant
materials; and 3) it is used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage. The above-noted alternative elevation methods are subject to the
following additional standards:
         a.   Design and Certification - The structure's design and as-built
condition must be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
as being in compliance with the general design standards of the State Building
Code and, specifically, that all electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and
air conditioning equipment and other service facilities must be at or above the
regulatory flood protection elevation or be designed to prevent flood water
from entering or accumulating within these components during times of flooding.
         b.   Specific Standards for Above-grade, Enclosed Areas - Above-grade,
fully enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages must be
designed to internally flood and the design plans must stipulate: A minimum
area of openings in the walls where internal flooding is to be used as a flood
proofing technique. There shall be a minimum of two openings on at least two
sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one-foot above grade. The automatic openings shall have a minimum net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot subject to flooding unless
a registered professional engineer or architect certifies that a smaller net
area would suffice. The automatic openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of flood waters without any form of human
intervention; and
         c.   That the enclosed area will be designed of flood resistant
materials in accordance with the FP-3 or FP-4 classifications in the State
Building Code and shall be used solely for building access, parking of vehicles
or storage.
      2.    Basements, as defined by Subdivision 2.H12 of this Ordinance, shall
be subject to the following:
         a.   Residential basement construction shall not be allowed below the
regulatory flood protection elevation.
         b.   Non-residential basements may be allowed below the regulatory
flood protection elevation provided the basement is structurally dry flood
proofed in accordance with Subdivision 5.D3 of this Ordinance.
      3.    All areas of non-residential structures including basements to be
placed below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be flood proofed
in accordance with the structurally dry flood proofing classifications in the
State Building Code. Structurally dry flood proofing must meet the FP-1 or FP-
2 flood proofing classification in the State Building Code and this shall
require making the structure watertight with the walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of
buoyancy. Structures flood proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 classification shall not
be permitted.
      4.    When at any one time more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill or other
similar material is located on a parcel for such activities as on-site storage,
landscaping, sand and gravel operations, landfills, roads, dredge spoil
disposal or construction of flood control works, an erosion/sedimentation
control plan must be submitted unless the community is enforcing a state
approved shoreland management ordinance. In the absence of a state approved
shoreland ordinance, the plan must clearly specify methods to be used to
stabilize the fill on site for a flood event at a minimum of the 100-year or
regional flood event. The plan must be prepared and certified by a registered
professional engineer or other qualified individual acceptable to the Governing
Body. The plan may incorporate alternative procedures for removal of the
material from the flood plain if adequate flood warning time exists.
      5.    Storage of Materials and Equipment:
         a.   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of
flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or
plant life is prohibited.
         b.   Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily
removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning and in
accordance with a plan approved by the Governing Body.
      6.    The provisions of Subdivision 5.E of this Ordinance shall also
apply.
   E.   Standards for All Flood Fringe Uses:
      1.    All new principal structures must have vehicular access at or above
an elevation not more than two (2) feet below the regulatory flood protection
elevation. If a variance to this requirement is granted, the Board of
Adjustment must specify limitations on the period of use or occupancy of the
structure for times of flooding and only after determining that adequate flood
warning time and local flood emergency response procedures exist.
      2.    Commercial Uses – accessory land uses, such as yards, railroad
tracks, and parking lots may be at elevations lower than the regulatory flood
protection elevation. However, a permit for such facilities to be used by the
employees or the general public shall not be granted in the absence of a flood
warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area would be
inundated to a depth and velocity such that when multiplying the depth (in
feet) times velocity (in feet per second) the product number exceeds four (4)
upon occurrence of the regional flood.
      3.   Manufacturing and Industrial Uses – measures shall be taken to
minimize interference with normal plant operations especially along streams
having protracted flood durations. Certain accessory land uses such as yards
and parking lots may be at lower elevations subject to requirements set out in
Subdivision 5.E2 above. In considering permit applications, due consideration
shall be given to needs of an industry whose business requires that it be
located in flood plain areas.
      4.   Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be properly
protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable method.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for
removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures
properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation – FEMA’s
requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection
standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should
be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of
special flood hazard area designation will be requested.
      5.   Flood plain developments shall not adversely affect the hydraulic
capacity of the channel and adjoining flood plain of any tributary watercourse
or drainage system where a floodway or other encroachment limit has not been
specified on the Official Zoning Map.
      6.   Standards for recreational vehicles are contained in Subdivision 9C.
      7.    All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in
addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind
forces.
Subd. 6.   Land Development Standards: All subdivisions must have street access
to both the subdivision and individual building sites not lower than two (2)
feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation. (Ordinance 16-04, adopted
September 25, 2016)
Subd. 7.   Subdivisions:
Note: This Subdivision is not intended as a substitute for a comprehensive city
or county subdivision ordinance. It can, however, be used as an interim control
until the comprehensive subdivision ordinance can be amended to include
necessary flood plain management provisions.
   A.   Review Criteria: No land shall be subdivided which is unsuitable for
the reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment
facilities. All lots within the flood plain districts shall be able to contain
a building site outside of the Floodway District at or above the regulatory
flood protection elevation. All subdivisions shall have water and sewage
treatment facilities that comply with the provisions of this Ordinance and have
road access both to the subdivision and to the individual building sites no
lower than two feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation. For all
subdivisions in the flood plain, the Floodway and Flood Fringe District
boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation and the required
elevation of all access roads shall be clearly labeled on all required
subdivision drawings and platting documents.
   B.   Removal of Special Flood Hazard Area Designation: The Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing the special
flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly elevated on fill
above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA's requirements incorporate specific
fill compaction and side slope protection standards for multi-structure or
multi-lot developments. These standards should be investigated prior to the
initiation of site preparation if a change of special flood hazard area
designation will be requested.
Subd. 8.   Public Utilities, Railroads, Roads, and Bridges:
   A.   Public Utilities. All public utilities and facilities such as gas,
electrical, sewer, and water supply systems to be located in the flood plain
shall be flood proofed in accordance with the State Building Code or elevated
to above the regulatory flood protection elevation.
   B.   Public Transportation Facilities. Railroad tracks, roads, and bridges
to be located within the flood plain shall comply with Subdivisions 4.0 and 5.0
of this Ordinance. Elevation to the regulatory flood protection elevation shall
be provided where failure or interruption of these transportation facilities
would result in danger to the public health or safety or where such facilities
are essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or auxiliary roads
or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where failure or
interruption of transportation services would not endanger the public health or
safety.
   C.   On-site Sewage Treatment and Water Supply Systems: Where public
utilities are not provided: 1) On-site water supply systems must be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and 2) New
or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into flood waters and they shall not be subject to impairment or
contamination during times of flooding. Any sewage treatment system designed in
accordance with the State's current statewide standards for on-site sewage
treatment systems shall be determined to be in compliance with this
Subdivision.
Subd. 9.   Manufactured Homes and Manufactured Home Parks and Placement of
Recreational Vehicles:
   A.   New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing manufactured
home parks shall be subject to the provisions placed on subdivisions by
Subdivision 7.0 of this Ordinance.
   B. The placement of new or replacement manufactured homes in existing
manufactured home parks or on individual lots of record that are located in
flood plain districts will be treated as a new structure and may be placed only
if elevated in compliance with Subdivision 5.0 of this Ordinance. If vehicular
road access for pre-existing manufactured home parks is not provided in
accordance with Subdivision 5.E1, then replacement manufactured homes will not
be allowed until the property owner(s) develops a flood warning emergency plan
acceptable to the Governing Body.
      1.    All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in
addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind
forces.
   C.   Recreational vehicles that do not meet the exemption criteria specified
in Subdivision 9.C1 below shall be subject to the provisions of this Ordinance
and as specifically spelled out in Subdivisions 9.C3-9.C4 below.
      1.    Exemption - Recreational vehicles are exempt from the provisions of
this Ordinance if they are placed in any of the areas listed in Subdivision
9.C2 below and further they meet the following criteria:
         a.   Have current licenses required for highway use.
         b.   Are highway ready meaning on wheels or the internal jacking
system, are attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities
commonly used in campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks and the
recreational vehicle has no permanent structural type additions attached to it.
         c.   The recreational vehicle and associated use must be permissible
in any pre-existing, underlying zoning use district.
      2.    Areas Exempted For Placement of Recreational Vehicles:
         a.   Individual lots or parcels of record.
         b.   Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds.
         c.   Existing condominium type associations.
      3. Recreational vehicles exempted in Subdivision 9.C1 lose this exemption
when development occurs on the parcel exceeding $500 for a structural addition
to the recreational vehicle or exceeding $500 for an accessory structure such
as a garage or storage building. The recreational vehicle and all additions and
accessory structures will then be treated as a new structure and shall be
subject to the elevation/flood proofing requirements and the use of land
restrictions specified in Subdivisions 4.0 and 5.0 of this Ordinance. There
shall be no development or improvement on the parcel or attachment to the
recreational vehicle that hinders the removal of the recreational vehicle to a
flood free location should flooding occur.
      4.    New commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds and new
residential type subdivisions and condominium associations and the expansion of
any existing similar use exceeding five (5) units or dwelling sites shall be
subject to the following:
         a.   Any new or replacement recreational vehicle will be allowed in
the Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts provided said recreational vehicle and
its contents are placed on fill above the regulatory flood protection elevation
and proper elevated road access to the site exists in accordance with
Subdivision 5.E1 of this Ordinance. No fill placed in the floodway to meet the
requirements of this Subdivision shall increase flood stages of the 100-year or
regional flood.
         b.   All new or replacement recreational vehicles not meeting the
criteria of (a) above may, as an alternative, be allowed as a conditional use
if in accordance with the following provisions and the provisions of 10.D of
the Ordinance. The applicant must submit an emergency plan for the safe
evacuation of all vehicles and people during the 100 year flood. Said plan
shall be prepared by a registered engineer or other qualified individual, shall
demonstrate that adequate time and personnel exist to carry out the evacuation,
and shall demonstrate the provisions of Subdivision 9.C1 (a) and (b) of this
Ordinance will be met. All attendant sewage and water facilities for new or
replacement recreational vehicles must be protected or constructed so as to not
be impaired or contaminated during times of flooding in accordance with
Subdivision 8.C of this Ordinance.
Subd. 10.   Administration:
   A.   Zoning Administrator: A Zoning Administrator or other official
designated by the Governing Body shall administer and enforce this Ordinance.
If the Zoning Administrator finds a violation of the provisions of this
Ordinance the Zoning Administrator shall notify the person responsible for such
violation in accordance with the procedures stated in Subdivision 12.0 of the
Ordinance.
   B.   Permit Requirements:
      1.    Permit Required. A Permit issued by the Zoning Administrator in
conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be secured prior to the
erection, addition, modification, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance
and repair), or alteration of any building, structure, or portion thereof;
prior to the use or change of use of a building, structure, or land; prior to
the construction of a dam, fence, or on-site septic system; prior to the change
or extension of a nonconforming use; prior to the repair of a structure that
has been damaged by flood, fire, tornado, or any other source; and prior to the
placement of fill, excavation of materials, or the storage of materials or
equipment within the flood plain.
      2.    Application for Permit. Application for a permit shall be made in
duplicate to the Zoning Administrator on forms furnished by the Zoning
Administrator and shall include the following where applicable: plans in
duplicate drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions, and
elevations of the lot; existing or proposed structures, fill, or storage of
materials; and the location of the foregoing in relation to the stream channel.
      3.    State and Federal Permits. Prior to granting a permit or processing
an application for a conditional use permit or variance, the Zoning
Administrator shall determine that the applicant has obtained all necessary
state and federal permits.
      4.    Certificate of Zoning Compliance for a New, Altered, or
Nonconforming Use. It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit the use or
occupancy of any building or premises or part thereof hereafter created,
erected, changed, converted, altered, or enlarged in its use or structure until
a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued by the Zoning
Administrator stating that the use of the building or land conforms to the
requirements of this Ordinance.
      5.   Construction and Use to be as Provided on Applications, Plans,
Permits, Variances and Certificates of Zoning Compliance. Permits, conditional
use permits, or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of
approved plans and applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and
construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other
use, arrangement, or construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction at
variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance,
and punishable as provided by Subdivision 12.0 of this Ordinance.
      6.    Certification. The applicant shall be required to submit
certification by a registered professional engineer, registered architect, or
registered land surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were
accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. Flood
proofing measures shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or
registered architect.
      7.    Record of First Floor Elevation. The Zoning Administrator shall
maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of
all new structures and alterations or additions to existing structures in the
flood plain. The Zoning Administrator shall also maintain a record of the
elevation to which structures or alterations and additions to structures are
flood proofed.
      8.   Notifications for Watercourse Alterations. The Zoning Administrator
shall notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the Commissioner
of the Department of Natural Resources prior to the community authorizing any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse. If the applicant has applied for a
permit to work in the beds of public waters pursuant to Minnesota Statute,
Chapter 103G, this shall suffice as adequate notice to the Commissioner of
Natural Resources. A copy of said notification shall also be submitted to the
Chicago Regional Office of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
      9.   Notification to FEMA When Physical Changes Increase or Decrease the
100-year Flood Elevation. As soon as is practicable, but not later than six (6)
months after the date such supporting information becomes available, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA of the changes
by submitting a copy of said technical or scientific data.
   C.   Board of Adjustment:
      1.    Rules. The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for the conduct of
business and may exercise all of the powers conferred on such Boards by State
law.
      2.    Administrative Review. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and
decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the
enforcement or administration of this Ordinance.
      3.    Variances. The Board of Adjustment may authorize upon appeal in
specific cases such relief or variance from the terms of this Ordinance as will
not be contrary to the public interest and only for those circumstances such as
hardship, practical difficulties or circumstances unique to the property under
consideration, as provided for in the respective enabling legislation for
planning and zoning for cities or counties as appropriate. In the granting of
such variance, the Board of Adjustment shall clearly identify in writing the
specific conditions that existed consistent with the criteria specified in this
Ordinance, any other zoning regulations in the Community, and in the respective
enabling legislation that justified the granting of the variance. No variance
shall have the effect of allowing in any district uses prohibited in that
district, permit a lower degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood
protection elevation for the particular area, or permit standards lower than
those required by state law. The following additional variance criteria of the
Federal Emergency Management Agency must be satisfied:
         a.   Variances shall not be issued by a community within any
designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base
flood discharge would result.
         b.   Variances shall only be issued by a community upon (i) a showing
of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the
variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a
determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
         c.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      4.    Hearings. Upon filing with the Board of Adjustment of an appeal
from a decision of the Zoning Administrator, or an application for a variance,
the Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing and give due
notice to the parties in interest as specified by law. The Board of Adjustment
shall submit by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the
application for proposed variances sufficiently in advance so that the
Commissioner will receive at least ten days notice of the hearing.
      5.    Decisions. The Board of Adjustment shall arrive at a decision on
such appeal or variance within sixty days. In passing upon an appeal, the Board
of Adjustment may, so long as such action is in conformity with the provisions
of this Ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator or other
public official. It shall make its decision in writing setting forth the
findings of fact and the reasons for its decisions. In granting a variance the
Board of Adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards such as
those specified in Subdivision 10.D6, which are in conformity with the purposes
of this Ordinance. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made a
part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a
violation of this Ordinance punishable under Subdivision 12.0. A copy of all
decisions granting variances shall be forwarded by mail to the Commissioner of
Natural Resources within ten (10) days of such action.
      6.   Appeals. Appeals from any decision of the Board of Adjustment may be
made, and as specified in this community's official controls and also by
Minnesota Statutes.
      7.   Flood Insurance Notice and Record Keeping. The Zoning Administrator
shall notify the applicant for a variance that: 1) The issuance of a variance
to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of
insurance coverage and 2) Such construction below the 100-year or regional
flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be
maintained with a record of all variance actions. A community shall maintain a
record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and
report such variances issued in its annual or biennial report submitted to the
Administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program.
   D.   Conditional Uses. The Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council
shall hear and decide applications for conditional uses permissible under this
Ordinance. Applications shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator who
shall forward the application to Planning Commission for consideration.
      1.    Hearings. Upon filing with the City of Rockford an application for
a conditional use permit, the City of Rockford shall submit by mail to the
Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the application for proposed
conditional use sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will receive
at least ten days notice of the hearing.
      2.    Decisions. The City Council shall arrive at a decision on a
conditional use within sixty days. In granting a conditional use permit the
City Council shall prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards, in addition
to those specified in Subdivision 10.D6, which are in conformity with the
purposes of this Ordinance. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when
made a part of the terms under which the conditional use permit is granted,
shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance punishable under Subdivision
12.0. A copy of all decisions granting conditional use permits shall be
forwarded by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten (10) days
of such action.
      3.    Procedures to be followed by the City Council in Passing on
Conditional Use Permit Applications Within all Flood Plain Districts.
         a.   Require the applicant to furnish such of the following
information and additional information as deemed necessary by the City of
Rockford for determining the suitability of the particular site for the
proposed use: Plans in triplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevation of the lot, existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, flood proofing measures, and the relationship of the
above to the location of the stream channel; and Specifications for building
construction and materials, flood proofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel
improvement, storage of materials, water supply and sanitary facilities.
         b.   Transmit one copy of the information described in sub-subdivision
(a) to a designated engineer or other expert person or agency for technical
assistance, where necessary, in evaluating the proposed project in relation to
flood heights and velocities, the seriousness of flood damage to the use, the
adequacy of the plans for protection, and other technical matters.
         c.   Based upon the technical evaluation of the designated engineer or
expert, the City Council shall determine the specific flood hazard at the site
and evaluate the suitability of the proposed use in relation to the flood
hazard.
      4.    Factors Upon Which the Decision of the City Council Shall Be Based.
In passing upon conditional use applications, the City Council shall consider
all relevant factors specified in other subdivisions of this Ordinance, and:
         a.   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments.
         b.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others or they may block bridges, culverts or other
hydraulic structures.
         c.   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability
of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions.
         d.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
         e.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community.
         f.   The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
         g.   The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding
for the proposed use.
         h.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development
and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
         i.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and flood plain management program for the area.
         j.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
         k.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site.
         l.   Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this
Ordinance.
      5.    Time for Acting on Application. The City of Rockford shall act on
an application in the manner described above within sixty days from receiving
the application, except that where additional information is required pursuant
to Subd. 10D 4 of this Ordinance. The City Council shall render a written
decision within 30 days from the receipt of such additional information.
      6.    Conditions Attached to Conditional Use Permits. Upon consideration
of the factors listed above and the purpose of this Ordinance, the City Council
shall attach such conditions to the granting of conditional use permits as it
deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this Ordinance. Such conditions may
include, but are not limited to, the following:
         a.   Modification of waste treatment and water supply facilities.
         b.   Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and operation.
         c.   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed
restrictions.
         d.   Requirements for construction of channel modifications,
compensatory storage, dikes, levees, and other protective measures.
         e.   Flood proofing measures, in accordance with the State Building
Code and this Ordinance. The applicant shall submit a plan or document
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the flood
proofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation
and associated flood factors for the particular area.
Subd. 11.   Non-Conforming Uses:
   A.   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful
before the passage or amendment of this Ordinance but which is not in
conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance may be continued subject to
the following conditions. Historic structures, as defined in Subdivision 2.H31
(b) of this Ordinance, shall be subject to the provisions of Subdivisions 11A-
2 – 11A-5 of this Ordinance.
      1.   No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered in a
way that increases its nonconformity.
      2.    Any structural alteration or addition to a nonconforming structure
or nonconforming use which would result in increasing the flood damage
potential of that structure or use shall be protected to the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation in accordance with any of the elevation on fill or flood
proofing techniques (i.e., FP-1 thru FP-4 flood proofing classifications)
allowable in the State Building Code, except as further restricted in 11-A3 and
11-A6 below.
      3.    The cost of any structural alterations or additions to any
nonconforming structure over the life of the structure shall not exceed 50
percent of the market value of the structure unless the conditions of this
Subdivision are satisfied. The cost of all structural alterations and additions
constructed since the adoption of the Community's initial flood plain controls
must be calculated into today's current cost which will include all costs such
as construction materials and a reasonable cost placed on all manpower or
labor. If the current cost of all previous and proposed alterations and
additions exceeds 50 percent of the current market value of the structure, then
the structure must meet the standards of Subdivision 4.0 or 5.0 of this
Ordinance for new structures depending upon whether the structure is in the
Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively.
      4.   If any nonconforming use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months,
any future use of the building premises shall conform to this Ordinance. The
Assessor shall notify the Zoning Administrator in writing of instances of
nonconforming uses that have been discontinued for a period of 12 months.
      5.    If any nonconforming use or structure is substantially damaged, as
defined in Subdivision 2H-20 of this Ordinance, it shall not be reconstructed
except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. The applicable
provisions for establishing new uses or new structures in Subdivisions 4.0 and
5.0 will apply depending upon whether the use or structure is in the Floodway
or Flood Fringe District, respectively.
      6.    If a substantial improvement occurs, as defined in Subdivision 2H-
21 of this Ordinance, from any combination of a building addition to the
outside dimensions of the existing building or a rehabilitation,
reconstruction, alteration, or other improvement to the inside dimensions of an
existing nonconforming building, then the building addition (as required by
Subdivision 11-A2 above) and the existing nonconforming building must meet the
requirements of Subdivision 4.0 or 5.0 of this Ordinance for new structures,
depending upon whether the structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe
District, respectively.
Subd. 12.   Penalties for Violation:
   A. Violation of the provisions of this Ordinance or failure to comply with
any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variances or conditional uses) shall
constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by law.
   B. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City Council from taking such
other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. Such
actions may include but are not limited to:
      1.    In responding to a suspected Ordinance violation, the Zoning
Administrator and Local Government may utilize the full array of enforcement
actions available to it including but not limited to prosecution and fines,
injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders for corrective measures or a
request to the National Flood Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance
availability to the guilty party. The Community must act in good faith to
enforce these official controls and to correct Ordinance violations to the
extent possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood
Insurance Program.
      2.    When an Ordinance violation is either discovered by or brought to
the attention of the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Administrator shall
immediately investigate the situation and document the nature and extent of the
violation of the official control. As soon as is reasonably possible, this
information will be submitted to the appropriate Department of Natural
Resources' and Federal Emergency Management Agency Regional Office along with
the Community's plan of action to correct the violation to the degree possible.
      3.    The Zoning Administrator shall notify the suspected party of the
requirements of this Ordinance and all other official controls and the nature
and extent of the suspected violation of these controls. If the structure and/
or use is under construction or development, the Zoning Administrator may order
the construction or development immediately halted until a proper permit or
approval is granted by the Community. If the construction or development is
already completed, then the Zoning Administrator may either: (1) issue an order
identifying the corrective actions that must be made within a specified time
period to bring the use or structure into compliance with the official
controls; or (2) notify the responsible party to apply for an after-the-fact
permit/development approval within a specified period of time not to exceed 30-
days.
      4. If the responsible party does not appropriately respond to the Zoning
Administrator within the specified period of time, each additional day that
lapses shall constitute an additional violation of this Ordinance and shall be
prosecuted accordingly. The Zoning Administrator shall also upon the lapse of
the specified response period notify the landowner to restore the land to the
condition which existed prior to the violation of this Ordinance.
Subd. 13.   Amendments: The flood plain designation on the Official Zoning Map
shall not be removed from flood plain areas unless it can be shown that the
designation is in error or that the area has been filled to or above the
elevation of the regulatory flood protection elevation and is contiguous to
lands outside the flood plain. Special exceptions to this rule may be permitted
by the Commissioner of Natural Resources if he determines that, through other
measures, lands are adequately protected for the intended use.
All amendments to this Ordinance, including amendments to the Official Zoning
Map, must be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of Natural Resources
prior to adoption. Changes in the Official Zoning Map must meet the Federal
Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA) Technical Conditions and Criteria and must
receive prior FEMA approval before adoption. The Commissioner of Natural
Resources must be given 10-days written notice of all hearings to consider an
amendment to this Ordinance and said notice shall include a draft of the
Ordinance amendment or technical study under consideration.
1001.22A. POC, PUBLIC / OPEN / CONSERVATION
Subd. 1.   Purpose. The purpose of the POC District is to provide for the
reservation of publicly (or in specific cases, privately) owned or managed open
space. Such areas are intended to be maintained as long term open space, and
this district is not intended as a "holding" zone for future development land.
Subd. 2.   Permitted Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter,
the following are permitted uses in a POC District:
   A.   Agriculture, the keeping of livestock and poultry, nurseries,
greenhouses for growing only, landscape gardening and tree farms, including
sale of products grown on premises.
   B.   Golf courses (except club houses, miniature courses and driving tees
operated for commercial purposes).
   C.   Residential care facilities licensed by the state and regulated,
located and operated per State Statutes.
   D.   Single family detached dwellings.
Subd. 3.   Interim Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are interim uses in the POC District and are governed by Section
1001.03, Subd. 6 of this Chapter.
   A.   Model homes as regulated by Section
1001.09, Subd. 16 of this Chapter.
   B.30    Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS) as regulated by Section
1001.09, Subd. 21 of this Chapter.
Subd. 4.   Accessory Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter,
the following are permitted accessory uses in the POC District:
   A.   Barns, stables, silos, other agricultural buildings.
   B.   Fences as herein regulated.
   C.   Keeping of not more than two (2) boarders or roomers by a resident
family.
   D.   Living quarters of persons employed on the premises.
   E.   Parking as herein regulated.
   F.   Private garage.
   G.   Secondary uses customarily incident to the permitted or conditional
uses allowed in the district.
   H.   Signs as herein regulated.
Subd. 5.   Conditional Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter,
the following are conditional uses allowed in a POC District: (Requires a
conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by
Section
1001.03, Subd. 5. of this Chapter.)
   A.   Cemeteries, provided that:
      1.   The site accesses on a major collector.
      2.   The site is landscaped in accordance with Section
1001.09 of this Chapter.
      3.   The provisions of this Chapter are considered and determined to be
satisfied.
   B.   Dog kennels provided that:
      1.   No person shall maintain or operate any kennel or shelter without a
license as regulated by the City Code.
      2.   A minimum lot size of one (1) acre is required to be licensed for
operation of a kennel or shelter.
      3.   Every kennel or shelter shall be enclosed or fenced in such a manner
as to prevent the running at large or escape of animals confined therein.
      4.   Both dog kennels or cat shelters shall be open for inspection by the
City authorities at any time.
      5.   It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep three (3) or more
dogs and/or cats over six (6) months of age on his/her premises in the City
without obtaining a kennel license pursuant to this section and the City Code.
   C.   Home occupations provided that the following general provisions are
met:
      1.   No home occupation shall produce light, glare, noise, fumes, odor,
or vibration that will in any way have an objectionable effect upon adjacent or
nearby property.
      2.   No equipment shall be used in the home occupation which will create
electrical interference to surrounding properties. No equipment shall be used
which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television
receives off the premises or causes fluctuations in the voltage off the
premises.
      3.   Any home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the
residential use of the premises; not more than ten (l0) percent of the floor
area of the dwelling unit shall be permanently set aside to be used in the
conduct of the home occupation. It shall not change the residential character
thereof, and shall result in no incompatibility or disturbance to the
surrounding residential uses.
      4.   No home occupation shall require internal or external alterations or
involve construction features not customarily found in dwellings except where
required to comply with local and state fire and police recommendations.
      5.   There shall be no exterior storage of equipment or materials used in
the home occupation, except personal vehicles used in the home occupation which
comply with applicable provisions of this Chapter may be parked on the site.
      6.   The home occupation shall meet all applicable fire and building
codes.
      7.   There shall be no exterior display or exterior signs or interior
display or interior signs which are visible from outside the dwelling with the
exception of directional and identification/business signs to the extent
authorized by the provisions of Section
1001.08 of this Chapter.
      8.   All home occupations shall comply with the provisions of the City
Code.
      9.   No home occupation shall be conducted between the hours of 10:00 PM
and 7:00 AM unless approved by the City Council and said occupation is
contained entirely within the principal building and will not require any on-
street parking facilities.
      10.   Home occupations shall not create a parking demand in excess of
that which can be accommodated in an existing driveway, where no vehicle is
parked closer than fifteen (15) feet from the curb line or edge of paved
surface.
      11.   No person other than those who customarily reside on the premises
shall be employed as part of the home occupation.
      12.   All permitted home occupations shall be conducted entirely within
the principal building and may not be conducted in an accessory building.
      13.   Permitted home occupations include and are limited to: art studio,
dressmaking, secretarial services, family day care, foster care, offices,
teaching with musical, dancing and other instructions which consist of no more
than one pupil at a time, and similar uses.
      14.   The home occupation shall not involve any of the following: repair
service or manufacturing which requires equipment other than found in a home;
teaching which customarily consists of more than one (1)pupil at a time; over-
the-counter sale of merchandise produced off the premises.
   D.   Municipal, administrative or service buildings or uses including public
and semi-public institutions, libraries, museums, post offices, etc., except
industrial type uses provided that:
      1.   When abutting a residential use in a residential use district, the
property is screened and landscaped in compliance with Section
1001.09 of this Chapter.
      2.   The provisions of Section
1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and determined to be satisfied.
   E.   Private recreation including golf club houses, country club, swimming
or tennis club provided that:
      1.   The principal use, function or activity is open, outdoor in
character.
      2.   Not more than five (5) percent of the land area of the site shall be
covered by buildings or structures.
      3.   When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the
property is screened and landscaped for the protection of the abutting use,
according to the provisions of Section
1001.09 of this Chapter.
      4.   The land area of the property containing such use or activity meets
the minimum established for the district.
      5.   The use will not negatively impact the natural setting intended for
this district or neighboring residential uses.
      6.   The traffic generated by the use can be adequately accommodated
(volume and weight) upon City streets serving the use.
      7.   An adequate septic system and well can be established on the site.
   F.   Parks and recreation areas owned or operated by public bodies, other
than the City.
   G.   Essential service buildings.
   H.   Railroad rights-of-way.
Subd. 6.   Lot Area and Setback Requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in a POC District, subject to additional
requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Chapter.
   A.   Lot Requirements.
      1.   Lot Area: Not less than five (5) acres.
      2.   Lot Width: Not less than three hundred (300) feet.
      3.   Lot Depth: Not less than three hundred (300) feet.
   B.   Principal Structure Setback Requirements.
      1.   Front Yard:
         a.   One or Two Family: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
         b.   Other Uses: Not less than one hundred (100) feet.
      2.   Side Yard:
         a.   One or Two Family: Not less than fifteen (15) feet, nor less than
fifty (50) feet abutting a street.
         b.   Other Uses Abutting Residences: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
         c.   Other Uses: Not less than thirty (30) feet.
         d.   Detached Access Uses: Not less than fifteen (15) feet.
         e.   Attached Access Uses: Not less than fifteen (15) feet.
      3.   Rear Yard:
         a.   One or Two Family: Not less than twenty-five (25) feet, nor less
than fifty (50) feet abutting a street.
         b.   Other Uses Abutting Residences: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
         c.   Other Uses: Not less than forty (40) feet.
         d.   Detached Access Uses: Not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
         e.   Abutting an Arterial Street: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
Subd. 7.   Other Requirements.
   A.   Any development in the POC District shall be required to submit a plan
indicating further subdivision of the property to include public sanitary sewer
and water.
   B.3   All unsewered development in the POC District must meet state and
local on-site sewer requirements.
1001.23 S, SHORELAND DISTRICT 27
Subd. 1.   Purpose. The purpose of the S, Shoreland District is to manage the
effect of shoreland and water surface crowding, to prevent pollution of surface
and ground waters of the City, to provide ample space on lots for sewage
treatment systems, to minimize flood damages, to maintain property values, and
to maintain natural characteristics of shorelands and adjacent water areas via
shoreland controls which regulate lot sizes, placement of structures and
alterations of shoreland areas.
Subd. 2.   District Authorization. The shorelands within the City of Rockford
are hereby designated as shoreland districts and the requirements set forth in
this Ordinance shall govern development and other activities within these
districts, pursuant to authorization and policies contained in Minnesota
Statutes Chapter 103F, Minnesota Regulations, Parts 6120.2500-6120.3900. The
classification of the shoreland areas shall govern the use, alteration and
development of these areas according to said classification.
Subd. 3.   District Application. The S, Shoreland District shall be applied to
and superimposed (overlaid) upon all zoning districts of this Ordinance as
existing or amended by the text of this Ordinance. The regulations and
requirements imposed by the S, Shoreland District shall be in addition to those
established for districts which joint apply. Under the joint application of
districts, the more restrictive requirements shall apply.
Subd. 4.   District Boundaries. The boundaries of the S, Shoreland District are
established within the following distances from the ordinary high water mark of
the surface water depending on the size of the surface water as indicated on
the Rockford Shoreland District Map.
 
Surface Water                                                    District 1
Greater than ten (10) acres                                      1,000 feet
Rivers and Streams (draining an area greater than two (2) square 3002
miles)
1 The practical distance may be less whenever the waters involved are
bounded by topographical divides which extend landward from the waters for
lesser distances and prevent flowage toward the surface water.
2 The distance requirement shall be increased to the limit of the
floodplain when the floodplain is greater than three hundred (300) feet.
 
Subd. 5.   Shoreland Classification. The surface waters affected by this
section and which require controlled development of their shoreland (Shoreland
District) are shown on the map designed as the official “Rockford Zoning Map”
which is incorporated herein by this reference and filed with the City Clerk .
Surface waters generally greater than ten (10) acres and given an
identification number by the State of Minnesota as defined in this section and
listed below. Other surface waters affected, generally having less than ten
(10) acres, are classified as wetland systems.
 
DNR Identification Number Name                   Classification
- -                       Crow River, South Fork AR
86-27W                    Spotanski Lake         NE
 
Subd. 6.   Allowable Land Uses. The land uses allowable for the S, Shoreland
District shall follow the “permitted”, “accessory”, and “conditional” use
designations as defined and outlined in the base zoning districts established
by Chapters
1001.10 through
1001.23 of this Ordinance.
Subd. 7.   Minimum Lot and Setback Requirements.
   A.   Subject to other more restrictive provisions that may be imposed by the
Zoning Ordinance, the following chart sets forth the minimum area setbacks and
other requirements of each respective classification:
  NE                  RD                       AR
   Natural Environment Recreational Development Agricultural River
                           NE                  RD           AR
                          Natural Environment Recreational Agricultural River
                                               Development
   Minimum lot size above
   normal high water mark: 5 acres             5 acres
1. Non-sewered             40,000 SF           20,000 SF    NA
   Sewered - abutting      20,000 SF           15,000 SF
   water
   Sewered - non-abutting
   Lot Width:              200 feet            150 feet     100 feet
2. Non-sewered             125 feet            80 feet      80 feet
   Sewered
   Setback from ordinary
3. high water mark (1):    200 feet            100 feet     100 feet
   Non-sewered             150 feet            75 feet      50 feet
   Sewered
5. Setback from top of     30 feet             30 feet      30 feet
   bluff
   Maximum impervious
6. surface to area ratio   30%                 30%          30%
   (2)
7. Maximum building height 35 feet             35 feet      35 feet
8. Side yard setback (3)  30 feet             20 feet      20 feet
1 Setback requirements from the ordinary high water mark shall not apply to
boathouses, piers, park buildings or structures, and docks. Boathouses may be
permitted to be located up to the ordinary high water mark provided they shall
not be used for habitation and they shall not contain sanitary facilities.
Where development exists on both sides of a proposed building site, building
setbacks may be altered to more closely conform to adjacent building setbacks,
provided the proposed building site is not located in a shoreland impact zone
or in a bluff impact zone.
2  Within the C-O District, impervious surface coverage may be allowed to
exceed 30 percent provided that all structures and best management practices
are in place for the control and treatment of stormwater runoff and a
shoreland impact plan is submitted and approved in accordance with Section
1001.23, Subd. 8.B of this Section.
3 Where feasible and practical, all roads and parking area shall meet the
setback requirements established for structures in (c) above. Natural
vegetation or other natural materials shall be required in order to screen
parking areas when viewed from the water. Parking areas of more than four (4)
spaces shall be screened in accordance with a landscaping plan submitted and
approved by the City Council.
 
   B.   Substandard Lots. Any lot of record filed in the office of the Hennepin
or Wright County Register of Deeds on the effective date of this Ordinance
amendment which does not meet the area requirements of this Ordinance may be
allowed as a building site subject to approval of a shoreland impact plan and
provided:
      1.    The lot is serviced by municipal sewer and water.
      2.    Except for lot area, all other sanitary and dimensional
requirements of the Shoreland District are complied with insofar as practical.
Subd. 8.   Development Regulations.
   A.   Applications. Landowners or developers desiring to develop land or
construct a dwelling, building, or any other artificial obstruction on land
located within any shoreland district within the City of Rockford shall make
one of the following applications:
      1.    Single family dwelling, two family dwelling, or accessory buildings
shall submit an application for building permit.
      2.    Multiple family, townhomes, commercial, or industrial buildings
shall submit application for a site and building plan review as regulated by
Section
1001.09, Subd. 12 of this Ordinance.
      3.    Subdivision request shall submit an application for preliminary
and/or final plat as required by the Rockford Subdivision Ordinance.
   B.   Shoreland Impact Plan. The aforementioned applications shall be
accompanied by plans for development referred to as a shoreland impact plan
which shall set forth proposed provisions to preventing erosion into public
waters, infiltrating rainwater runoff, preserving shoreland aesthetics and
historic values, preventing bank slumping, limiting direct and indirect impacts
on water quality, and protecting fish and wildlife habitat. A shoreland buffer,
consisting of trees, shrubs, and ground cover of native plants and understory,
shall be required as part of the plan. Shoreline buffers standards shall
include the following:
      1.   Removal or alterations of natural vegetation, except for forest
management or agricultural uses shall follow these standards:
         a.   A shoreline buffer shall exist within the shore impact zone,
consisting of trees, shrubs, and low ground cover of native plants and
understory in a natural state.
         b.   Vegetation clearing and removal of ground cover, including leaf
litter and the forest floor duff layer, within the shore and bluff impact zones
and on steep slopes shall not be allowed, except as follows:
            1)   Limited clearing of trees and shrubs, and cutting, pruning,
and trimming of trees to accommodate the placement of stairways and landings,
access paths, view corridors, recreation use areas, and permitted water-
oriented accessory structures or facilities shall be allowed within the shore
impact zone. Trees, shrubs, and a low ground cover consisting of native plants
and understory shall be maintained in a natural state within this area. An
access path permitted within this area shall not exceed a cleared width of 6
feet and must be oriented generally perpendicular to the shoreline. Only one
shoreline recreation use area shall be allowed on each residential lot and it
shall not exceed the following dimensions:
 
Classification Width Length
NE             10    15
RD             20    15
AR             30    15
 
            2)   For conservation subdivisions, planned unit developments and
new resorts, shoreline recreation use areas shall be no larger than 20 feet in
width along the shoreline for each 100 feet of shoreline, not to exceed 5000
square feet in total area, with the depth of the shoreline recreational area
not exceeding 25 feet landward from the ordinary high water level. A perennial
ground cover shall be maintained to prevent erosion on all shoreline recreation
use areas, and a tree canopy shall cover half of the area to intercept rainfall
and lessen erosion potential.
            3)   Limited clearing of trees and shrubs, and cutting, pruning,
and trimming of trees to accommodate the placement of stairways and landings,
and access paths shall be allowed in bluff impact zones and on steep slopes.
Trees, shrubs, and a low ground cover consisting of native grasses and plants
shall be maintained in these areas.
            4)   The removal of dead or dying trees or branches that pose a
safety hazard shall be allowed.
         c.   Removal of trees and shrubs within the secondary shoreline buffer
zone may be allowed, provided that a well-distributed stand of trees and shrubs
are maintained. A well distributed stand of trees and shrubs means that a tree
and shrub canopy covers over 50 percent the area. A ground layer of
predominantly perennial vegetation, such as grass, flowers, forbs, or
preferably native plants, shall be preserved, established or maintained in this
area.
      2.    Use of fertilizer shall not be allowed within the shore impact
zone. Use of fertilizer and pesticides elsewhere within the shoreland
management district must be done in such a way as to minimize runoff into the
shore impact zone or public water.
      3.    Vegetation within the shore impact zone shall be maintained to
screen structures with trees and shrubs so that the structures are at most 50
percent visible from public waters during summer, leaf-on conditions.
      4.    No impervious surfaces shall be allowed within the shore impact
zone, except for boat launches, stairways, lifts or landings, and, where
permitted, one water-oriented accessory structure.
      5.    Open areas and lawns within the shore impact zone, except those
allowed in part 1, shall be left unmowed or replanted with native vegetation of
trees and shrubs to establish and maintain a vegetative buffer, with a natural
ground layer of understory plants.
      6.    Shoreland controls shall meet or exceed the following standards:
         a.   Filling of any wetlands within the shore impact and secondary
shoreline buffer zones shall be prohibited.
         b.   Natural swales, depressions, steep slopes, and topsoil shall be
preserved. Alterations to these areas may only be permitted in conjunction with
erosion control, stormwater management, and vegetation buffer plans that are
approved by the local government and effectively implemented.
         c.   Excavation or placement of more than five (5) cubic yards of
material within shore impact zone may be permitted provided that erosion
control, stormwater management, and vegetation buffer plans are approved by the
local government and effectively implemented.
         d.   Alterations must be designed and conducted in a manner that
ensures only the smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for the shortest
time possible.
         e.   Mulches or similar materials must be used for erosion control,
where necessary, for temporary bare soil coverage, and a permanent vegetation
cover must be established as soon as possible.
         f.   Silt fences or other methods to trap sediments before they reach
any surface water feature must be used.
         g.   Altered areas must be stabilized to acceptable erosion control
standards consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil
and water conservation districts and the Natural Resources Conservation
Service.
         h.   Fill or excavated material must not be placed in a manner that
creates an unstable slope.
         i.   Plans to place fill or excavated material on steep slopes,
including the construction of walkout basements, shall be developed by a
registered professional engineer for continued slope stability and must not
create finished slopes of 30 percent or greater.
         k.   Fill or excavated material must not be placed in bluff impact
zones.
         l.   Any alterations below the ordinary high water level of public
waters shall be authorized by the commissioner under Minnesota Statutes,
sections 103G.245 and 103G.405 prior to the commencement of any work.
         m.   Alterations of topography shall only be allowed if they do not
adversely affect adjacent or nearby properties.
         n.   Placement of natural rock riprap and retaining walls, where
allowed shall comply with regulations adopted pursuant to Minnesota Statutes,
section 103G.245. Natural rock riprap shall only be used for the correction of
an established erosion problem that cannot be controlled through the use of
native vegetation, slope stabilization using mulch, biomat, or similar
bioengineered means. Riprap and retaining walls used for ornamental purposes or
for terracing natural slopes shall be prohibited within the shore and bluff
impact zones.
      7.    Excavations where the intended purpose is connection to a public
water, such as boat slips, canals, lagoons, and harbors, shall be regulated by
local shoreland controls. Permission for excavations may be given only after
the commissioner has approved the proposed connection to public waters pursuant
to Minnesota Statutes, section 103G.245. Structures setbacks and the shore
impact zone shall be measured from the excavation.
   C.   Bluff Impact Zones. Structures and accessory facilities except
stairways, landings, and public utilities shall not be placed within bluff
impact zones.
   D.   Stairways, Lifts, and Landings. Stairways and lifts, solely for the
purpose of pedestrian transportation, are the preferred alternative to major
topographic alterations for achieving access up and down bluffs and steep
slopes to shore areas. Stairways and lifts must meet the following design
requirements:
      1.    Stairways and lifts shall not exceed four feet (4') in width on
residential lots. Wider stairways may be used for commercial properties, public
open-space recreational properties, and planned unit developments;
      2.    Landings for stairways and lifts on residential lots shall not
exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area;
      3.    Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, lifts, or landings;
      4.    Stairways, lifts, and landings may be either constructed above the
ground on posts or pilings, no higher than thirty inches (30") above grade at
any one point, or placed into the ground provided they are designed and built
in a manner that ensures control of soil erosions;
      5.    Stairways, lifts, and landings shall be located in the most
visually inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from the surface of the
public water assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever practical; and
      6.    Facilities such as ramps, lifts, or mobility paths for physically
handicapped persons are also allowed for achieving access to shore areas,
provided that the dimensional and performance standards of Section
1001.23, Subd. 8.C of this Ordinance are complied with in addition to the
requirements of Minnesota Regulations, chapter 1340.
   E.   Steep Slopes: The City Engineer shall evaluate possible soil erosion
impacts and development visibility from public waters before issuing a permit
for construction of sewage treatment systems, roads, driveways, structures, or
other improvements on steep slopes. When determined necessary, conditions must
be attached to issued permits to prevent erosion and to preserve existing
vegetation screening of structures, vehicles, and other facilities as viewed
from the surface of public waters, assuming summer, leaf-on vegetation.
   F.   Sewage and Waste Disposal: Any premises used for human occupancy shall
be provided with an adequate method of sewage disposal to be maintained in
accordance with the requirements of Section
401 of the City Code and existing individual on site septic systems in
accordance with Minnesota Rules 7080.
   G.   Water Supply: Any private supply of water for domestic purposes shall
conform to Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, Hennepin and Wright County, and
Minnesota Department of Health Standards for water quality and Section
402 of the City Code.
    H.    Stormwater Management: The following general and specific standards
shall apply in regard to stormwater management within any shoreland district
within the City:
      1.    When possible, existing natural drainage ways, wetlands, and
vegetated soil surfaces shall be used to convey, store, filter, and retain
stormwater runoff before discharge to public waters.
      2.    Development shall be planned to minimize the extent of disturbed
areas, runoff velocities, erosion potential, and reduce and delay runoff
volumes. Disturbed areas shall be stabilized and protected as soon as possible,
and no later than thirty (30) days after completion of the project. All methods
of stormwater management shall comply with the Rockford Comprehensive Storm
Drainage Plan.
      3.    When development density, topographic features, and soil and
vegetation conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle stormwater runoff
using natural features and vegetation, various types of constructed facilities
such as diversions, settling basins, skimming devices, dikes, waterways, and
ponds may be used. Preference shall be given to designs using surface drainage,
vegetation, and infiltration rather than buried pipes and manmade materials and
facilities.
      4.    New constructed stormwater outfalls to public waters shall provide
for filtering or settling of suspended solids and skimming of surface debris
before discharge.
      5.   Stormwater outfalls above the OHW will not need a permit. All
stormwater outfalls below the OHW will need to apply for a Pollution Control
Agency General Stormwater Permit and a DNR permit.
   I.   Placement and Design of Streets, Driveways, And Parking Areas: The
following standards shall apply in regard to street, driveway and parking area
placement and design within any shoreland district within the City.
      1.    Public streets and private driveways and parking areas shall be
designed to take advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve
maximum screening from view from public waters. Documentation shall be provided
to the City Engineer that all streets, driveways and parking areas are designed
and constructed to minimize and control erosion to public waters consistent
with City standards.
      2.    Private driveways, and parking areas shall meet structure setbacks
and shall not be placed within bluff and shore impact zones, when other
reasonable and feasible placement alternatives exist. If no alternatives exist,
they may be placed within these areas by conditional use permit, and must be
designed to minimize adverse impacts. Natural vegetation or other natural
materials shall be required in order to screen parking areas when viewed from
the water. Parking areas of more than four (4) spaces shall be screened in
accordance with a landscape plan, submitted and approved by the City Council.
       3.    Public and private watercraft access ramps, approach roads, and
access-related parking areas may be placed within shore impact zones provided
the vegetative screening and erosion control conditions of this subpart are
met.
      4.    Fences: Fences shall not exceed forty eight inches (48") in height
and shall be at least seventy five percent (75%) open space for passage of air
and light inside the ordinary high-water level setback. Fences shall not be
located within ten feet (10') from the ordinary high-water mark.
Subd. 9.   Shoreland Alterations: Alterations of vegetation and topography will
be regulated to prevent erosion into public waters, fix nutrients, preserve
shoreland aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent bank slumping, and
protect fish and wildlife habitat.
   A.   Vegetation Alterations: The removal of natural vegetation shall be
restricted to prevent erosion into public waters, to conserve nutrients in the
soil, and to preserve shoreland aesthetics.
      1.    During the site grading of new subdivision development and other
planning actions, any removal of significant trees shall require a tree
preservation plan in accordance with the City's subdivision regulations.
      2.    Natural vegetation shall be restored as soon as feasible after any
construction project, but not later than the start of the next growing season.
      3.    The provisions of this Section shall not apply to vegetation
alterations necessary for the construction of structures and the construction
of streets and parking areas subject to the following standards:
         a)   In shore and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes, limited
clearing of trees and shrubs and cutting, pruning, and trimming of trees is
allowed to provide a view to the water from the principal dwelling site and to
accommodate the placement of stairways and landings, access paths, beach and
watercraft access areas or facilities, provided that:
            1)   The screening of structures, vehicles, or other facilities as
viewed from the water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, is not
substantially reduced.
            2)   Along rivers, existing shading of water surfaces is preserved.
            3)   The above provisions are not applicable to the removal of
trees, limbs, or branches that are dead, diseased, or pose safety hazards.
   B.   Grading and Filling Associated With Any Development Project Involving
Subdivisions, Commercial, Industrial, Or Multiple- Family Uses:
      1.    Grading and filling within shoreland districts, or any alterations
of the natural topography where the slope of the land is toward public water or
watercourse leading to public water shall be approved by the City Engineer. A
permit shall be obtained prior to the commencement of any work thereon. The
permit may be granted subject to the conditions that:
         a.   Temporary ground cover such as mulch shall be used and permanent
cover such as sod shall be planted as soon as possible.
         b.   Methods to prevent erosion and trap sediment shall be employed in
accordance with the Rockford Standard Detail Plates.
         c.   Fill shall not be placed in areas lower in elevation than the
normal high-water mark.
         d.   Fill shall be stabilized according to accepted engineering
standards.
         e.   Fill shall not restrict a floodway or destroy the storage
capacity of a flood plain.
         f.   The maximum slope of the finished surface which slopes toward a
water body or a watercourse leading to such water body shall be three (3) units
horizontal to one vertical.
         g.   Fill or excavated material must not be placed in bluff impact
zones.
         h.   Any alterations below the ordinary high-water level of public
waters must first be authorized by the Commissioner under Minnesota Statutes
section 103G.245.
      2.    Any work which will change or diminish the course, current, or
cross section of a public water shall require a permit from the City Engineer
and be approved by the Department of Natural Resources before the work is
begun. This includes construction of boat slips, canals, channels and ditches,
lagooning, dredging of lake bottoms for the removal of muck, silt or weeds, and
filling in the lake bed including low lying marsh areas. Approval will be given
only if the proposed work is consistent with applicable State regulations for
beds of public waters.
   C.   Special Provisions for Agricultural, Extractive, and Commercial Uses:
      1.    Agriculture Use Standards: General cultivation farming, grazing,
nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting
are permitted uses if steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones are
maintained in permanent vegetation or operated under an approved conservation
plan (resource management systems) consistent with the field office technical
guides of the Hennepin and Wright County Soil and Water Conservation Districts
or the United States Soil Conservation Service, as provided by a qualified
individual or agency. The shore impact zone for parcels with permitted
agricultural land uses is equal to a line parallel to and fifty feet (50') from
the ordinary high-water level.
Subd. 10.   Variances. Variances may be granted by the City Council upon
application as required in Section
1001.03, Subd. 4.A of this Ordinance in extraordinary cases but only when the
proposed use is determined to be in the public interest and no variance shall
be granted which the Council determines will or has a tendency to:
   A.   Impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property.
   B.   Unreasonably increase the congestion in the public street.
   C.   Have the effect of allowing any uses which are prohibited, permit a
lesser degree of flood protection than the flood protection elevation for the
particular area, or permit standards which are lower than those required by
State Law.
   D.   Increase the danger of fire or endanger the public safety.
   E.   Unreasonably diminish or impair established property values within the
neighborhood, or in any way be contrary to the intent of the Chapter.
   F.   Violate the intent and purpose of the Comprehensive Plan.
   G.   Violate any of the terms or conditions of Item B of Section
1001.03, Subd. 4.A.
Subd. 11.   Conditional Uses. Conditional uses allowable within shoreland areas
shall be subject to the review and approval procedures set forth in Section
1001.03, Subd. 5 of this Ordinance. The following additional evaluation
criteria and conditions apply within shoreland areas:
   A.   Evaluation Criteria: A thorough evaluation of the water body and the
topographic, vegetation, and soils conditions on the site must be made to
ensure:
      1.    The prevention of soil erosion or other possible pollution of
public waters, both during and after construction.
      2.    The visibility of structures and other facilities as viewed from
public waters is limited.
Subd. 12.   Notifications to the Department of Natural Resources.
   A.   Copies of all notices of any public hearings to consider variances,
amendments, or conditional uses under local shoreland management controls must
be sent to the commissioner or the commissioner's designated representative and
postmarked at least ten (10) days before the hearings. Notices of hearings to
consider proposed subdivisions/plans must include copies of the subdivision/
plat.
   B.   A copy of approved amendment and subdivisions/plats, and final
decisions granting variances or conditional uses under local shoreland
management controls must be sent to the commissioner or the commissioner's
designated representative and postmarked within ten (10) days of final action.
Subd. 13.   Effect of Permit.  The granting of any permit, variance, or
subdivision approval under provisions of this Chapter shall in no way affect
the owner's capability to obtain the approval required by any other statute,
ordinance or legislation of any State agency or subdivision thereof. Approval
may be expressly given in conjunction with other permits applied for, but no
approval shall be implied from the grant of such permits or from the necessity
to apply for a permit as described herein.
1002. Subdivision Regulations
PASSED JUNE 12, 2007 - ORDINANCE 07-06
LIST OF AMENDMENTS
 
Symbol Ordinance Number Dated Passed
 
1002.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT
This Chapter is enacted for the following purposes: to safeguard the best
interests of the City of Rockford; to assist the subdivider in harmonizing
their interests with those of the City at large; to correlate land subdivision
with the comprehensive plan; to encourage well planned, efficient and
attractive subdivisions by establishing adequate and impartial standards for
design and construction; to provide for the health and safety of residents by
requiring properly designed streets and adequate sewer and water service; to
place the cost of improvements against those benefiting from their
construction; to secure the rights of the public with respect to public lands
and waters; to improve land records by establishing standards for surveys and
plats; to discourage inferior development which might adversely affect property
values; to establish subdivision development standards; and to set the minimum
requirements necessary to protect the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience and general welfare.
1002.02 APPLICATION
Any plat, hereafter made, for each subdivision or each part thereof lying
within the City, shall be prepared, presented for approval and recorded as
herein prescribed. The regulations contained herein shall apply to the
subdivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts or
other division of land for the purpose of sale, building development, whether
immediate or future, or any other purpose, including the resubdivision or re-
platting of land or lots.
1002.03 APPROVALS NECESSARY FOR ACCEPTANCE OF PLATS:
Before any plat shall be recorded or be of any validity, it shall be referred
to the City planning commission and approved by the City Council as having
fulfilled the requirements of this Chapter.
1002.04 CONDITIONS FOR RECORDING:
No plat or any subdivision shall be entitled to record in the Hennepin or
Wright County recorder's office or have any validity until the plat or
subdivision has been prepared, approved and acknowledged in the manner
prescribed by this Chapter.
1002.05 INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS
Subd. 1.   Conflicting Provisions. Whenever there is a difference between
minimum standards or dimensions specified herein and those contained in other
official regulations, resolutions or City Code provisions, the most restrictive
standards shall apply.
Subd. 2.    Measured Distances. All measured distances expressed in feet shall
be the nearest tenth of a foot.
1002.06 COMPLIANCE WITH CITY REGULATIONS
No plat of any subdivision shall be entitled to record in the county recorders
office, or have any validity until the plat thereof has been prepared,
approved, and acknowledged in the manner prescribed by this Chapter.
1002.07 BUILDING PERMITS
No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building,
structure or improvement upon any land or to any lot in a subdivision unless
and until all requirements of this Chapter have been complied with relative to
the property for which a permit is sought.
1002.08 SEVERABILITY
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Chapter is for
any reason held to be invalid or unenforceable as to any person or
circumstance, the application of such section, subsection, clause or phrase to
persons or circumstances, other than those as to which it shall be held invalid
or unenforceable, shall be affected thereby, and all provisions hereof, in all
other respects, shall remain valid and enforceable.
1002.09 DEFINITIONS
Except for those words and phrases defined in this section, the words and
phrases used in this Chapter shall be interpreted to be given the meanings in
common usage, and as may be commonly defined in dictionaries so as to give this
Chapter its most reasonable application.
Alley: A public or private right of way primarily designed to serve as
secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal
frontage is on a street.
Applicant: The owner, their agent or person having legal control and/or an
interest in the land proposed to be subdivided.
Base Lot: A lot meeting all the specifications within its zoning district prior
to being divided into a subdivision of single-family attached units.
Block: An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by
streets, or by streets and the entire boundary or boundaries of the
subdivision, or a combination of the above, with a river, lake, railroad, or
unsubdivided acreage.
Boulevard: The portion of the street right of way between the curb line and the
property line.
Building: Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons,
animals, chattels or moveable property of any kind.
Butt Lot: A lot at the end of a block, located between two (2) corner lots.
City: The City of Rockford.
City Attorney: The attorney appointed by the City, unless otherwise stated.
City Council: The Rockford City Council
City Engineer: The registered engineer appointed by the City, unless otherwise
stated.
City Planner.  The planner appointed by the City unless otherwise stated.
Comprehensive Plan: A comprehensive plan prepared by the City, including a
compilation of policy statement goals, standards and maps, indicating the
general locations recommended for the various functional classes of land use,
places and structures, and for the general physical development of the City,
including any unit or part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to
such plan or parts thereof.
Contour Map: A map on which irregularities of land surface are shown by lines
connecting points of equal elevations. "Contour interval" shall mean the
vertical height between contour lines.
Copy: A print or reproduction made from a tracing.
County: are the counties of Hennepin and Wright as applicable.
Dedication: The contribution of property or of money to the governing body.
Said property is forever vacated by the dedicators or their successors.
Design Standards: The specifications to landowners or those proposing to
subdivide land for the preparation of plats, both preliminary and final,
indicating, among other things, the optimum, minimum or maximum dimensions of
such items as rights of way, blocks, easements and lots.
Developments: The act of building structures and installing site improvements.
Double Frontage Lots: A lot which has a property line abutting on one street
and an opposite property line abutting on another nonintersecting street.
Drainage Course: A watercourse or indentation for the drainage of surface
water.
Easement: A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land and for
the purpose of constructing and maintaining drives, sidewalks, trails and
utilities, including, but not limited to, wetlands, ponding areas, sanitary
sewers, water mains, electric lines, telephone lines, storm sewer or storm
drainageways and gas lines.
Final Plat: A drawing or map of a subdivision, meeting all of the requirements
of the city and the Minnesota State Statutes regarding the platting of land and
in such form as required for the purposes of recording.
Key Map: A map drawn to comparatively small scale which definitively shows the
area proposed to be platted in relation to known geographical features (e.g.,
town centers, lakes and roads).
Lot: A parcel or portion of land in a subdivision or plat of land separated
from other parcels or portions by description, as on a subdivision or record of
survey map, for the purpose of sale or lease or separate use thereof and having
its principal frontage on a public street.
Lot, Corner: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) streets, the
interior angle of such intersection not exceeding one hundred thirty five
degrees (135°).
Lot Improvements: Any building, structure, place, work of art, or other object,
or improvement of the land on which they are situated, constituting a physical
betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment. Certain proposed
"lot improvements" shall be properly bonded for as provided in this Chapter.
Lot of Record: A parcel of land whether subdivided and/or otherwise legally
described and recorded under a single parcel identification number prior to the
effective date of the City’s subdivision regulations or approved by the City as
a lot and which is occupied by or intended for occupancy by one principal
building or principal use, together with any accessory buildings and such open
spaces as required by the Rockford Zoning Ordinance and having its principal
frontage upon a public street.
Metes and Bounds Description: A description of real property which is not
described by reference to a lot or block shown on a map, but is described by
starting at a known point and describing the bearings and distances of the
lines forming the boundaries of the property or delineating a fractional
portion of a section, lot or area by described lines or portions thereof.
Natural Waterways: A natural passageway in the surface of the earth, so
situated and having such a topographical nature that surface water flows
through it from other areas before reaching a final ponding area. The term also
shall include all drainage structures that have been constructed or placed for
the purpose of conducting water from one place to another.
Outlot: A lot remnant or parcel of land left over after platting, which is
intended as open space or other future use, for which no building permit shall
be issued.
Owner: An individual, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust
or any other legal entity holding an equitable or legal ownership interest in
the land sought to be subdivided.
Park: Playgrounds, trails, parks or open spaces within the City, owned, leased
or used, wholly or in part, by the City for park and recreational purposes or
which are designated by the City Council as a park.
Pedestrianway: A public right of way or private easement across a block or
within a block to provide access for pedestrians and which may be used for the
installation of paths or trails.
Percentage of Grade: Along a centerline of a street, the change in vertical
elevation in feet and tenths of a foot for each one hundred feet (100') of
horizontal distance, expressed as a percentage.
Planning Commission: The planning commission of the City of Rockford.
Preliminary Plat: A drawing or map of a proposed subdivision, meeting the
requirements herein enumerated, submitted to the planning commission and
governing body for their consideration, in compliance with the comprehensive
plan, along with required supporting data.
Private Drive: A driveway serving as vehicular access to two (2) or more
parcels of land which is not dedicated to the public and is owned by one or
more private parties.
Protective Convents: Contracts entered into between all owners and holders of
mortgages constituting a restriction on the use of all private property within
a subdivision for the benefit of the property owners, and providing mutual
protection against undesirable aspects of development which would tend to
impair the stability of property value and economic integrity of any given
area.
Public Improvements: Any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, street, sanitary
sewer, storm sewer, water system, sidewalk, pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off
street parking area, lot improvement or other facility for which the City may
ultimately assume ownership, responsibility for maintenance and operation, or
which may affect an improvement for which local government responsibility is
established.
Quadraminiums: Single structures which contain four (4) subdivided dwelling
units all of which have individually separate entrances from the exterior of
the structure.
Reserve Strips: A narrow strip of land placed between lot lines and streets to
control access.
Right of Way: The land covered by a public road, otherwise dedicated for public
use, or land for certain private uses, such as land over which a power line
passes.
Road: is a public right-of-way affording primary access by pedestrians and
vehicles to abutting properties, whether designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, boulevard, place, or however otherwise
designated.
Setback: The distance between a building and the property line nearest thereto.
Street: A public right of way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as
highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane,
place, drive, court or otherwise designated.
Street Width: The shortest distance between the lines delineating the right of
way of a street.
Streets, Arterial: Those streets designated as arterial streets by the Rockford
Comprehensive Plan.
Streets, Collector: Those streets designated as collector streets (major or
minor) by the Rockford Comprehensive Plan.
Streets, Cul-de-Sacs: Those local streets with only one outlet and having a
terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
Streets, Local: Those streets which are used primarily for access to abutting
properties and for local traffic movement.
Subdivider: is an individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership,
corporation, trust or other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest
in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to
subdivide the same under this chapter.
Subdivision: is the dividing of any parcel of land into two or more parcels.
   A.   Platted Subdivision - if any resulting parcel is less than five acres
in area and less than three hundred feet in width and the subdividing was done
for the purpose of transfer of ownership to effectuate building development or
if a new street or road is involved, regardless of the size of the parcel and/
or its width, such parcels must be platted in accordance with the terms and
procedures of this chapter.
   B.   Unplatted Subdivision - a division of any parcel of land into two or
more parts wherein all parts are at least five acres and have at least three
hundred feet in width and. frontage on an existing public road. Ingress and
egress easements of any type shall not be construed as public roads. These do
not require platting, but shall be zoned for the appropriate use.
Surveyor: A land surveyor registered under Minnesota state laws.
Tangent: is a straight line that is perpendicular to the radius of a curve
where a tangent meets a curve.
Tracing : A plat or map drawn on transparent paper, film, or cloth which can be
reproduced by using regular reproduction procedure.
Tree Preservation Related:
   A.   Caliper: The diameter of a replacement tree measured at a height of one
(1) foot above the ground level.
   B.   Diameter: The diameter of a tree measured at diameter breast height
(four and one-half (4.5) feet from the uphill side of the existing ground
level).
   C.   Drip Line: The farthest distance away from the trunk that rain or dew
will fall directly to the ground from the leaves or branches of the tree.
   D.   Forester: A person holding a bachelor’s degree in forestry from an
accredited four (4) year college of forestry.
   E.   Landscape Architect: A person registered with the State of Minnesota as
a landscape architect.
   F.   Significant Tree: A healthy tree measuring at least six (6) inches in
diameter for deciduous trees or twelve (12) feet in height for coniferous
trees.
   G.   Tree Certification: A certified inventory of trees on the site after
work is complete listing all trees and their final disposition, which is signed
by a licensed forester or landscape architect.
   H.   Tree Preservation Plan: A plan and inventory certified by a forester or
landscape architect indicating all of the significant trees and their locations
in the proposed development or on the lot. The tree preservation plan shall
include the size, species, and location of all significant trees proposed to be
saved and removed on the area of development, and the measures proposed to
protect the significant trees to be saved.
   I.   Tree Protection: Snow fencing or polyethylene laminar safety netting
placed at the drip-line of the significant trees to be preserved. The tree
protection measures shall be shown on the tree preservation plan drawings and
remain in place until all grading and construction activity is terminated.
Unit Lots:   Lots created from the subdivision of single-family attached
dwellings having different minimum lot size requirements than the conventional
base lot within the zoning district.
Vertical Curve: is the surface curvature on a road or highway center line
located between lines of different percentage of grade.
Zoning Ordinance: The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Rockford.
1002.10 FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES
Subd. 1.   Fees, Charges And Expenses Established. Fees and charges, as well as
expenses incurred by the City for engineering, planning, attorney, and other
services related to the processing of application shall be established by
ordinance and collected by the City Administrator for deposit in the City
accounts.
Subd. 2.   Payment Of Fees, Charges And Expenses. Such fees, charges, and
estimated expenses (as well as a deposit, if so required by the City
Administrator) shall be collected prior to City action on any application. All
such applications must be accompanied by a written agreement between the City
and the subdivider (when the subdivider is not the same person or entity as the
landowner, both the landowner and the subdivider must sign the agreement)
whereby the subdivider/landowner agrees to pay all applicable fees, charges,
and administrative, planning, engineering and legal expenses associated with
the review and processing of the development application, if these expenses
exceed the application escrow, and which allows the City to assess said fees,
charges and expenses against the landowner if such monies are not paid within
thirty (30) days after a bill is sent to the subdivider/landowner.
Subd. 3.   Fees, Charges And Expenses Are Additional. These fees shall be in
addition to sewer access charges, water access charges, sewer and water trunk
charges, transportation impact fees, park dedication fees in lieu of land,
building permit fees, inspection fees, subdivision application fees, charges,
and expenses, and other such fees, charges, and expenses currently required by
ordinance or which may be established by ordinance in the future.
1002.11 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY
Subd. 1.   Sale Of Lots From Unrecorded Plats. It shall be a misdemeanor to
sell, trade, or otherwise convey any lot or parcel of land as a part of, or in
conformity with, any plan, plat or replat of any subdivision or area located
within the jurisdiction of this Chapter unless said plan, plat or replat shall
have first been recorded in the office of the recorder of Hennepin or Wright
County, as applicable.
Subd. 2.   Receiving Or Recording Unapproved Plats. It shall be unlawful for a
private individual to receive or record in any public office any plans, plats
of lands laid out in building lots and streets, alleys or other portions of the
same intended to be dedicated to public or private use, or for the use of
purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent thereto, and located
within the jurisdiction of this Chapter, unless the same shall bear thereon, by
endorsement or otherwise, the approval of the City Council.
Subd. 3.   Misrepresentations. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person owning
an addition or subdivision of land within the City to represent that any
improvement upon any of the streets, alleys or avenues of said addition or
subdivision has been constructed according to the plans and specifications
approved by the City Council, or has been supervised or inspected by the City,
when such improvements have not been so constructed, supervised or inspected.
Subd. 4.   Misdemeanor Violation. Anyone violating any of the provisions of
this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each month during which
compliance is delayed shall constitute a separate offense.
1002.12 VARIANCES AND APPEALS
Subd. 1.   Variance Findings. The City Council may approve a variance from the
minimum standards of this Chapter (not procedural provisions) when, in its
opinion, undue hardship may result from strict compliance. In approving any
variance, the City Council shall prescribe any conditions that it deems
necessary to or desirable for the public interest. In making its approval, the
City Council shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land and
the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or
work in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of the proposed
subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. A variance shall only be
approved when the City Council finds:
   A.   That there are special circumstances or highly unique conditions
affecting the property such that the strict application of the provisions of
this Chapter would deprive the subdivider of the reasonable use of their land.
   B.   That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety and welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in
which property is situated.
   C.   That the variance is to correct inequities resulting from an unusual
physical hardship such as topography. Hardships relating to economic
difficulties shall not be considered for the purpose of granting a variance.
   D.   That the hardship is not a result of an action or actions by the owner,
subdivider or any agent thereof.
Subd. 2.    Requests For Variance Or Appeal. Requests for a variance or appeal
shall be filed with the City Administrator on an official application form.
Such application shall be accompanied by a fee as set out in section
1002.12 of this chapter. Such application shall also be accompanied by four (4)
copies of detailed written and graphic materials including one plan no larger
than eleven inches by seventeen inches (11" x 17") necessary for the
explanation of the request.
Subd. 3.   Planning Commission Procedures.
   A.   Upon receiving said application, the City Clerk shall refer the
application, along with all related information, to the Planning Commission for
a report and recommendation to the City Council as outlined in 1002.15 of this
Chapter.
   B.   The Planning Commission shall consider the variance at its next regular
meeting unless the filing date falls within fifteen (15) days of said meeting,
in which case, the requests would be placed on the agenda and considered at the
regular meeting following the next regular meeting. The City Administrator
shall refer said application, along with all related information, to the
Planning Commission for consideration and a report and recommendation to the
City Council.
   C.   The variance application shall be referred to the City staff for a
report and recommendation to be presented to the Planning Commission.
   D.   The Planning Commission and City Staff shall have the authority to
request additional information from the subdivider concerning the variance or
to retain expert testimony at the expense of the subdivider concerning said
variance where said information is declared necessary to ensure preservation of
health, safety and general welfare of the city.
   E.   The City Administrator shall set a date for a public hearing. Notice of
such hearing shall be published in the official newspaper at least ten (10)
days prior to said hearing, and individual notices shall be mailed not less
than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days prior to the hearing to all
owners of property within three hundred fifty feet (350) of the parcel included
in the request.
   F.   Failure of a property owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate
any such proceedings as set forth within this Chapter.
   G.   The subdivider or a representative thereof shall appear before the
Planning Commission in order to answer questions concerning the proposed
variance request.
   H.    The Planning Commission shall make a finding of fact and recommend
such actions or conditions relating to the request as they deem necessary to
carry out the intent and purpose of this Chapter.
Subd. 4.   City Council Procedures.
   A.       The City Council shall not grant a variance until they have
received a report and recommendation from the Planning Commission and the City
staff or until thirty (30) days after the first regular Planning Commission
meeting at which the request was considered.
   B.   Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission
and City staff, the City Council shall place the report and recommendation on
the agenda for the next regular meeting. Such reports and recommendations shall
be entered in and made part of the permanent written record of the City Council
meeting.
   C.    Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning
Commission and City staff, the City Council shall make a recorded finding of
fact and impose any conditions it considers necessary to protect the public
health, safety and welfare of the city.
   D.   The City Council shall decide whether to approve or deny a request for
a variance or an appeal within thirty (30) days after the public hearing on
said request.
Subd. 5.   Grant Of Variance Or Appeal. A variance of this Chapter or grant of
an appeal shall be by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the full City Council.
1002.13 ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISIONS
Subd. 1.   Qualification.   This section shall apply to the following
applications: 
   A.   In the case of a request to divide a portion of a lot where the
division is to permit the adding of a parcel of land to an abutting lot so that
no additional lots are created and both new lots conform to Zoning Ordinance
lot size minimum standards.
   B.   In the case of a request to combine two (2) existing platted lots.
   C.   In the case of a request to divide a lot from a larger tract of land
and thereby creating no more than two (2) lots. To qualify, the parcel of land
shall not have been part of a subdivision within the last five (5) years.
   D.   In the case of a request to divide a base lot which is a part of a
recorded plat upon which has been constructed a two-family dwelling, townhouse
or quadraminium, where the division is to permit individual private ownership
of a single dwelling unit within such a structure, and the newly created
property lines will not cause any of the unit lots or the structure to be in
violation of the Zoning Ordinance or the state building code.
Subd. 2.   Content and Data Requirement.
   A.   Certificate Of Survey: The requested administrative subdivision shall
be prepared by a registered land surveyor in the form of a certificate of
survey.
   B.   Property Description And Submission Information: The data and
supportive information detailing the proposed administrative subdivision shall
be the same as required for a preliminary plat as described in section 1002.15
Subd. 2 of this Chapter. Exceptions, as stipulated in writing, may be granted
by the city administrator.
Subd. 3.   Design Standards.
The administrative subdivision shall conform to all design standards as
specified in this Chapter. Any proposed deviation from said standards shall
require the processing of a variance request.
Subd. 4.   Processing.
   A.   If the land division involves property which has been previously
platted, or the total property area involved is greater than ten (10) acres,
the City Administrator shall have the authority to approve the subdivision;
provided, that it complies with applicable provisions of this Chapter.
   B.   In the case of applications involving property not previously platted,
and less than ten (10) acres in total area, the subdivision platting procedures
of Section
1002.14 of this Chapter shall be followed.
1002.14 SUBDIVISION PLATTING PROCEDURES
Subd. 1.   Sketch Plan.  In order to ensure that all subdividers are informed
of the procedural requirements and minimum standards of this Chapter and the
requirements or limitations imposed by other City Code provisions or plans,
prior to the development of a preliminary plat, all subdividers shall present a
sketch plan to the City Administrator prior to filing a preliminary plat. The
City Administrator may refer said sketch plan to City staff, the Planning
Commission and/or the City Council for review or comments.
Subd. 2.   Preliminary Plat.
   A.   Filing:
      (1)   The subdivider shall prepare and file a plat which is in conformity
with the requirements of this Chapter. The subdivider must demonstrate to the
City ownership of the land in question or show the legal and written power to
file a preliminary plat application for the land in question.
      (2)   The subdivider also shall complete an official City application
form as may be required, and shall submit any additional information, plans or
studies as are required by this Chapter, and shall furnish the City
Administrator with ten (10) copies of the plat and one reduced copy of the plat
no larger than eleven inches by seventeen inches (11" x 17").
      (3)   The subdivider shall submit a list of property owners located
within three hundred fifty feet (350') of the subject property. The records of
the County recorder shall be deemed sufficient for determining the location and
ownership of all such properties.
      (4)   The subdivider shall submit any necessary applications and
information for variances from the provisions of this Chapter, as set out in
section
1002.10 of this Chapter, which may be heard during the review of the proposed
preliminary plat.
      (5)   Prior to consideration of the proposed preliminary plat by the
City, the subdivider shall pay the required filing fee as set out in section
1002.10 of this Chapter.
      (6)   The plat shall be considered as being officially submitted when all
of the information requirements are complied with and the appropriate fees
paid.
      (7)   Whenever an application for a preliminary plat has been considered
and denied by the City Council, a similar application and proposal for a land
division affecting either a portion or all of the same property shall not be
considered again by the planning commission or City Council for at least one
year from the date of its denial, except as follows:
         (a)   Applications are withdrawn prior to the City Council taking
action on the matter.
         (b)   If the City Council determines that the circumstances
surrounding a previous application have changed significantly.
         (c)   If the City Council decides to reconsider such matter by a four-
fifths (4/5) vote of the entire City Council.
   B.   Hearing:
      (1)   Upon receipt of the completed application as outlined in subsection
(1) of this section, the City Administrator shall set a public hearing for
public review of the preliminary plat. The hearing shall be held after adequate
time has been allowed for staff and planning commission review of the plat, but
within forty-five (45) days of the completed filing of the application.
      (2)   Notice of the hearing shall consist of a legal property
description, description of request and shall be published in the official
newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Written notification of
the hearing shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to all owners of land
within three hundred fifty feet (350) of the boundary of the property in
question. Failure of any property owner to receive said notice shall not
invalidate the public hearing.
      (3)   The subdivider and/or their representative(s) shall appear at the
public hearing before the Planning Commission in order to answer questions
concerning the proposal.
   C.   Technical Assistance Reports: The City Administrator may instruct the
appropriate staff to prepare technical reports and provide general assistance
in preparing a recommendation on the action to the City Council. This may
include the City Planner, City Engineer, City Building Official, or the City
Attorney, among others.
   D.   Review By Other Jurisdictions: The City Administrator shall refer
copies of the preliminary plat to county, state or other public jurisdictions
for their review and comment, where appropriate and when required.
   E.   Planning Commission Action: The Planning Commission shall report its
findings and make its recommendation to the City Council no later than sixty
(60) days after the close of public hearing described in subsection (2) of this
section. If the Planning Commission has not acted upon the preliminary plat
within sixty (60) days following the close of public hearing on such and in
compliance with this Chapter, the City Council may act on the preliminary plat
without the Planning Commission's recommendation.
   F.      City Council Action:
      (1)   The City Council shall approve or disapprove the preliminary plat
within one hundred twenty (120) days following delivery of an application
completed in compliance with this Chapter unless an extension of the review
period has been agreed to by the subdivider.
      (2)   If the preliminary plat is approved, such approval shall not
constitute final acceptance of the layout. The City Council may impose such
conditions and restrictions as it deems appropriate or require such revisions
or modifications in the preliminary plat or final plat as it deems necessary to
protect the health, safety, comfort, general welfare and convenience of the
City. Subsequent approval will be required of the engineering proposals and
other features and requirements as specified by this Chapter to be indicated on
the final plat.
      (3)   The City Council reserves the right to decline approval of a
subdivision if due regard is not shown for the preservation of all natural
features, such as topography, trees, watercourses, scenic points, historical
spots and similar community assets, which, if preserved, will add
attractiveness and stability to the proposed development of the property.
      (4)   Following City Council approval of a preliminary plat, the
subdivider must submit a final plat to the city administrator within one
hundred (100) days of preliminary approval unless otherwise specified as part
of a development agreement. If this procedure is not followed, then approval of
the preliminary plat shall be considered void, unless a request for time
extension is submitted in writing and approved by the City Council.
      (5)   Should the subdivider desire to amend a preliminary plat as
approved, the subdivider may submit an amended preliminary plat. No public
hearing or fee will be required unless the amendment, in the opinion of the
City Council, is of such scope as to constitute a new preliminary plat.
      (6)   If the preliminary plat is not approved by the City Council, the
reasons for such action shall be recorded in the proceedings of the City
Council and shall be transmitted in writing to the subdivider within ten days
of the action.
Subd. 3.   Final Plat.
   A.   Filing:
      (1)   After the preliminary plat has been approved, the final plat shall
be submitted for review as set forth in this section. The City may agree to
review the preliminary and final plats simultaneously. The final plat shall
incorporate all changes, modifications and revisions required by the City.
Otherwise, it shall conform to the approved preliminary plat.
      (2)   Unless the following requirement is modified as part of a
development contract, the submission of a complete final plat application shall
be no later than one hundred (100) days after the date of approval of the
preliminary plat for distribution to the City Council and appropriate City
staff. Ten (10) copies of the final plat and one reduced copy, no larger than
eleven inches by seventeen inches (11" x 17"), shall be submitted to the City
Administrator for City review. Failure to timely submit a complete final plat
application shall result in the expiration of the preliminary plat approval.
      (3)   Prior to consideration of the proposed final plat by the City, the
subdivider shall pay the required filing fee as set out in section
1002.10 of this Chapter.
      (4)   The final plat shall be considered as being officially submitted
when all of the information requirements are complied with and the appropriate
fees paid.
   B.   Compliance With Provisions: All final plats shall comply with the
provisions of Minnesota state statutes and requirements of this Chapter.
   C.   Title Or Registered Certificate Required: A subdivider shall submit
with the final plat a current abstract of title or a registered property
certificate, along with any unrecorded documents, and an opinion of title.
   D.   Review Of Final Plat:
      (1)   Upon receipt of a final plat, the City Administrator shall refer
one copy each to the City Council, appropriate City staff, the County surveyor
and to all applicable government or public jurisdictions, and one copy, with
abstract of title or registered property certificate and opinion title, to the
City attorney.
      (2)   The City Council may refer the final plat to the Planning
Commission for recommendation if they feel the proposed final plat is
substantially different from the approved preliminary plat. The Planning
Commission shall submit a report thereon to the City Council within forty five
(45) days.
      (3)   The County surveyor shall review the final plat and notify the
subdivider's surveyor or final plat preparer of corrections that are to be made
to the final plat.
      (4)   Prior to approval of a final plat, the subdivider shall have
executed an agreement with the City controlling the installation of all
required improvements. Said agreement will require all improvements to comply
with approved engineering standards and applicable regulations.
      (5)   The City Council shall take action on a final plat not more than
sixty (60) days after the plat is filed with the City Administrator.
      (6)   Upon receiving an approved final plat in conformance with the
requirements of the county surveyor, representatives of the city shall sign the
plat, and the subdivider, as a condition of approval, shall record it with the
applicable County registrar of titles within one hundred twenty (120) days, or
the approved final plat shall be considered void. If recording is not
accomplished according to these procedures, the City may require another review
of the proposed subdivision according to this Chapter and State law.
       (7)   If the final plat is not approved, the reasons for such action
shall be recorded in the official proceedings of the City Council and shall be
transmitted in writing to the subdivider within ten (10) days of the action.
1002.15 PREMATURE SUBDIVISIONS
Subd. 1.   Qualification.  Any preliminary plat of a proposed subdivision
deemed premature for development shall be denied by the City Council.
Subd. 2.   Conditions Establishing Premature Subdivision.  A subdivision may be
deemed premature should any of the conditions set forth in the following
provisions exist:
   A.   Inconsistency With Comprehensive Plan: The proposed subdivision is
inconsistent with the purposes, objectives and recommendations of the duly
adopted comprehensive plan of Rockford, as may be amended.
   B.   Lack Of Adequate Drainage:
      (1)   A condition of inadequate drainage shall be deemed to exist if:
         (a)   Surface or subsurface water retention and runoff is such that it
constitutes a danger to the structural security of the proposed structures,
including streets, sidewalks and utilities.
         (b)   The proposed subdivision will cause pollution of water sources
or damage from erosion and siltation on downhill or downstream land.
         (c)   The proposed site grading and development will cause harmful and
irreparable damage from erosion and siltation on downstream land.
      (2)   Factors to be considered in making these determinations may
include:
         (a)   Average rainfall for the area;
         (b)   The relation of the land to floodplains;
         (c)   The nature of soils and sub-soils and their ability to
adequately support surface water runoff and waste disposal systems;
         (d)   The slope of the land and its effect on effluents; and
         (e)   The presence of streams as related to effluent disposal.
   C.   Lack Of Adequate Water Supply: A proposed subdivision shall be deemed
to lack an adequate water supply if the proposed subdivision does not have
adequate sources of water to serve the proposed subdivision if developed to its
maximum permissible density without causing an unreasonable depreciation of
existing water supplies for surrounding areas.
   D.   Lack Of Adequate Streets Or Highways To Serve Subdivision: A proposed
subdivision shall be deemed to lack adequate streets or highways to serve the
subdivision when:
      (1)   Roads which serve the proposed subdivision are of such a width,
grade, stability, vertical and horizontal alignment, site distance and surface
condition that an increase in traffic volume generated by the proposed
subdivision would create a hazard to public safety and general welfare, or
aggravate an already hazardous condition, and when, with due regard to the
advice of Hennepin or Wright County and/or the Minnesota department of
transportation, said roads are inadequate for the intended use; or
      (2)   The traffic volume generated by the proposed subdivision would
create unreasonable highway congestion or unsafe conditions on highways
existing at the time of the application or proposed for completion within the
next two (2) years.
   E.   Lack Of Adequate Waste Disposal Systems: A proposed subdivision shall
be deemed to lack adequate waste disposal systems if, in subdivisions for which
sewer lines are proposed, there is inadequate sewer capacity in the present
system to support the subdivision if developed to its maximum permissible
density indicated in the Rockford Comprehensive Plan, as may be amended.
   F.   Providing Public Improvements: If public improvements, such as
recreational facilities, streets and utilities, reasonably necessitated by the
subdivision, which must be provided at public expense, cannot be provided for
within the next two (2) fiscal years.
Subd. 3.   Burden of Establishing Premature Subdivision.  The burden shall be
upon the subdivider to show that the proposed subdivision is not premature.
1002.16 PLAT AND DATA REQUIREMENTS
Subd. 1.   Sketch Plan.  Sketch plans shall contain, at a minimum, the
following information:
   A.    Plat boundary.
   B.   North arrow.
   C.   Scale.
   D.   Street layout on and adjacent to plat. Where the subdivider owns
property adjacent to that which is being proposed for the subdivision or where
adjacent lands will be impacted by the proposed subdivision, it shall be
required that the subdivider submit a sketch plan for the adjacent property so
as to show the possible relationships between the proposed subdivision and
future, existing or potential adjacent subdivisions and land uses.
   E.   Designation of land use and current and proposed zoning.
   F.   Significant topographical or physical features.
   G.   General lot locations and layout.
   H.   Preliminary evaluation by the subdivider that the subdivision is not
classified as premature based upon criteria established in section
1002.16 Subd. 2 of this Chapter.
Subd. 2.   Preliminary Plat. The subdivider shall prepare and submit a
preliminary plat, together with any necessary supplementary information. The
preliminary plat shall contain the following information:
   A.   General Requirements:
      (1)   The proposed name of the subdivision; names shall not duplicate or
be alike in pronunciation to the name of any plat heretofore recorded in the
county.
      (2)   Location of boundary lines in relation to a known section, quarter
section or quarter-quarter section line comprising a legal description of the
property.
      (3)   Name, address and phone number of the record owner, any agent
having control of the land, the subdivider, land surveyor, engineer and
designer of the plan.
      (4)   Graphic scale not less than one inch to one hundred feet (1" =
100').
      (5)   North point and key map of the area showing well known geographical
points for orientation within a one-half (1/2) mile radius.
      (6)   Date of preparation.
   B.    Existing Conditions:
      (1)   Boundary line and total acreage of proposed plat, clearly
indicated.
      (2)   Existing zoning classifications for land in and abutting the
subdivision.
      (3)   Approximate total acreage.
      (4)   Location, right of way width and names of existing or platted
streets or other public ways, parks and other public lands, permanent buildings
and structures, easements and section, corporate and school district lines
within the plan, to a distance one hundred feet (100') beyond the plat.
      (5)   Location and size of existing sewers, water mains, culverts or
other underground facilities within the preliminary plat area and to a distance
of one hundred feet (100') beyond. Such data as grades and locations of catch
basins, manholes, hydrants and street pavement width and type shall also be
shown.
      (6)   Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided land within
one hundred feet (100'), identified by name and ownership, including all
contiguous land owned or controlled by the subdivider.
      (7)   Topographic data, including contours at vertical intervals of not
more than two feet (2') shown on a contour/topographic map. Watercourses,
marshes, wooded areas, rock outcrops, power transmission poles and lines, and
other significant features shall also be shown. USGS datum shall be used for
all topographic mapping where feasible.
      (8)   A statement certifying the environmental condition of the site,
including the presence of any "hazardous substance" as defined in Minnesota
statutes section 115B.02, subdivision 8. Such statement may be required to be
based upon an environmental assessment of the site by a qualified environmental
engineering firm which is acceptable to the city.
   C.    Proposed Design Features:
      (1)   Layout of proposed streets showing the right of way widths,
centerline gradients, typical cross sections, proposed road improvements,
including turning and passing lanes, traffic signals and medians, and proposed
names of streets.
      (2)   Locations and widths of proposed pedestrianways.
      (3)   Locations and size of proposed sewer lines and water mains.
      (4)   Gradients of proposed streets, sewer lines and water mains, as
requested. (Design work to be completed by the city engineer if a city
project.)
      (5)   Location, dimension and purpose of all easements.
      (6)   Layout, numbers, lot areas and preliminary dimensions of lots and
blocks.
      (7)   Minimum front and side street building setback lines.
      (8)   When lots are located on a curve, the width of the lot at the
building setback line.
      (9)   Areas, other than streets, pedestrianways, and utility easements,
intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use, including the size of such
area or areas in acres.
      (10)   Water mains shall be provided to serve the subdivision by
extension of the existing city water system. Service connections shall be
stubbed to the property line, and all necessary fire hydrants shall also be
provided. Extensions of the public water supply system shall be designed so as
to provide public water in accordance with the standards of the City.
      (11)   Sanitary sewer mains and service connections shall be installed in
accordance with the standards of the city.
      (12).    Grading plan which shall include the proposed grading and
drainage of the site. Also to be stipulated are the garage floor and basement
elevations of all structures.
      (13)   Provisions for surface water ponding, drainage and flood control.
      (14)   A storm water pollution control plan.
      (15)   A tree preservation plan.
   D.   Compliance With Provisions: The items listed in this section shall be
in conformance with all other applicable sections of this Chapter.
   E.   Platting Adjoining Lands: A preliminary plat shall contain the entire
tax parcel to be platted plus all of the owner's contiguous lands unless such
lands are subject to a planned unit development or the City Planner and City
Engineer agree to waive such requirement. The final plat may cover only a
portion of the preliminary plat, provided it is in conformance with the
approved preliminary plat, development contract and other requirements herein.
   F.   Supplementary Information: Any or all of the supplementary information
requirements set forth in this subsection shall be submitted when deemed
necessary by the City staff, advisory bodies and/or City Council:
      (1)   Proposed protective covenants or private restrictions.
      (2)   Statement of the proposed use of lots stating type of buildings
with number of proposed dwelling units or type of business or industry, so as
to reveal the effect of the development on traffic, fire hazards, and
congestion of population. The city may require the subdivider to have formal
traffic or other studies performed to the city's satisfaction which show the
effect of the proposed development on traffic, fire hazards and congestion.
      (3)   If any zoning changes are contemplated, the proposed zoning plan
for the areas, including dimensions, shall be shown. Such proposed zoning plan
shall be for information only and shall not vest any rights in the subdivider.
      (4)   Where structures are to be placed on large or excessively deep lots
which are subject to potential replat, the preliminary plat shall indicate a
logical way in which the lots could possibly be resubdivided in the future.
      (5)   A plan for soil erosion and sediment control both during
construction and after development has been completed. The plan shall include
gradients of waterways, design of velocity and erosion control measures, design
of sediment control measures, and landscaping of the erosion and sediment
control system. Such plans are to be in accordance with the technical standards
and specifications of the soil conservation service, as provided by the
Hennepin or Wright County soil and water conservation district office.
      (6)   When the City has agreed to install improvements in a development,
the developer may be required to furnish a financial statement, satisfactory to
the City, indicating the developer's ability to develop the plat.
      (7)   An environmental assessment worksheet shall be submitted if the
City, Minnesota Environmental Quality Board or other groups or agencies
determine that one is required by law.
      (8)   Statements and supporting documentation and plans for zoning
approvals being sought for the subdivision.
      (9)   Such other information as may be required by City staff.
Subd. 3.   Final Plat.
   A.   The subdivider shall submit a final plat, together with any necessary
supplementary information. The final plat, prepared for recording purposes,
shall be prepared in accordance with provisions of Minnesota state statutes and
Hennepin or Wright County regulations, and such final plat shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   Name of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate or too closely
approximate the name of any existing plat heretofore recorded in the county.
      (2)   Location by section, township, range, county and state, and
including descriptive boundaries of the subdivision, based on an accurate
traverse, giving angular and linear dimensions.
      (3)   The location of monuments shall be shown and described on the final
plat. Locations of such monuments shall be shown in reference to existing
official monuments on the nearest established street lines, including true
angles and distances to such reference points or monuments.
      (4)   Location of lots, outlots, streets, public highways, and parks and
other features, with accurate dimensions in feet and decimals of feet, with the
length of radii and/or arcs of all curves, and with all other information
necessary to reproduce the plat on the ground shall be shown. Dimensions shall
be shown from all angle points of curve to lot lines.
      (5)   Lots shall be numbered clearly; blocks are to be numbered, with
numbers shown clearly in the center of the block.
      (6)   The exact locations, widths and names of all streets to be
dedicated.
      (7)   Location, purpose and width of all easements to be dedicated
including the exact locations, widths and names of all private drives.
      (8)   Name and address of surveyor preparing the lot.
      (9)   Scale of plat (the scale to be shown graphically on a bar scale),
date and north arrow.
      (10)   Statement dedicating all easements as follows: Easements for
installation and maintenance of utilities and drainage facilities and buffers
within easements are reserved over, under and along the strips marked "drainage
and utility easements".
      (11)   Statement dedicating all streets and other public areas not
previously dedicated as follows: Streets and other public areas shown on this
plat and not heretofore dedicated to public use are hereby so dedicated.
Subd. 4.   Certification Required.
   A.   Certification by registered surveyor in the form required by Section
505.03, Minnesota Statutes, as amended.
   B.   Execution of all owners of any interest in the land and holders of a
mortgage thereon of the certificates required by Section 505.03, Minnesota
Statutes, as amended, and which certificate shall include a dedication of the
utility easements and other public areas in such form as approved by the City
Council.
   C.   Space for certificates of approval and review to be filled in by the
signatures of the Mayor and City Administrator in the form:
For Approval of the City:
This plat of (name of plat) was approved and accepted by the City of Rockford,
Minnesota, at a regular meeting thereof held this         day of         , A.D.
20____.
CITY COUNCIL OF ROCKFORD, MINNESOTA
BY:                       Mayor
BY:                       City Administrator
 1002.17 DESIGN STANDARDS
Subd. 1.   Compliance with Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Ordinance.   A
proposed subdivision shall conform to the Rockford Comprehensive Plan and
related policies adopted by the City and to the provisions of the Rockford
Zoning Ordinance.
Subd. 2.   Minimum Design Requirements.   The design features set forth in this
chapter are minimum requirements. The City may impose additional or more
stringent requirements concerning lot size, streets and overall design as
deemed appropriate, considering the property being subdivided, based upon site
considerations and the Rockford Comprehensive Plan.
Subd. 3.   Land Requirements.
   A.   Land shall be suited to the purpose for which it is to be subdivided.
No plan shall be approved if the site is not suitable for the purposes proposed
by reason of potential flooding, topography, wetlands, or adverse soil or rock
formation.
   B.   Land subject to hazards to life, health or property shall not be
subdivided until all such hazards have been eliminated or unless adequate
safeguards against such hazards are provided by the subdivision plan.
   C.   Proposed subdivisions shall be coordinated with existing nearby
municipalities or neighborhoods so that the city, as a whole, may develop
efficiently and harmoniously.
Subd. 4.   Blocks.   Block length and width or acreage within bounding streets
shall be such as to accommodate the size of residential lots required in the
area by the Zoning Ordinance and to provide for convenient access, circulation
control and safety of street traffic. 
   A.   Block Length: In general, intersecting streets shall be provided at
such intervals so as to serve cross traffic adequately and to meet existing
streets. Where no existing plats control, the blocks in residential
subdivisions, other than those with lake frontage, shall not exceed one
thousand three hundred twenty feet (1,320') nor be less than six hundred feet
(600') in length, except where topography or other conditions justify a
departure from this maximum. In blocks longer than eight hundred feet (800'),
ten foot (10') wide pedestrian rights of way and/or easements through the block
may be required in locations deemed necessary for the public health,
convenience and necessity. Suitable surfacing and fencing shall be provided in
pedestrianways and shall be subject to city review.
   B.   Block Width: The width of the block shall normally be sufficient to
allow two (2) tiers of lots of minimum depth as required by the Zoning
Ordinance except adjoining a lake, stream, railroad or arterial street or where
one tier or lot is necessary because of topographic conditions. Blocks intended
for business or industrial use shall be of such width as to be considered most
suitable for his respective use, including adequate space for off street
parking, deliveries and loading. Such facilities shall be provided with safe
and convenient limited access to the street system.
Subd. 5.   Lots.
   A.   Area, Width And Depth: The minimum lot area, width and depth shall not
be less than that established by the Rockford Zoning Ordinance in effect at the
time of adoption of the final plat.
   B.   Side Lot Lines: Side lines of lots shall be at right angles to street
lines, radial to curved street lines, or radial to lake or stream shores unless
topographic conditions necessitate a different arrangement.
   C.   Building Sites: Each lot shall provide an adequate building site,
excluding drainage course and wetlands, and said building site shall be at
least one and one-half feet (1 1/2') above the street grade.
   D.   Butt Lots: Butt lots in any subdivision are to be discouraged. Where
such lots must be used to fit a particular type of design, they shall be
platted at least twenty feet (20') wider than the average width of interior
lots in the block.
   E.   Frontage On Public Street: Every lot must have the minimum frontage on
a city approved public street other than an alley, as required in the Zoning
Ordinance.
   F.   Setback Lines: Setback or building lines shall be shown on all lots and
shall not be less than the setback required by the Zoning Ordinance, as may be
amended.
   G.   Drainage courses, Ponding Areas, Channels: Lots abutting a drainage
course, ponding area, drainageway, or channel shall have additional depth and
width, as required under the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance to assure
building sites that are not subject to flooding. Lots abutting a pond or
watercourse shall contain adequate lot area which is capable of accommodating a
structure with its lowest opening (window or door) no less than two feet (2')
above the highest known water level, or no less than two feet (2') above the
100-year flood level, or two feet (2') above the emergency overflow elevation,
whichever is greater.
   H.   Lakeshore Frontage: Lots with lakeshore frontage shall be designed so
that the lot lines extended shall maintain the closest approximation to
riparian rights.
   I.   Natural Features: In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall be
shown for all natural features, such as tree growth, watercourses, historic
spots or similar conditions which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and
stability to the proposed development.
   J.   Lot Remnants: All remnants of lots below minimum size for the
respective zoning district in which they are located must be added to abutting
lots or lots immediately adjoining, separated only by a public right of way. In
those cases where parcels are separated by a public right of way, the lot
remnant shall be designated as an outlot. Lot remnants may be allowed if a plan
for future use is found acceptable by the City Council.
   K.   Political Boundaries: No singular lot shall extend over a political
boundary or school district line.
   L.   Double Frontage Lots: Double frontage, or lots with frontage on two (2)
parallel or nonintersecting streets, shall not be permitted except: where lots
back on arterial streets or highways, or where topographic or other conditions
render subdividing otherwise unreasonable.
   M.   Access to Arterial and Major Collector Streets: In the case where a
proposed plat is adjacent to an arterial or major collector street, there shall
be no direct vehicular access from individual lots to such streets. In the
platting of small tracts of land fronting on an arterial or major collector
street or where there is no other alternative, a temporary entrance may be
granted. As neighboring land becomes subdivided and more preferable access
arrangements become possible, such temporary access permits shall become void.
   N.   Outlots: The creation of outlots is to be discouraged. In such cases
where outlots are created or exist, this area shall not be utilized in
calculating minimums for buildable lot area requirements. Said outlots are also
prohibited from qualifying for building permits except for public uses and
private recreational uses accessory to allowable uses within the respective
zoning district and which are properties under common ownership. In those cases
where outlots are located within a shoreland overlay district, they shall
comply with the minimum shoreland overlay district requirements.
   O.   Irregular Shaped Lots: On single-family residential lots determined to
be irregular in shape (i.e., triangular), the developer shall demonstrate to
the city an ability to properly place principal buildings and accessory
structures upon the site which are compatible in size and character to the
surrounding area.
Subd. 6.   Streets:
   A.   Compliance With State And County Plans: Proposed streets shall conform
to state and county highway plans which have been prepared, adopted and/or
filed as prescribed by law.
   B.   Topography: Streets shall be logically related to the topography so as
to produce usable lots and reasonable grades.
   C.   Required Access: Access shall be given to all lots and portions of the
tract in a subdivision and to adjacent unsubdivided parcels, unless the
topography clearly indicates that such connection is not feasible. Reserved
strips and landlocked areas shall not be created.
   D.   Adjacent Street Connection: The arrangement of streets in new
subdivisions shall make provision for the appropriate continuation of existing
streets in adjoining areas.
   E.   Connection To Adjoining Areas: Where adjoining areas are not subdivided
but may be subdivided, the arrangement of streets in a new subdivision shall
make provision for the proper projection of streets into adjoining areas by
carrying the new streets to the boundaries of the new subdivision at
appropriate locations. A temporary turnaround facility may be required at the
closed end, in conformance with cul-de-sac requirements. The street design
shall not be such as to cause hardship to owners of adjoining property in
platting their own land and providing convenient access to it.
   F.   Second Access Required: A residential plat within which single or
multiple roadways are to be continued in the future as subsequent development
phases are implemented shall not create dead end access situations limited by a
single location for ingress and egress to major collector or arterial roadways.
      (a)    No more than twenty five (25) units on local streets and no more
than fifty (50) units on minor collector streets may be developed within a
single plat without providing a second street access into/out of the
subdivision. The developer shall be limited by the issuance of building permits
as regulated by the City Building Official.
      (b)    Upon issuance of the twenty fifth building permit within a plat,
the developer shall be required to construct a secondary access street. No
other building permits will be issued within current or future phases of the
plat until the secondary access road is in place. The limitation on building
permits shall not prevent the developer or landowner from planning or platting
land unrelated to the affected plat and located in other portions of the city.
      (c)    Under this subsection, all streets to provide either the primary
or secondary access shall be constructed to city standards and paved with
asphalt. The required secondary access street shall coincide with the approved
plan for permanent street location.
      (d)    In no case shall an abutting landowner be allowed to plat new
residential lots adjacent to a plat whereby the addition of lots would increase
the number of units located on a dead end street or intensify the negative
effects upon adjoining, established neighborhoods. Adjacent development by
adjoining landowners shall be permitted if the plat provides for the second
access required herein.
      (e)    Without the provision of adequate vehicular access, the remaining
portions or phases of the subdivision may be deemed premature according to
1002.16 of this Chapter.
   G.   Relation Of Streets To Proposed Uses: Local streets shall be laid out
to discourage their use by through traffic. The arrangement of arterial and
collector streets shall be considered in their relation to the reasonable
circulation of traffic, to topographic conditions, to runoff of storm water, to
public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the
proposed uses of the area to be served.
   H.   Resubdivision Of Large Lots And Parcels: When a tract is subdivided
into larger than normal building lots or parcels, such lots or parcels shall be
so arranged as to permit the logical location and openings of future streets
and appropriate resubdivision, with provision for adequate utility connections
for such resubdivision.
   I.   Half Or Partial Streets Rights-of-way:
      (a)    Prohibited Generally: Half or partial streets will not be
permitted except where essential to reasonable subdivision of a tract in
conformance with the other requirements and standards of this Chapter and
where, in addition, satisfactory assurance for dedication of the remaining part
of the street can be secured.
      (b)    Completion Of Existing Partial Streets: Wherever a tract to be
subdivided adjoins an existing half or partial street, the part of the street
within such tract shall be platted.
    J.    Private Streets Prohibited: Private streets and reserve strips,
except in the case of planned unit developments, shall be prohibited, and no
public improvements shall be approved for any private street. All streets shall
be dedicated for public use. If any person applies to subdivide or replat any
land or parcels adjoining an existing private street, the private street shall
be required to be dedicated for public use and scheduled for improvement to
public street standards at the time of final plat.
   K.   Plats Abutting Arterial Streets Or Railroad Rights Of Way: Where a
subdivision abuts or contains an existing or planned major arterial street or a
railroad right-of-way, a street approximately parallel to and on each side of
such arterial and right of way may be required for adequate protection of
residential properties and separation of through and local traffic. Such
service streets shall be located at a distance from the major arterial or
railroad right of way suitable for appropriate use of the intervening land, as
for park purposes in residential districts, or for commercial and industrial
purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with
due regard to the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.
   L.   Street Improvements: Whenever a proposed subdivision and accompanying
development is expected to generate additional traffic on streets within the
City, the subdivider shall construct at their expense or provide surety for
future construction of street improvements reasonably necessary to offset the
impacts the additional traffic is expected to have on traffic flow on streets
within the City.
   M.   Dead End Streets Prohibited: Dead end streets shall be prohibited
except as stubs to permit future street extension into adjoining tracts with
possible temporary cul-de-sacs, as determined by the City, or when designed as
cul-de-sac streets.
   N.   Permanent Cul-De-Sacs:
      (1)   Criteria For Construction: Permanent cul-de-sacs shall be allowed
only where one or more of the following criteria have been met:
         (a)   Physical site conditions warrant a cul-de-sac.
         (b)   A through street is not physically feasible or desirable due to
environmental considerations.
      (2)   Requirements: Cul-de-sac streets, permanently designed as such,
shall not exceed five hundred feet (500) in length, including a terminal
turnaround which shall be provided at the closed end, with a right of way
radius of not less than ninety feet (90). The length shall be measured along
the centerline from the nearest intersection to the center point of the cul-de-
sac.
   O.   Temporary Cul-De-Sacs: Where a temporary cul-de-sac is required, the
turnaround right of way shall be placed adjacent to a plat boundary line and a
right of way of the same width as the street shall be carried to said property
line in such a way as to permit future extension of the street into the
adjoining tract. A sign as specified by the City Standard Detail Plates shall
be posted at the terminus of the temporary cul-de-sac providing notice that a
future street extension is planned. At such time a such a street is extended,
the acreage coverage by the turnaround outside the boundaries of the extended
street shall revert in ownership to the property owner fronting on the
temporary turnaround.
   P.   Street Names:   Names of new streets shall not duplicate existing or
platted street names, unless a new street is a continuation of or in alignment
with the existing or platted street. In that event, it shall bear the same name
of the existing or platted street. Street names shall conform to the City's
street naming and property numbering system as applicable. 
   Q.   Sidewalks. All local residential through streets shall have a sidewalk
on one side of the public right-of-way as determined by the City Engineer. All
city sidewalks shall have a minimum width of five (5) feet when setback not
less than five feet from the back of curb or six and one-half (6.5) feet when
at the back of curb. The subdivider shall be responsible for the payment of the
cost of sidewalks.
Subd. 7.    Street Design.  For all public streets hereafter dedicated and
accepted, the minimum right-of-way widths for streets shall not be less than
the minimum dimensions for each classification as follows:
   A.   Dedication Required. Where any proposed subdivision abuts a public
street, right-of-way dedication from centerline of a public street shall be
provided in compliance the Rockford Transportation Plan and this Chapter.
Right-of-way dedication for county roads and state highways shall be subject to
the requirements of the respective government jurisdiction.
   B.   Street Dimension Standards: The right-of-way, pavement width, minimum
and maximum grades and minimum axle load for City streets shall be provided in
accordance with the Rockford Standard Detail Plates or otherwise recommended by
the City Engineer and approved by the City Council
   C.   Where the existing or anticipated traffic on major collector and minor
or principal arterial roadways warrants greater widths of right-of-way, these
shall be required. Right-of-way widths for principal arterials shall also meet
standards established by the Minnesota State Highway Department to facilitate
inclusion in a State Aid funded street system.
   D.   Local street access to existing arterial and major collector streets
shall not be permitted at intervals of less than six hundred sixty (660) feet.
Subd. 8.   Water and Sewer Systems.
   A.   Water Supply:
      (1)   Extensions of the public water supply system, when available, shall
be designed so as to provide public water service to each lot.
      (2)   For any lots within a plat graded to a first floor elevation of
1025.0 feet or above, the developer shall provide for installation at their
expense an individual water pressure booster pump with a reservoir tank in all
dwelling units within the plat, unless the City has entered into a contract to
construct a water booster station or some other water pressure boosting
mechanism that will specifically serve such dwelling units prior to the
issuance of the final occupancy permit. Said water pressure booster system to
be installed by the developer shall be of a type which meets the approval of
the City Public Works Director. A bypass of the system shall be included in the
plumbing configuration to allow water to be supplied (at lower pressure) to the
home while the booster is being repaired. Prior to the sale of any lot with a
first floor elevation of 1025.0 or above, the developer shall notify the
prospective purchaser of the necessity of a water booster for said lot, and
shall inform the prospective buyer that the developer will install the water
booster and reservoir tank at the developer’s expense unless the City has
already contracted for a municipal improvement to increase the pressure. Once
installed, the homeowner shall be responsible for the maintenance and eventual
replacement of the booster pump system installed within the dwelling. The City
will not own or maintain these individual systems.
      (3)   For any lots within a plat graded to a first floor elevation
between 990.0 and 1004.0 feet, a disclosure of the purchaser must be made as
follows:
“The City’s static water pressure at your home, while adequate by Department of
Health Standards, may not satisfy all of your expectations for service. You may
wish to consider the installation of an in-home water pressure boosting pump
with a reservoir tank to better meet your expectations. The installation and
maintenance of the water pressure boosting system would be at your cost. The
City does not own or maintain these systems.”
   B.   Sewage Disposal: Extension of the public sanitary sewer system, when
available, shall be designed so as to provide public sewer service to each lot.
Subd. 9.   Drainage System:
   A.   A complete and adequate drainage system design shall be required for
the subdivision and may include a storm sewer system or system of open ditches,
culverts, pipes, catch basins and ponding areas, or a combination thereof.
   B.   Drainage system utilities shall be provided for in accordance with the
Rockford Stormwater Policy and constructed in accordance with standards
established by the Rockford Standard Detail Plates or as otherwise specified by
the City Engineer.
   C.   The easement limits of open ditch ponding areas, wetlands and wetland
buffers shall be delineated as reasonably practical at all common lot lines and
angle points in the easements with markers consistent with the Rockford
Standard Detail Plates. The cost of preparing and installing such markers shall
be borne by the subdivider and the markers shall be installed prior to the sale
of lots and construction of any buildings or structures.
Subd. 10.   Easements:
   A.   Drainage and Utility Easements:
      (1)   Easements for drainage and utilities of at least ten feet (10')
wide shall be provided on all lot lines. In the case of side or rear lot lines,
these may be centered on the lot line.
      (2)   Utility easements shall connect with easements established in
adjoining properties. These easements, when approved, shall not thereafter be
changed without the approval of the City Council after a public hearing.
      (3)   Drainage and utility easements shall be provided along each side of
the centerline of any watercourse or drainage channel, whether or not shown on
the comprehensive plan, to a sufficient width to provide proper maintenance and
protection, to provide for storm water runoff and to provide for installation
and maintenance of storm sewers.
      (4)   Drainage and utility easements shall be provided to encompass all
wetlands, required wetland buffers and stormwater ponds to the high water
level.
   B.   Dedication of Easements: All easements shall be dedicated for the
required use and shall be shown on the final plat.
Subd. 11.   Erosion and Sediment Control. The following guidelines shall be
applied in the subdivision:
   A.   The development shall conform to the natural limitations presented by
topography and soil so as to create the least potential for soil erosion;
   B.   Land shall be developed in increments of workable size such that
adequate erosion and siltation controls can be provided as construction
progresses. Appropriate control measures shall be installed prior to
development when necessary to control erosion. The smallest practical area of
land shall be exposed at any one period of time;
   C.   When soil is exposed, the exposure shall be for the shortest feasible
period of time, as specified in the development agreements;
   D.   Where the topsoil is removed, sufficient arable soil shall be set aside
for re-spreading over the areas to be planted. The soil shall be restored to a
minimum depth of four inches (4") or a depth as may be established by the City
Engineer and shall be of a quality at least equal to the soil quality prior to
development;
   E.   Natural vegetation shall be protected wherever possible;
   F.   As determined by the City Engineer, runoff water shall be diverted to a
sedimentation basin before allowed to enter the natural drainage system. Storm
water runoff from the developed site shall not, at any time, exceed the runoff
rate existing prior to development except as may be approved by the City
Council.
Subd. 12.   Protected Areas.
   A.   Where land proposed for subdivision is deemed environmentally sensitive
by the city due to the existence of wetlands, drainageways, watercourses,
floodable areas or steep slopes or wooded areas, the design of said subdivision
shall clearly reflect all necessary measures of protection to ensure against
adverse environmental impact.
   B.   Based upon the necessity to control and maintain certain sensitive
areas, the city shall determine whether said protection will be accomplished
through lot enlargement and redesign or dedication of those sensitive areas in
the form of outlots.
   C.   In general, measures of protection shall include design solutions which
allow for construction and grading involving a minimum of alteration to
sensitive areas. Such measures, when deemed appropriate by the city, may
include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   The establishment of easements and/or outlots over wetlands,
wetland buffers, drainageways, and watercourses.
      (2)   The implementation of flood control measures.
      (3)   The enlargement of lots or redesign of the subdivision.
      (4)   The submission of a tree preservation plan subject to the review of
the planning commission and approval of the City Council.
      (5)   The utilization of appropriate erosion control measures subject to
approval by the city engineer.
      (6)   Soil testing to determine the ability of the proposed subdivision
to support development.
      (7)   The limitation of development on natural or manmade slopes over
eighteen percent (18%).
      (8)   Structure conformance to the natural limitations presented by the
topography and soil so as to create the least potential of soil erosion.
Subd. 13.   Floodplain. All developments in flood hazard areas shall include:
   A.   Construction and modification of sewage, water supply and drainage
facilities to meet the standards of this Chapter and to promote the health,
safety and general welfare.
   B.   Construction of channel modifications, dikes, levees and other
protective measures to include filling in.
   C.   Establishment of flood warning systems. The limits of the areas which
have been or would be inundated by the 100-year flood shall be delineated as
reasonably practical at three hundred foot (300') intervals by means of firmly
placed markers of sufficient size to be easily read from a distance of twenty
feet (20'). The markers shall record the maximum known depth of flooding or
height to the flood protection level, whichever is greater. All flood warning
signs in flood-prone areas shall be in accordance with the above requirements
or any other additional requirements as provided by the use of the 100-year
flood profile and other supporting technical data in the Flood Insurance Study
and the Flood Insurance Rate Map. The subdivision markers shall meet the
following specifications:
      (1)   The markers shall be on substantial permanent metal posts.
      (2)   The marker(s) shall have notification painted white and shall be
stenciled or otherwise lettered with the inscription "100-year flood
elevation". This lettering is to be of a permanent nature.
      (3)   The marker be firmly placed in the ground and be at least two feet
(2') above the ground.
      (4)   The cost of preparing and installing such markers shall be borne by
the subdivider and the markers shall be installed prior to the sale of lots and
construction of any buildings or structures.
   D.   Imposition of operational controls, sureties and deed restrictions
enforceable by the City to restrict the type and design of uses. Such
restrictions shall include floodproofing of intended uses mandated by the
Minnesota State Building Code. Structurally dry floodproofing standards for
construction shall be in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code.
Subd. 14.   Tree Preservation.  A tree preservation plan shall be submitted to
and approved by the City and implemented for all subdivisions containing four
(4) or more lots.
   A.   Subdividers shall:
      (1)   Submit a tree preservation plan superimposed on the grading plan.
      (2)   Ensure the tree preservation plan is followed during the plan
development.
      (3)   Submit a five hundred dollar ($500.00) security for each lot having
at least one significant tree for tree preservation requirements. The security
will be included in the development contract.
   B.   The tree preservation plan must be certified by a forester or landscape
architect and must include the following information:
      (1)   The name(s), telephone number(s), and address(es) of subdividers,
property owners, developers and/or builders.
      (2)   Delineation of all areas to be graded and limits of proposed land
disturbance including those areas on lots where homes and other structures area
anticipated.
      (3)   Size, species, and location of all significant trees. These
significant trees should be identified in both graphic and tabular form.
      (4)   Identification in graphic and tabular form of all significant trees
proposed to be saved and to be removed.
      (5)   Identification of all diseased or hazardous trees.
      (6)   Tree protection methods, including those listed in Section
1002.10, Subd. 6 (9) of this Chapter.
   C.   During preliminary plat review, the tree preservation plan will be
reviewed to determine the best available layout to preserve significant trees
and the efforts of the subdivider to mitigate damage to significant trees. If
two (2) or more significant trees are preserved in the front yard of each lot,
the landscape plan requirement of two (2) two-inch caliper trees is waived in
accordance with Section
1001.09 Subd. 3 A.2.
   D.   No significant trees shall be removed until a tree preservation plan is
approved and except in accordance with the approved tree preservation plan. If
a significant tree indicated to be saved on the tree preservation plan is
destroyed or damaged so that it is in a state of decline one (1) year from the
date of project closure, the subdivider shall mitigate tree loss by
reforestation of appropriate areas within the development area in accordance
with the following replacement schedule.
   E.   For each significant tree removed that was indicated to be saved, two
(2) deciduous trees with a minimum of two and one-half (2.5) inch caliper or
two (2) coniferous trees with a height of not less than six (6) feet must be
planted. Species of replacement trees shall be subject to City review and
approval. The planting of trees for mitigation shall be in addition to any
other landscape requirements.
   F.   Prior to grading, all diseased and hazardous trees on the subject
property shall be removed from the property.
   G.   After grading for streets, house pads, or any other purpose has been
completed and streets and utilities are installed, the forester or landscape
architect shall certify in writing to the City whether required tree protection
measures were installed, the status of all trees indicated to be saved in the
approved plan, and the status of any trees designated to be removed that were
saved. Measures proposed to protect significant trees shall include, but are
not limited to:
      (1)   Installation of snow fencing or polyethylene laminar safety netting
at the drip line before any grading or construction begins and remaining in
place until all grading and construction is terminated.
      (2)   No grade change, construction activity, or storage of fill,
materials, or equipment shall occur within the fenced area.
      (3)   Installation of erosion control measures is required.
      (4)   Prevention of change in soil chemistry due to concrete washout and
leakage or spillage of toxic materials such as fuels or paints is required.
      (5)   Pruning of oak trees must not take place from April 15 through July
1. If wounding of oak trees occurs, a nontoxic tree wound sealant must be
applied immediately.
   H.   The subdivider shall provide a financial guarantee as part of the
development contract to guarantee replacement of all significant trees which
were to have been saved but were actually destroyed or damaged. The financial
security of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each lot with at least one
significant tree shall be provided as part of the development contract to
ensure tree protection.
   I.   The financial security may be released upon certification in writing by
the forester or landscape architect indicating the tree protection measurers
were implemented and tree replacement completed, if necessary, but in no event
shall the financial security be released earlier than one (1) year after the
date of the project closure.
Subd. 15.   Parks and Trails.
   A.   Land for parks and trails shall be acquired, planned and developed
according to the park and trail classification guidelines contained in the
Comprehensive Plan, which specifies the appropriate sizes, locations,
   B.   Dedication Requirements.
      (1)   Subdividers shall be required to dedicate to the city for park,
trail and public open space purposes the following minimum amounts of land or
cash, improvements or a combination thereof, which the City shall require at
its option. The required dedication shall be made prior to the City's release
of the final plat for filing. The amount of any required cash contribution
shall be calculated based upon rates established by the City and in effect as
of the date of the release of the final plat for filing.
      (2)   Land to be dedicated for public use shall be reasonably suitable
for its intended use as determined by the City and shall be at a location
convenient to the public to be served. Factors used in evaluating the adequacy
of proposed park and recreation areas shall include size, shape, topography,
geology, hydrology, vegetation, access and location.
      (3)   The subdivider shall consult with the Park and Recreation
Commission, at the time the preliminary plat is under consideration, to secure
their recommendation as to the location of any property that should be
dedicated to the public, such as parks, trails, open space or other public
property. The preliminary plat shall show the location, area, and dimensions of
all areas to be dedicated in this manner. Such contribution requirement
recommendation(s) will be sent to the City Council for their approval.
      (4)   When a proposed park, trail or sidewalk located outside of a street
right of way, park, or other public property has been indicated in the
Comprehensive Plan and is located in whole or in part within a proposed plat,
it shall be dedicated to the City. If the subdivider elects not to dedicate an
area in excess of the land required hereunder for a proposed public site that
the city feels is in the public interest to acquire, the City may consider
acquiring the excess land through purchase or condemnation.
      (5)   Land area conveyed or dedicated to the city shall not be used in
calculating density requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and shall be in
addition to and not in lieu of open space requirements for planned unit
developments.
      (6)   Where private open space for park, trail, open space or other
recreation purposes is provided in a proposed subdivision and such space is to
be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the subdivision,
such areas may be used for credit at the discretion of the City Council against
the requirement of dedication for purposes described in this Chapter, provided
the City Council finds it is in the public interest to do so and that the
following standards are met:
         (a)   That yards, court areas, setbacks and other open space required
to be maintained by the zoning and building regulations shall not be included
in the computation of such private open space; and
         (b)   That the private ownership and maintenance of the open space is
adequately provided for by written agreement; and
         (c)   That the private open space is restricted for park, playground,
trail, open space or recreational purposes by recorded covenants which run with
the land in favor of the future owners of property within the tract and which
cannot be eliminated without the consent of the City Council; and
         (d)   That the proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for
use for such purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape,
topography, vegetation, geology, access and location of the private open space
land; and
         (e)   That facilities proposed for such purposes are in substantial
accordance with the provisions of the recreational element of the Comprehensive
Plan and are approved by the City Council; and
         (f)   That where such credit is granted, the amount of credit shall
not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the amount of dedication as calculated
herein.
      (7)   The City, upon consideration of the particular type of development,
may require larger or lesser parcels of land to be dedicated if the city
determines that present or future residents would require greater or lesser
land for park, trail and open space purposes. In addition, the City Council may
also require lots within the subdivision be held in escrow for future sale or
development. The monies derived from the sale of escrowed lots will be used to
develop facilities or to purchase park land in the future. 
      (8)   If the subdivider is unable to make a commitment to the City as to
the type of building that will be constructed on lots in the proposed plat,
then the land and cash contribution requirement will be a reasonable amount as
determined by the City Council.
      (9)   Wetlands, ponding areas, floodplains and drainageways accepted by
the City shall not be considered as satisfying the park and dedication
requirements established by this Section.
      (10)   Residential Dedications:
         (a)   Land Dedication: Land shall be dedicated pursuant to the
following schedule wherein density is calculated by considering the total net
acreage (minus wetlands, floodplains and arterial or major collector street
rights-of-way) of the entire plat, subdivision or development being considered:
 
Net Density:        Land Dedication Percentage
Units Per Acre
0.00>5.00 du/ac.    12%
5.01>9.00 du/ac.    14%
9.00 du/ac or more. 18%
 
         (b)   Cash Contribution In Lieu Of Land Dedication: A cash
contribution in lieu of land dedication may be required at the discretion of
the City Council pursuant to Section
1002.10 of this Chapter.
      (11)   Commercial, Industrial And Public/Institutional Dedications:
         (1)   Land Dedication: Land dedication, if required, shall be ten
percent (10%) of a commercial, industrial or public/institutional (except
schools and public recreational facilities) subdivision or development.
         (2)   Cash Contribution In Lieu Of Land Dedication: A cash
contribution in lieu of land dedication may be required at the discretion f the
City Council pursuant to Section
1002.10 of this Chapter.
      (12)   Combination Land And Cash Dedication: The City Council may at its
discretion require the subdivider to make a combination cash and land
dedication pursuant to the following formula:
         (1)   The amount of land which could be required in accordance with
this section shall be calculated.
         (2)   From the total calculated in subsection (i) of this section, the
actual amount of land the city determines to be needed to fulfill the purposes
of this section shall be subtracted.
         (3)   The balance arrived at in subsection (ii) of this section shall
be converted into a cash contribution in lieu of land dedicated pursuant to
subsection (2) of this section.
   (13)   Combination Cash, Land and Development of Land for Park Use: The City
may elect at its discretion to receive a combination of cash, land and
development of improvements to the land for park use. In this case, the City
may reduce the amount of land to be dedicated or the cash contribution in lieu
of land dedication by an amount equivalent to the cost of the facilities
provided.
   (14)   Planned Unit Development: Planned unit developments with mixed land
uses shall make cash and/or land contributions in accordance with this section
based upon the percentage of land devoted to the various uses.
   (15)   Unplatted Lands: In the event the City waives the requirement that an
subdivider proposing to subdivide land plat the same, the City Council may
require the subdivider, as a condition of granting such waiver, to dedicate
parks (or pay cash in lieu thereof), trails, and open space in a manner
consistent with the provisions of this section.
   (16)   Divided Land with Same Number of Lots; Increase in Lot Number:
Property being divided with the same number of lots shall be exempt from all
park land dedication requirements. If the number of lots is increased or if
land outside the previously recorded plat is added, then the park land
dedication and/or park cash contributions shall be based on the additional lots
and on the additional land being added to the plat. If the additional land does
not create additional lots, then each one-third (1/3) acre added shall be
considered a new lot for purposes of calculating the dedication requirements.
   (17)   If the subdivider does not believe that the estimates contained in
this section fairly and accurately represent the effect of the subdivision on
the park or trail system of the City, the subdivider may request that the City
prepare in depth study of the effect of the subdivision on the park and trail
system and an estimate of that effect in money and/or land. All costs of such
study shall be borne by the subdivider. If the subdivider requests the
preparation of such a study, the request must be made at the time the
development application is submitted. No application for development that is
submitted shall be deemed complete until the requested study has been completed
and a determination is made as to the appropriate amount of land or money
necessary to offset the effects of the subdivision.
1002.18 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
Subd. 1   Monuments.  
   A.   Monuments shall be placed at all block and lot corners, angle points,
points of curves in streets and at intermediate points as shall be required by
the City and State Statute. Monuments shall be metal and shall be placed by a
Registered Engineer or Registered Land Surveyor. Monument placement shall meet
the current accepted standards of practice for surveying including the Wright
County Surveyor requirements.
   B.   All lot corners and survey control monuments shall be set and in place
at the time the plat is recorded. An exception to this requirement may be
granted for up to one (1) year by the City Council, provided such approval is
made part of the development contract and a financial guarantee in a form
determined by the City Attorney is provided.
   C.   Stakes showing the locations of easements shall be provided by the
subdivider upon request of the City. The stakes shall be wood laths and will be
used only to insure the proper location of utilities on the easements. The
stakes shall not be intended to be permanent survey monuments.
Subd. 2.   Streets.
   A.   Grading: Streets shall be graded in accordance with a plan approved by
the city engineer. The grading shall include the entire width of the right of
way and shall provide a boulevard section, in addition to the minimum pavement
width.
   B.   Pavement: The design of street pavement for all streets covered by this
section shall be in accordance with the Minnesota Department of Transportation
road design manual for flexible pavements, the City Standard Detail Plates or
as otherwise specified by the City Engineer.
   C.   Soil Tests: To determine sub-grade soil classifications, soil samples
shall be collected and analyzed by a reputable testing laboratory. Reports of
the soil analysis shall be submitted to the city engineer with the pavement
plans. Soil samples shall be taken along the centerline of the proposed road at
intervals not exceeding three hundred feet (300').
   D.   Curb And Gutter: Concrete curb and gutter shall be constructed on both
sides of all streets in accordance with the City Standard Detail Plates.
   E.   Boulevards: All boulevards shall have four inches (4") of topsoil
(black dirt) placed on them and then shall be seeded or sodded.
   F.   Sidewalks shall be concrete, a minimum of five (5) feet in width, and
shall be constructed in accordance with the City Standard Detail Plates.
Subd. 3.   Street Signs.   Street signs and all traffic management signs shall
be provided by and at the expense of the subdivider.
Subd. 4.   Street Lighting.  The minimum requirement for street lighting
facilities shall be one 2,500-lumen light, or equal, light standard as approved
by the City Engineer at each street intersection within or abutting the
subdivision.
Subd. 5.   Tree Planting.   Developers of all residential, commercial and
industrial property in the city shall be required to plant two (2) shade trees
and/or evergreen trees per lot or unit as defined in section
1001.07 of the Zoning Ordinance. This planting shall be in addition to other
landscaping, screening or buffering requirements. 
Subd. 6.   Water and Sewer Systems.
   A.   Installation and Connection to Public System: Water and sewer lines
shall be installed and connected to the public system to serve all lots within
the proposed subdivision under the provisions of applicable statutes and
ordinances. The City Council shall require the installation of water and sewer
mains, at the subdivider's expense or under the provisions of applicable
statutes and ordinances.
   B.   All utilities shall be constructed in accordance with standards
established by the City in the City Standard Detail Plates or as otherwise
specified by the City Engineer.
      (1)   Water Main: A minimum water main of eight inch (8") ductile iron
pipe, PVC C-900 pipe or other approved pipe shall be required. Mains over eight
inches (8") in size may be required, and the additional cost shall be allocated
pursuant to established City Council policies.
      (2)   Sanitary Sewer: Unless otherwise required, a sanitary sewer of
eight inch (8") pipe shall be installed as the minimum size, placed at grades
approved by the city engineer. Mains over eight inches (8") in size may be
required, and the additional cost shall be allocated pursuant to established
City Council policies. Service wyes shall be four inches (4") for residential
uses and a minimum of six inches (6”) for commercial and industrial uses.
      (3)   House Services: Each house service shall be run from the main to
the property line, where a cap or plug shall be placed until the service is
extended to the structure. A one inch (1") type K copper water service, or
approved equal; corporation cock, curb box and stop; and four inch (4") PVC
soil pipe, or approved equal, sewer service shall be the minimum requirements,
and they may be placed in a common trench in accordance with the City Standard
Detail Plates, Building Code and MPCA standards.
      (4)   Fire Hydrants: Installation shall be pursuant to plans approved by
the City Engineer, Public Works Director and Fire Chief and shall be located in
accordance with Insurance Service Office (ISO) standards. Hydrants shall be
placed at the end of all "dead ends", cul-de-sacs and at intersections. All
hydrants shall have wedge gate valves and shall be easily accessible to fire
fighting personnel and equipment. The single hydrant style shall be throughout
the distribution system and that type is shown on the City Standard Detail
Plates.
      (5)   As Built Plans: Reproducible as built drawings showing all
utilities and improvements shall be furnished to the City by the subdivider of
all required improvements. Such as built drawings shall be certified to be true
and accurate by the registered engineer responsible for the installation of the
improvements.
Subd. 7.   Stormwater Management. All surface and underground drainage systems
shall be installed to adequately remove all natural drainage that accumulates
on the developed property. All such systems shall provide a permanent solution
for the removal of drainage water and shall not drain or discharge more than
the predevelopment rate of runoff.
Subd. 8.   Utilities Location.   All utilities shall be placed underground
unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer. All underground work shall be
completed prior to street surfacing.
Subd. 9.   Inspections.  All required improvements shall be inspected by the
City Engineer during construction at the expense of the subdivider. 
Subd. 10.   Certificate of Occupancy. No certificate of occupancy shall be
issued by the City Building Official for any building in the subdivision prior
to all improvements outlined in the development contract having been installed.
Exceptions to this provision may be granted by the City Council at their
discretion as part of the development contract.
1002.19 IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS
Subd. 1.   Improvements Required.  Prior to the approval of a final plat by the
City Council, the subdivider shall have agreed, in the manner set forth in this
Chapter, to install the following improvements on the site at the subdivider's
expense, in conformity with approved construction plans and in conformity with
all applicable standards and ordinances:
   A.   Monuments: Monuments are to be installed for each lot as required by
Section
1002.19, Subd. 1 of this Chapter.
   B.   Grading: The full width of the right of way of each street dedicated in
the plat shall be graded as outlined in section
1002.19 Subd. 2 of this Chapter.
   C.   Pavement: All streets shall be improved with concrete or bituminous
surface in accordance with the City Standard Detail Plates.
   D.   Curb And Gutter: There shall be concrete curb and gutter installed
along both sides of all streets in accordance with the City Standard Detail
Plates.
   E.   Sidewalks. There shall be concrete curb and gutter installed along both
sides of all streets and alleys to the standards listed in section
1002.19 Subd. 2 of this Chapter.
   F.   Water Mains: In the case where water mains from a public water system
are available, the subdivider shall be required to install water mains in the
plat and connect the same to the public water system. The water house service
shall be installed in accordance with the City Standard Detail Plates.
   G.   Public Sanitary Sewer: In all cases where trunk line sanitary sewer
facilities are available, the subdivider shall be required to install sanitary
sewers in the plat and connect the same to the trunk line sewers. The sanitary
sewer house service shall be installed in accordance with the City Standard
Detail Plates.
   H.   Drainage Facilities: Such facilities and easements shall be installed
as will adequately provide for the drainage of surface waters and storm water
pollution control, and a storm sewer system may be required. Drainageway
easements or land dedication may be required when such easements or land is
needed, in the public interest, for purposes of floodplain management, proper
drainage, prevention of erosion, pedestrian access to water bodies, or other
public purpose. All surface water drainage must be approved by the Hennepin or
Wright County soil and water conservation district.
   I.   Miscellaneous Facilities: Tree planting, street name signs, traffic
control signs, oversized trunk lines, pedestrianways and other improvements may
be required to be furnished and installed by the subdivider. The subdivider
shall install four inches (4") of black dirt and a good quality sod in the
boulevard at the time of occupancy of the adjacent lot. During the construction
phase, if the utility lines (electric power, telephone, gas, and cable TV) are
placed prior to placing the curb, the subdivider shall place four inches (4")
of black dirt and adequate seed in the boulevard within thirty (30) days after
curb placement. If the curb is placed prior to placing the utility lines, the
subdivider shall place four inches (4") of black dirt and grass sod in the
boulevard within thirty (30) days after the utility lines are placed, or within
one year after the curb is placed, whichever occurs sooner. Placing of black
dirt and grass sod in the boulevard shall not relieve the subdivider from
placing black dirt and sod in the boulevard at the time of occupancy of the
adjacent lot.
   J.   Flooding: No final plat shall be approved by the City Council on land
subject to flooding or containing poor drainage facilities and on land which
would make adequate drainage of the streets and lots impossible. However, if
the subdivider agrees to make improvements which will, in the opinion of the
council, make the area suitable for use without interfering with the flow of
water under flood conditions, the final plat of the subdivision may be
approved.
Subd. 2.   Construction Plans and Inspection.
   A.   Construction plans for the required improvements conforming in all
respects with the standards and ordinances of the city shall be prepared, at
the subdivider's expense, by a professional engineer who is registered in the
State of Minnesota, and said plans shall contain their certificate or by the
City Engineer at the request of the subdivider. Such plans, together with the
quantities of construction items, shall be submitted to the City Engineer for
their approval and estimate of the total costs of the required improvements.
Upon approval, such plans shall become a part of the required contract.
   B.   The subdivider is required to submit the final plat in electronic
format. The electronic format shall be either AutoCAD.DWG file or a .DWG file.
All construction record drawings (e.g., grading, utilities, streets) shall be
in electronic format in accordance with standard City specifications. The
subdivider shall also submit one complete set of reproducible construction
plans on Mylar.
   C.   All required improvements on the site that are to be installed under
the provisions of this chapter shall be inspected during the course of
construction by the city engineer at the subdivider's expense, and acceptance
by the city shall be subject to the city engineer's certificate of compliance
with the contract.
Subd. 3.   Responsibility for Installation Costs.  The required improvements as
listed elsewhere are to be furnished and installed at the sole expense of the
subdivider. If any improvement installed within the subdivision will be of
substantial benefit to lands beyond the boundaries of the subdivision,
provision may, at the discretion of the City Council, be made for causing a
portion of the cost of the improvement, representing the benefit to such lands,
to be assessed against the same. In such a situation, the subdivider may be
required only to pay for such portion of the whole cost of said improvement as
will represent the benefit to the property within the subdivision. 
Subd. 4.   Agreement for Private Installation of Improvements.
   A.   Prior to the installation of any required improvements by the
subdivider and prior to approval of the plat, the subdivider shall enter into a
contract in writing with the City requiring the subdivider to furnish and
construct said improvements at subdivider's sole cost and in accordance with
City plans and specifications and usual contract conditions. This shall include
provision for supervision of details of construction by the City Engineer.
   B.   The agreement shall require the subdivider to make an escrow deposit or
furnish an irrevocable letter of credit or a certified check as is determined
by the City Attorney, City Engineer and City Administrator. The amount of the
deposit or security is to be based upon the City Engineer's estimate of the
total cost of the improvements to be furnished under the contract, including
the cost of inspection. The deposit or security shall equal one hundred percent
(110%) of the City Engineer's estimate.
   C.   The time for completion of the work and the several parts thereof shall
be determined by the City Council, upon recommendation of the City Engineer
after consultation with the subdivider. It shall be reasonable with relation to
the work to be done, the seasons of the year, and proper coordination with
construction activities in the plat and subdivision.
   D.   No subdivider shall be permitted to start work on any other
subdivision, without special approval of the City Council if the subdivider has
previously defaulted on work or commitments.
Subd. 5.    Agreement for Installation of Improvements by City.
   A.   A subdivider may request the City to install required street and
utility improvements subject to the following conditions and to the approval
and authorization thereof by the City Council and as authorized by State law.
   B.   If so approved by the City Council, a request for City installation of
required street and utility improvements include an escrow deposit or an
irrevocable letter of credit or a certified check as is determined by the City
Attorney, City Engineer and City Administrator. The amount of the deposit or
security is to be based upon the City Engineer's estimate of the total cost of
the improvements to be furnished under the contract, including the cost of
inspection. The deposit or security shall equal one hundred percent (110%) of
the City Engineer's estimate.
   C.   Improvements shall be constructed only in platted real estate.
   D.   No subdivider shall be allowed to start work on any other subdivision
improvements without compliance with this Section and approval of the City
Council.
Subd. 6.   Financial Guarantee.  The contract provided for in section
1002.20 Subd. 4 and Subd. 5 of this Chapter shall require the subdivider to
make an escrow deposit or provide a certified check or irrevocable letter of
credit as determined by the City Attorney, City Engineer and City
Administrator. The escrow deposit, certified check or irrevocable letter of
credit shall conform to the requirements of this Chapter.
   A.   Escrow Deposit; Certified Check: If an escrow deposit or certified
check is required, the escrow deposit or certified check shall be made with the
city treasurer in a sum equal to the amount calculated as provided in section
1002.20 Subd. 4 of this chapter, as estimated by the city engineer, of all the
improvements to be furnished and installed by the subdivider pursuant to the
contract (developer's agreement), which have not been completed prior to
approval of the plat. The total cost shall include costs of inspection by the
City. The City shall be entitled to reimburse itself out of said deposit or
check for any cost and expense incurred by the City for completion of the work
in case of default of the subdivider under said contract, and for any damages
sustained on account of any breach thereof. Upon completion of the work and
termination of any liability, the balance remaining in said deposit or check
shall be refunded to the subdivider.
   B.   Irrevocable Letter Of Credit: If an irrevocable letter of credit is
required, it shall be payable to the order of the City and delivered to the
City Administrator in a sum equal to the amount calculated, as provided in
Section
1002.20, Subd. 4 of this Chapter, as estimated by the City Engineer for all the
improvements to be furnished and installed by the subdivider pursuant to the
contract, which have not been completed prior to the approval of the plat. The
total cost shall include costs of inspection by the City. The irrevocable
letter of credit shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney and filed
with the City Administrator.
Subd. 7.   Completion of Improvements Prior to Final Plat
Approval.  Improvements within a subdivision which have been completed prior to
application for approval of the final plat, or execution of the contract for
installation of the required improvements, shall be accepted as equivalent
improvements in compliance with this Chapter only if the City Engineer
certifies the existing improvements conform to applicable standards and if
evidence of payment for the work that has been completed is presented in such
form as the City reasonably requires.
Subd. 8.   Trunk Facilities.  Where a larger size water main, sanitary sewer,
storm drain or similar facility is required to serve areas outside the
subdivision, the larger facility required shall be constructed. Additional
costs may, at the discretion of the City Council, be allocated pursuant to
established city policies.
Subd. 9.   Administrative Fee. Prior to the release of a final plat, the
subdivider shall pay an administrative fee equal to one (1.0) percent of the
cost of all municipal improvements installed in or on the plat as required by
this ordinance. Municipal improvements shall include streets, curb, gutter,
sidewalk, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main, storm water ponding and
other such items which will be dedicated to the City after their installation.
This administrative fee shall be in addition to out of pocket costs incurred by
the City such as engineering, planning and attorney fees. The City may, from
time to time by resolution, change the amount of the administrative fee set out
herein.
Subd. 10.   Alternate Installation.  The City Council may elect to install any
or all of the required improvements pursuant to a cash escrow agreement or
other financial arrangements with the subdivider. 
1002.20 CONVEYANCE BY METES AND BOUNDS
Subd. 1.   Conveyance by Metes and Bounds of Less Than Five Acres.
   A.   The regulations established by this section are for the purpose of
providing for the reasonable regulation of conveyance by metes and bounds
descriptions, thereby promoting greater efficiency in the City offices having
responsibilities relating to the conveyance of land and to promote the purpose
set forth in Minnesota Statutes, Section 272.19, as amended.
   B.   No conveyance of land to which the regulations are applicable shall be
filed or recorded if the land is described in the conveyance by metes and
bounds or by reference to an unapproved registered land survey after date of
passage of these regulations, or to an unapproved plan made after such
regulations have become effective. The foregoing provision does not apply to a
conveyance if the land described:
      (1)   Was a separate parcel of record on the date of adoption of
subdivision regulations under Section 394.12 to 394.37 of Minnesota Statutes.
      (2)   Was the subject of a written agreement to convey entered into prior
to such time, or
      (3)   Was a separate parcel of not less than five (5) acres and having a
width of not less than three hundred feet.
   C.   Building permits shall be withheld for buildings on tracts which have
been subdivided and conveyed by the metes and bounds method, except as set out
above.
1002.21 REGISTERED LAND SURVEYS:
All registered land surveys shall be filed subject to the same procedure as
required for the filing of a preliminary plat for platting purposes. The
standards and requirements set forth in this Chapter shall apply to all
registered land surveys. Unless the City Council approves, a registered land
survey shall not be used to divide a parcel of land into lots for the purpose
of transfer of ownership or building development if any of the tracts do not
have the required frontage on a dedicated public street.
1003 Building Code
1003.01 Minnesota State Building Code.
Subd. 1.   Codes Adopted by Reference. The Minnesota State Building code, as
adopted by the Commissioner of Administration pursuant to Minnesota Statues
Chapter 16B.59 to 16B75, including all of the amendments, rules and regulations
established adopted and published from time to time by the Minnesota Commission
of Administration, through the Building Codes and Standards Division is herby
adopted by reference with the exception of the optional chapters, unless
specifically adopted in this ordinance. The Minnesota State Building Code is
herby incorporated in this ordinance as if fully set out herein.
Subd. 2.   Application, Administration and Enforcement. The application,
administration, and enforcement of the code shall be in accordance with
Minnesota Sate Building Code. The code shall be enforced with the
extraterritorial limits permitted by Minnesota Statutes, 16B.62, subdivision 1,
when so established by this ordinance.
The code enforcement agency of this municipality is called the City of
Rockford.
This code shall be enforced by the Minnesota Certified Building Official
designated by this Municipality to administer the code (Minnesota Statues
16B.65) subdivision 1.
Subd. 3.   Permits and Fees.  The issuance of permits and the collection of
fees shall be as authorized in Minnesota Statues, 16B.62, subdivision 1.
Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by this code in accordance with
the fee schedule adopted by the municipality per annual resolution of fees. In
addition a surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits issued for work
governed by this code in accordance with Minnesota Statute 16B.70.
Subd. 4.   Violations and Penalties. A violation of the code is a misdemeanor
(Minnesota Statute 16B.69). (Amended by Ord. No. 03-08, October 28, 2003)
Subd. 5.   Building Code Optional Chapters.  The Minnesota State Building Code,
established pursuant to Minnesota Statues 16B.59 to 16B.75 allows the
Municipality to adopt by reference and enforce certain optional chapters of the
most current edition of the Minnesota State Building Code. Amended by Ordinance
03-08 (October 28, 2003)
1004. Planning Commission
1004.01 Planning Commission Established and Membership.
A Planning Commission for the City is hereby continued. The Planning Commission
shall consist of five members who shall be reviewed and recommended by the
Planning Commission then appointed by the mayor with council approval for three
year terms commencing January 1st. Terms shall be staggered so that no more
than one-half of the members' terms expire at one time. Both the original and
successive appointee shall hold their respective offices until their successors
are appointed and qualified. Vacancies during the terms shall be filled in the
same manner as the original appointments are made for the unexpired portion of
the term vacated. Every appointed member shall, before entering upon the
discharge the duties of his office. (Amended by ordinance 86-14, passed October
28, 1986.)
1004.02 Meetings, Officers, Procedures.
The commission shall establish regular meeting dates and shall hold at least
one regular meeting each month. Special meetings may be called by any two
members of the commission upon three days written notice to all members. The
commission shall establish such rules of procedure as may be deemed necessary.
The commission shall select a chairperson and vice-chairperson at the first
meeting in January, from its membership, who shall serve for terms of one year
upon selection. The commission may select a secretary from its membership or
authorize the City Staff secretary attending the commission meetings to act as
the commission secretary. Official minutes of each meeting shall be kept by the
designated member and filed in the office of the clerk/treasurer one week after
the meeting. (Amended by Ordinance 95-04, passed April 11, 1995.)
1004.03 Removal.
Any commission member may be removed prior to the end of the term only by a
two-thirds vote of the council. Three consecutive absences by any member shall
require council review and action for dismissal or continuance. (Amended by
Ordinance 86-14, passed October 28, 1986.)
1004.04 Duties.
The commission shall have such duties as assigned in this code, by statute, and
any other ordinances of the City.
1004.05 Meetings.26
Meetings shall be held at least one per month, two per month during the months
of April through October, as called by the chairman, or as set by the council.
Fifty-one percent shall constitute a quorum. Minutes of each meeting shall be
kept and provided to the council.
1004.06 Compensation.
Commissioners shall be paid the last week in December in an amount established
by Council resolution annually. (Amended by Ordinance –2-12, passed August 27,
2002.)
1004.07 Quorum.
A majority of the entire commission shall be a quorum to transact business, and
less than a quorum may recess a meeting to a future date. In the event of
vacancies, the “entire commission” shall be temporarily reduced to include only
those members legally entitled to participate, and the quorum shall be a
majority of the temporarily reduced “entire commission”. (Amended by Ordinance
96-06, passed August 19, 1996.)
1005 Moratorium on Multiple Unit Housing
1005.01 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the terms listed below shall have the meanings
assigned:
Subd. 1.   Multiple Unit Housing. A housing subdivision, planned unit
development, apartment building, condominium, or other housing arrangement
allowed in R2 and, R3 Zoning Districts.
Subd. 2.   Corporation by Reference. The definitions set forth in the City Code
of Ordinances, Section
1001.04, Subdivision 2, are incorporated into this chapter by reference.
1005.02 Prohibition of Development.
The development and building of multiple unit housing within the City is
prohibited for a period of one year from the effective date of this chapter.
1005.03 Extensions.
The prohibition established by Section
1005.02 may be extended by resolution of the City Council for a period not to
exceed six months for such resolution. The City Council shall not extend the
prohibition for more than a total of 18 months.
1005.04 Grandfather Clause.
This ordinance shall not be construed to prohibit the building or development
of any multiple unit housing project for which preliminary approval has been
granted prior to the effective date of this ordinance.
1005.05 Rescinding.
The prohibition established by Section
1005.02 may be rescinded by the City Council at any time by resolution.
(Amended by Ordinance 97-14, passed July 28, 1997)
1006 Fire Code
1006.01 Minnesota State Fire Code.
The Minnesota State Fire Code as in effect, and any amendments duly enacted or
adopted hereafter, is hereby adopted. (Chapter 1006 added by Ordinance 86-
8 passed June 9, 1986.)
1007 Land Alteration
1007.01
Subd. 1.   Intent. The intent of this ordinance is to ensure that alteration to
the topography of the land is planned and controlled:
   (1)   to conform to and complement the City's drainage plan;
   (2)   to prevent overburdening any part of the City's existing drainage
system;
   (3)   to protect adjacent land and property from physical harm, additional
water runoff, unsightly conditions, dust and debris;
   (4)   to prevent pollution caused by soil erosion and sedimentation;
   (5)   to ensure that altered land does not become a health or safety hazard,
or stand in violation of the ordinance;
   (6)   to establish minimum uniform limitations and requirements to ensure
property planning and control of items one through five above for all land
within the City.
Subd. 2.   Definitions. Under this ordinance, land alterations so defined as
changing the topography of the land so as to alter the grade by depositing,
excavation, or re-grading ten (10) or more cubic yards of dirt, soil, sand,
clay, rock or other earth materials. Land alterations shall not include the
excavation, removal, moving or storage of earth materials necessary for the
construction of some pending structure, for which a building permit has been
issued, and which is to be erected immediately following the excavation,
removal, moving or storage of such materials. Land alteration shall not include
the depositing, excavation or moving of earth materials for construction of
roads, sewer lines, storm sewers, water mains, or surface water drainage.
Subd. 3.   Annual Permit Required. Land alteration in all districts shall be
allowed only by annual permit issued by the City. Land alteration in flood
plains shall be in accordance with the flood plain ordinance.
The permit application shall be obtained from the City Clerk. The fee for the
permit shall be as set forth in Chapter
212.02 (24). (Amended by Ordinance 87-10, Passed September 22, 1987.)
Persons, partnerships, companies or corporations now conducting land alteration
as defined by the ordinance, and for which this ordinance requires a permit may
continue such operations, but within 60 days of the effective date of this
Ordinance shall make application for a permit and shall include a finished
grading plan and land restoration plan. Failure to do so shall be a violation
of this ordinance; however, on request, and for reasonable cause, the City
Council may extend the time for the initial application to ninety (90) days. If
application is not made within the required time, all land alteration
operations shall be terminated.
The City Council may terminate land alteration permit for violation of this
ordinance or a condition of the permit. or for other cause. To terminate a
permit, the City Council shall give notice of the violation or other cause for
the termination along with an order that the condition be remedied. If the
condition has not been remedied to satisfaction within a two week period, the
City Council shall determine whether the permit should be terminated. No land
alteration shall take place after the permit is terminated.
Subd. 4.   General Provisions. Approval of the land alteration shall be granted
by the City Administrator with the right to appeal to the City Council only
after:
   (1)   A finished grading plan; and
   (2)   A land restoration plan have been approved by the City Administrator
according to the requirements of this ordinance and are attached as part of the
permit application, and the required fee has been paid.
The finished grading plan and the land restoration plan shall complement the
City's drainage plans and shall not overburden any part of the existing City
drainage system. Land alteration shall not adversely effect adjacent land or
property and shall as much as possible retain. gently rolling topography in
substantial conformity with the immediately surrounding land. The plans shall
be prepared in accordance with requirements set by the City Engineer and/or the
City Administrator under authority of this ordinance.
A finished grading plan shall consist of not less than a written description
of:
   (1)   The maximum number of cubic yards of material to be deposited,
excavated or re-graded;
   (2)   The start and finish dates for land alteration;
   (3)   Any change in water runoff and drainage caused by the land alteration;
and
   (4)   The measures will be used to:
      (a)   Prevent pollution caused by soil erosion and sedimentation.
      (b)   Ensure that altered land does not become a health or safety hazard.
      (c)   Protect adjacent property.
In addition, the City Administrator may require that the finished grading plan
also include:
   (1)   A certified survey by a registered surveyor.
   (2)   Topographic data, including contours at vertical intervals specified
by the City Engineer or City Administrator and/or
   (3)   A written description of types of land materials to be deposited or
excavated, conditions for the general maintenance of the site, controls for
vehicular ingress and egress, conditions for control of materials disbursed
from wind or during hauling materials to or from the site, or any other
conditions deemed necessary to ensure conformance with the intent of this
ordinance.
The land restoration plan shall be designed to prevent soil erosion by wind and
water, sedimentation, gullying, and other detrimental effects as determined by
the City Administrator and/or City Engineer.
A land restoration plan shall consist of not less than a written description
of:
   (1)   The vegetation and ground cover to be used in restoring disturbed
land.
   (2)   Land restoration start and finish dates.
   (3)   How the land restoration plan will prevent soil erosion by wind and
water, sedimentation, and gullying.
In addition, the City Administrator may require a landscape plan showing the
locations and types of vegetation and ground covers to be used on the site
which shall conform to the requirements set by the City Administrator and other
sections of the ordinance; and/or any other written or descriptive materials to
ensure conformance with the intent of this ordinance and all other City
regulations.
(Section 1007 Added by Ordinance 86-15, passed November 25, 1986)
1008 Park Dedication
1008.01
Subd. 1.   Intent. The City Council recognizes that the health, safety and
welfare of all people depends greatly on the quality and character of their
environment. Thus, preserving and enhancing the quality and importance in the
planning and development of the City.
Dedicating a portion of land to the City for parks, playgrounds, and public
open spaces at the time of residential, commercial and industrial development
is an essential means to provide and maintain the high quality environment
today's citizens demand and to ensure that it will continue to exist for future
residents.
Furthermore, the City Council recognizes that new residential, commercial and
industrial developments contribute to increased demands for parks, playgrounds
and public open spaces by new residents, workers and visitors and that these
demands are directly related to the density and intensity of development which
is permitted in any district. Therefore, it is the policy of the City that the
following standards and guidelines for the dedication of land for parks,
playgrounds, and public open spaces, or cash contributions in lieu of such
dedication, shall be directly related to the density and intensity of each
subdivision and development which occurs within the City.
Subd. 2.   Standards for Accepting Dedication of Land for Public Purposes.
   (1)   Land proposed to be dedicated for public purposes shall meet
identified needs contained in the City's Comprehensive Park and Trail Corridor
Plans.
   (2)   To be eligible for park dedication credit, no less than 100% of the
land dedicated shall be located outside of drainways, flood plains or ponding
areas after the site has been developed unless specific purposes for land
proposed to be dedicated for public purposes shall be identified in the City
Comprehensive Plan for Parks and Trails Corridor Plan. (Amended by Ordinance
88-8, passed June 28, 1988.)
   (3)   In those cases where subdividers and developers of land provide
significant amenities, such as, but not limited to, swimming pools, tennis
courts, handball courts, ball fields, etc., within the development for the
benefit of those residing or working therein, and where, in the judgment of the
City Administrator, such amenities significantly reduce the demands for public
recreational facilities, he may recommend to the City Council that the required
amount of land to be dedicated for park, playground, public open space (or cash
contributions in lieu of such dedication) be reduced by an amount not to exceed
20%.
   (4)   The City may permit easements to be dedicated for trail corridors
which are identified in the City's Trail Corridor Plan thereby allowing the
developer to include the land area in the determination of setbacks and
building density on the site; however, park dedication credit shall not be
given in such cases to the easement.
   (5)   Exceptions to these provisions shall be reviewed and recommended by
the Park and Recreation Commission.
Subd. 3.   Residential Dedication Requirements. A person who desires to
subdivide property for purposes of urban development shall, as a prerequisite
to approval of lot division or final plat, dedicate to the public for use as a
park, playground, or open space, a percentage of the land being platted or
developed as hereinafter specified. In the alternative, the subdivider shall at
the option of the City, pay to the City a sum of money based upon the fair
market value of the undeveloped land in lieu of dedicating property, which the
City shall use in the acquisition, development or maintenance of public parks,
playgrounds or debt retirement in connection with the public space. Any such
cash payment received shall be placed in a separate fund maintained by the City
and used only for those purposes. In establishing the percentage of land to be
dedicated, or the cash value to be donated, the City Council shall take into
account the open space, park, recreational or common areas or facilities which
the subdivider proposes to reserve for the subdivision. These parks, playground
and open space areas shall be independent of and distinct from the areas
dedicated to the public for use as streets or for utility easements, sewers,
water facilities, storm water drainage, holding ponds, run-off improvements,
trails or other similar utilities or improvements.
The City may choose to accept an equivalent amount in cash from the applicant
for part or all of the portion required to be dedicated to such public uses or
purposes based on the fair market value of the land no later than at the time
of final approval. Any cash payments received shall be placed in a special fund
by the City and used only for the purposes for which the money was obtained. In
establishing the reasonable portion to be dedicated, the regulations may
consider the open space park, recreational or common areas and facilities which
the applicant proposes to reserve for the subdivision. The City reasonably
determines that it will seek to acquire that portion of land for the purposes
stated as a result of approval of the subdivision.
The City of Rockford finds that parks, playgrounds, green areas and open spaces
improve the value of property in the City, provides amenities and outlets for
citizens, preserves natural environment, and in many ways improves the health,
safety, welfare and morale of the citizens of the City of Rockford. In order to
facilitate such improvements, the City of Rockford finds that park land,
playground areas, green and open spaces are necessary in all new developments,
lot divisions, subdivisions of land within the City. In order to provide
uniform benefit to all residents of said areas, the City of Rockford requires
subdivider and developers of land to dedicate land to the City or at the City's
option, to make a cash donation for the City to acquire land and park equipment
and for other related purposes.
The City requires that a reasonable portion of any proposed subdivision be
dedicated to the public or preserved for public use as street, roads, sewers,
electric, gas and water facilities, storm water drainage and holding areas or
ponds and similar utilities and improvements.
The form of contribution (cash or land, or any combination thereof) shall be
decided by the City Council upon recommendation of the Park and Recreation
Commission and based upon need and conformance with the City's Comprehensive
Plan.
The amount of land/cash shall be determined as follows:
TYPE OF USE: SUBDIVISION (Land dedication = 10% of gross land area)
Cash Dedication:
Single family:            $1,724.00
Townhouse:            $1,724.00 per unit
Apartment:            $1,724.00 per unit plus
               $50.00 per bedroom above the first bedroom
(Amended by Ordinance 05-13, passed October 25, 2005)
TYPE OF USE: NEW CONSTRUCTION/PREVIOUSLY PLATTED
Cash Dedication:
Single family:            $1,724.00
Two family:            $1,724.00 per unit
Townhouse:            $1,724.00 per unit
Apartment:            $1,724.00 per unit plus
               $50.00 per bedroom above the first bedroom
(Amended by Ordinance 04-10, passed July 13, 2004)
(Amended by Ordinance 05-13, passed October 25, 2005)
Subd. 4.   Required Improvements. Developers shall be responsible for making
certain improvements to their developments for park, playground, and public
open space purposes:
   (1)   Developers must provide finished grading and ground cover for all
park, playground, and public open spaces within their development contract or
site plan approval responsibilities.
   (2)   Developers must construct and pave all proposed trails concurrently
with the roads in their development; i.e., grading with site grading and paving
with street or parking lot paving. City staff may recommend deviation from this
policy in the case of individual hardship in terms of the timing of
installation of such trail facilities when they are identified in the City's
Trail Corridor Plan.
   (3)   Developers will not receive park dedication credit for trails which
are not identified in the City's Trail Corridor Plan, or for connecting these
trails to any existing or proposed trails which are identified in the City's
Trail Corridor Plan.
   (4)   Developers will not receive park dedication credit if sidewalks are
constructed in the street right-of-way in lieu of trails within the
development.
Subd. 5.   Commercial and Industrial Dedication Requirements. A commercial
subdivision of property shall be required to pay a park dedication fee of $250
per acre.
Subd. 6.   Definitions.
Sidewalk. A sidewalk is defined as a public walkway constructed within the
street right of way.
(Section 1008 added by Ordinance 87-6, passed July 28, 1987; Amended by
Ordinance 96-04, passed July 8, 1996.) (Amended by Ordinance 97-09, passed
April 28, 1997.)
Appendix A.
Electric Franchise Ordinance
ORDINANCE #14-02
CITY OF ROCKFORD, HENNEPIN COUNTY, MINNESOTA
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO NORTHERN STATES POWER COMPANY, A MINNESOTA
CORPORATION, D/B/A XCEL ENERGY, ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, PERMISSION TO
CONSTRUCT, OPERATE, REPAIR AND MAINTAIN IN THE CITY OF ROCKFORD, MINNESOTA, AN
ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM AND TRANSMISSION LINES, INCLUDING NECESSARY POLES,
LINES, FIXTURES AND APPURTENANCES, FOR THE FURNISHING OF ELECTRIC ENERGY TO THE
CITY, ITS INHABITANTS, AND OTHERS, AND TO USE THE PUBLIC GROUNDS AND PUBLIC
WAYS OF THE CITY FOR SUCH PURPOSES.
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ROCKFORD, HENNEPIN COUNTY, MINNESOTA, ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this Ordinance, the following capitalized terms listed in
alphabetical order shall have the following meanings:
   1.1   City. The City of Rockford, County of Hennepin, State of Minnesota.
   1.2   City Utility System. Facilities used for providing non-energy related
public utility service owned or operated by City or agency thereof, including
sewer and water service, but excluding facilities for providing heating,
lighting or other forms of energy.
   1.3   Commission. The Minnesota Public Utilities Commission, or any
successor agency or agencies, including an agency of the federal government,
which preempts all, or part of the authority to regulate electric retail rates
now vested in the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission.
   1.4   Company. Northern States Power Company, a Minnesota corporation, d/b/
a Xcel Energy, its successors and assigns.
   1.5   Electric Facilities. Electric transmission and distribution towers,
poles, lines, guys, anchors, conduits, fixtures, and necessary appurtenances
owned or operated by Company for the purpose of providing electric energy for
public use.
   1.6   Notice. A written notice served by one party on the other party
referencing one or more provisions of this Ordinance. Notice to Company shall
be mailed to the General Counsel, 414 Nicollet Mall, 5th Floor, Minneapolis, MN
55401. Notice to the City shall be mailed to the City Administrator, City Hall,
6031 Main Street, Rockford, MN 55373. Either party may change its respective
address for the purpose of this Ordinance by written notice to the other party.
   1.7   Public Ground. Land owned by the City for park, open space or similar
purpose, which is held for use in common by the public.
   1.8   Public Way. Any street, alley, walkway or other public right-of-way
within the City. (Ordinance 14-02, Adopted February 25, 2014)
SECTION 2. ADOPTION OF FRANCHISE.
   2.1   Grant of Franchise. City hereby grants Company, for a period of 20
years from the date passed and approved by the City, the right to transmit and
furnish electric energy for light, heat, power and other purposes for public
and private use within and through the limits of the City as its boundaries now
exist or as they may be extended in the future. For these purposes, Company may
construct, operate, repair and maintain Electric Facilities in, on, over, under
and across the Public Grounds and Public Ways of City, subject to the
provisions of this Ordinance. Company may do all reasonable things necessary or
customary to accomplish these purposes, subject, however, to such reasonable
regulations as may be imposed by the City pursuant to ordinance and to the
further provisions of this franchise agreement.
   2.2   Effective Date; Written Acceptance. This franchise agreement shall be
in force and effect from and after passage of this Ordinance, its acceptance by
Company, and its publication as required by law. The City, by Council
resolution, may revoke this franchise agreement if Company does not file a
written acceptance with the City within 90 days after publication.
   2.3   Service and Rates. The service to be provided and the rates to be
charged by Company for electric service in City are subject to the jurisdiction
of the Commission. The area within the City in which Company may provide
electric service is subject to the provisions of Minnesota Statutes, Section
216B.40.
   2.4   Publication Expense. The expense of publication of this Ordinance will
be paid by City and reimbursed to City by Company.
   2.5   Dispute Resolution. If either party asserts that the other party is in
default in the performance of any obligation hereunder, the complaining party
shall notify the other party of the default and the desired remedy. The
notification shall be written. Representatives of the parties must promptly
meet and attempt in good faith to negotiate a resolution of the dispute. If the
dispute is not resolved within 30 days of the written notice, the parties may
jointly select a mediator to facilitate further discussion. The parties will
equally share the fees and expenses of this mediator. If a mediator is not
used, or if the parties are unable to resolve the dispute within 30 days after
first meeting with the selected mediator, either party may commence an action
in District Court to interpret and enforce this franchise or for such other
relief as may be permitted by law or equity for breach of contract, or either
party may take any other action permitted by law. (Ordinance 14-02, Adopted
February 25, 2014)
SECTION 3. LOCATION, OTHER REGULATIONS.
   3.1   Location of Facilities. Electric Facilities shall be located,
constructed and maintained so as not to interfere with the safety and
convenience of ordinary travel along and over Public Ways and so as not to
disrupt normal operation of any City Utility System previously installed
therein. Electric Facilities shall be located on Public Grounds as determined
by the City. Company's construction, reconstruction, operation, repair,
maintenance and location of Electric Facilities shall be subject to permits if
required by separate ordinance and to other reasonable regulations of the City
to the extent not inconsistent with the terms of this franchise agreement.
Company may abandon underground Electric Facilities in place, provided at the
City’s request, Company will remove abandoned metal or concrete encased conduit
interfering with a City improvement project, but only to the extent such
conduit is uncovered by excavation as part of the City improvement project.
   3.2   Field Locations. Company shall provide field locations for its
underground Electric Facilities within City consistent with the requirements of
Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 216D.
   3.3   Street Openings. Company shall not open or disturb any Public Ground
or Public Way for any purpose without first having obtained a permit from the
City, if required by a separate ordinance, for which the City may impose a
reasonable fee. Permit conditions imposed on Company shall not be more
burdensome than those imposed on other utilities for similar facilities or
work. Company may, however, open and disturb any Public Ground or Public Way
without permission from the City where an emergency exists requiring the
immediate repair of Electric Facilities. In such event Company shall notify the
City by telephone to the office designated by the City as soon as practicable.
Not later than the second working day thereafter, Company shall obtain any
required permits and pay any required fees.
   3.4   Restoration. After undertaking any work requiring the opening of any
Public Ground or Public Way, Company shall restore the same, including paving
and its foundation, to as good a condition as formerly existed, and shall
maintain any paved surface in good condition for two years thereafter. The work
shall be completed as promptly as weather permits, and if Company shall not
promptly perform and complete the work, remove all dirt, rubbish, equipment and
material, and put the Public Ground or Public Way in the said condition, the
City shall have, after demand to Company to cure and the passage of a
reasonable period of time following the demand, but not to exceed five days,
the right to make the restoration at the expense of Company. Company shall pay
to the City the cost of such work done for or performed by the City. This
remedy shall be in addition to any other remedy available to the City for
noncompliance with this Section 3.4, but the City hereby waives any requirement
for Company to post a construction performance bond, certificate of insurance,
letter of credit or any other form of security or assurance that may be
required, under a separate existing or future ordinance of the City, of a
person or entity obtaining the City’s permission to install, replace or
maintain facilities in a Public Way.
   3.5   Avoid Damage to Electric Facilities. Nothing in this Ordinance
relieves any person from liability arising out of the failure to exercise
reasonable care to avoid damaging Electric Facilities while performing any
activity.
   3.6   Notice of Improvements. The City must give Company reasonable notice
of plans for improvements to Public Grounds or Public Ways where the City has
reason to believe that Electric Facilities may affect or be affected by the
improvement. The notice must contain: (i) the nature and character of the
improvements, (ii) the Public Grounds and Public Ways upon which the
improvements are to be made, (iii) the extent of the improvements, (iv) the
time when the City will start the work, and (v) if more than one Public Ground
or Public Way is involved, the order in which the work is to proceed. The
notice must be given to Company a sufficient length of time in advance of the
actual commencement of the work to permit Company to make any necessary
additions, alterations or repairs to its Electric Facilities.
   3.7   Shared Use of Poles. Company shall make space available on its poles
or towers for City fire, water utility, police or other City facilities upon
terms and conditions acceptable to Company whenever such use will not interfere
with the use of such poles or towers by Company, by another electric utility,
by a telephone utility, or by any cable television company or other form of
communication company. In addition, the City shall pay for any added cost
incurred by Company because of such use by City. (Ordinance 14-02, Adopted
February 25, 2014)
SECTION 4. RELOCATIONS.
   4.1   Relocation of Electric Facilities in Public Ways. If the City
determines to vacate a Public Way for a City improvement project, or at City’s
cost to grade, regrade, or change the line of any Public Way, or construct or
reconstruct any City Utility System in any Public Way, it may order Company to
relocate its Electric Facilities located therein if relocation is reasonably
necessary to accomplish the City’s proposed public improvement. Except as
provided in Section 4.3, Company shall relocate its Electric Facilities at its
own expense. The City shall give Company reasonable notice of plans to vacate
for a City improvement project, or to grade, regrade, or change the line of any
Public Way or to construct or reconstruct any City Utility System. If a
relocation is ordered within five years of a prior relocation of the same
Electric Facilities, which was made at Company expense, the City shall
reimburse Company for non-betterment costs on a time and material basis,
provided that if a subsequent relocation is required because of the extension
of a City Utility System to a previously unserved area, Company may be required
to make the subsequent relocation at its expense. Nothing in this Ordinance
requires Company to relocate, remove, replace or reconstruct at its own expense
its Electric Facilities where such relocation, removal, replacement or
reconstruction is solely for the convenience of the City and is not reasonably
necessary for the construction or reconstruction of a Public Way or City
Utility System or other City improvement.
   4.2   Relocation of Electric Facilities in Public Ground. City may require
Company, at Company’s expense, to relocate or remove its Electric Facilities
from Public Ground upon a finding by City that the Electric Facilities have
become or will become a substantial impairment to the existing or proposed
public use of the Public Ground.
   4.3   Projects with Federal Funding. City shall not order Company to remove
or relocate its Electric Facilities when a Public Way is vacated, improved or
realigned for a right-of-way project or any other project which is financially
subsidized in whole or in part by the Federal Government or any agency thereof,
unless the reasonable non-betterment costs of such relocation are first paid to
Company. The City is obligated to pay Company only for those portions of its
relocation costs for which City has received federal funding specifically
allocated for relocation costs in the amount requested by the Company, which
allocated funding the City shall specifically request. Relocation, removal or
rearrangement of any Company Electric Facilities made necessary because of a
federally-aided highway project shall be governed by the provisions of
Minnesota Statutes, Section 161.46, as supplemented or amended. It is
understood that the rights herein granted to Company are valuable rights.
   4.4   No Waiver. The provisions of this franchise apply only to facilities
constructed in reliance on a franchise from the City and shall not be construed
to waive or modify any rights obtained by Company for installations within a
Company right-of-way acquired by easement or prescriptive right before the
applicable Public Ground or Public Way was established, or Company's rights
under state or county permit. (Ordinance 14-02, Adopted February 25, 2014)
SECTION 5. TREE TRIMMING.
   Company may trim all trees and shrubs in the Public Grounds and Public Ways
of City to the extent Company finds necessary to avoid interference with the
proper construction, operation, repair and maintenance of any Electric
Facilities installed hereunder, provided that Company shall save the City
harmless from any liability arising therefrom, and subject to permit or other
reasonable regulation by the City. (Ordinance 14-02, Adopted February 25, 2014)
SECTION 6. INDEMNIFICATION.
   6.1   Indemnity of City. Company shall indemnify, keep and hold the City
free and harmless from any and all liability on account of injury to persons or
damage to property occasioned by the construction, maintenance, repair,
inspection, the issuance of permits, or the operation of the Electric
Facilities located in the Public Grounds and Public Ways. The City shall not be
indemnified for losses or claims occasioned through its own negligence except
for losses or claims arising out of or alleging the City's negligence as to the
issuance of permits for, or inspection of, Company's plans or work. The City
shall not be indemnified if the injury or damage results from the performance
in a proper manner, of acts reasonably deemed hazardous by Company, and such
performance is nevertheless ordered or directed by City after notice of
Company's determination.
   6.2   Defense of City. In the event a suit is brought against the City under
circumstances where this agreement to indemnify applies, Company at its sole
cost and expense shall defend the City in such suit if written notice thereof
is promptly given to Company within a period wherein Company is not prejudiced
by lack of such notice. If Company is required to indemnify and defend, it will
thereafter have control of such litigation, but Company may not settle such
litigation without the consent of the City, which consent shall not be
unreasonably withheld. This section is not, as to third parties, a waiver of
any defense or immunity otherwise available to the City and Company, in
defending any action on behalf of the City, shall be entitled to assert in any
action every defense or immunity that the City could assert in its own behalf.
(Ordinance 14-02, Adopted February 25, 2014)
SECTION 7. VACATION OF PUBLIC WAYS.
   The City shall give Company at least two weeks prior written notice of a
proposed vacation of a Public Way. Except where required for a City improvement
project, the vacation of any Public Way, after the installation of Electric
Facilities, shall not operate to deprive Company of its rights to operate and
maintain such Electric Facilities, until the reasonable cost of relocating the
same and the loss and expense resulting from such relocation are first paid to
Company. In no case, however, shall City be liable to Company for failure to
specifically preserve a right-of-way under Minnesota Statutes, Section 160.29.
(Ordinance 14-02, Adopted February 25, 2014)
SECTION 8. CHANGE IN FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   Any change in the form of government of the City shall not affect the
validity of this Ordinance. Any governmental unit succeeding the City shall,
without the consent of Company, succeed to all of the rights and obligations of
the City provided in this Ordinance. (Ordinance 14-02, Adopted February 25,
2014)
SECTION 9. FRANCHISE FEE.
   9.1 Fee Schedule. During the term of the franchise hereby granted, and in
lieu of any permit or other fees being imposed on Company, the City may impose
on Company a franchise fee by collecting the amounts indicated in a Fee
Schedule set forth in a separate ordinance from each customer in the designated
Company Customer Class. The parties have agreed that the franchise fee
collected by the Company and paid to the City in accordance with this Section 9
shall not exceed the following amounts.
Class Fee Per Premise Per Month
Class                 Fee Per Premise Per Month
Residential           $0.00
Sm C & I – Non-Dem $0.00
Sm C & I – Demand   $0.00
Large C & I           $0.00
Public Street Ltg     $0.00
Muni Pumping –N/D   $0.00
Muni Pumping – Dem  $0.00
 
   9.2   Separate Ordinance. The franchise fee shall be imposed by a separate
ordinance duly adopted by the City Council, which ordinance shall not be
adopted until at least 90 days after written notice enclosing such proposed
ordinance has been served upon Company by certified mail. The fee shall not
become effective until the beginning of a Company billing month at least 90
days after written notice enclosing such adopted ordinance has been served upon
Company by certified mail. Section 2.5 shall constitute the sole remedy for
solving disputes between Company and the City in regard to the interpretation
of, or enforcement of, the separate ordinance. No action by the City to
implement a separate ordinance will commence until this Ordinance is effective.
A separate ordinance which imposes a lesser franchise fee on the residential
class of customers than the maximum amount set forth in Section 9.1 above shall
not be effective against Company unless the fee imposed on each other customer
classification is reduced proportionately in the same or greater amount per
class as the reduction represented by the lesser fee on the residential class.
   9.3   Terms Defined. For the purpose of this Section 9, the following
definitions apply:
   9.3.1 “Customer Class” shall refer to the classes listed on the Fee Schedule
and as defined or determined in Company’s electric tariffs on file with the
Commission.
   9.3.2 “Fee Schedule” refers to the schedule in Section 9.1 setting forth the
various customer classes from which a franchise fee would be collected if a
separate ordinance were implemented immediately after the effective date of
this franchise agreement. The Fee Schedule in the separate ordinance may
include new Customer Class added by Company to its electric tariffs after the
effective date of this franchise agreement.
   9.4   Collection of the Fee. The franchise fee shall be payable quarterly
and shall be based on the amount collected by Company during complete billing
months during the period for which payment is to be made by imposing a
surcharge equal to the designated franchise fee for the applicable customer
classification in all customer billings for electric service in each class. The
payment shall be due the last business day of the month following the period
for which the payment is made. The franchise fee may be changed by ordinance
from time to time; however, each change shall meet the same notice requirements
and not occur more often than annually and no change shall require a collection
from any customer for electric service in excess of the amounts specifically
permitted by this Section 9. The time and manner of collecting the franchise
fee is subject to the approval of the Commission. No franchise fee shall be
payable by Company if Company is legally unable to first collect an amount
equal to the franchise fee from its customers in each applicable class of
customers by imposing a surcharge in Company’s applicable rates for electric
service. Company may pay the City the fee based upon the surcharge billed
subject to subsequent reductions to account for uncollectibles, refunds and
correction of erroneous billings. Company agrees to make its records available
for inspection by the City at reasonable times provided that the City and its
designated representative agree in writing not to disclose any information
which would indicate the amount paid by any identifiable customer or customers
or any other information regarding identified customers.
   9.5   Equivalent Fee Requirement. The separate ordinance imposing the fee
shall not be effective against Company unless it lawfully imposes and the City
monthly or more often collects a fee or tax of the same or greater equivalent
amount on the receipts from sales of energy within the City by any other energy
supplier, provided that, as to such a supplier, the City has the authority to
require a franchise fee or to impose a tax. The “same or greater equivalent
amount” shall be measured, if practicable, by comparing amounts collected as a
franchise fee from each similar customer, or by comparing, as to similar
customers the percentage of the annual bill represented by the amount collected
for franchise fee purposes. The franchise fee or tax shall be applicable to
energy sales for any energy use related to heating, cooling or lighting, or to
run machinery and appliances, but shall not apply to energy sales for the
purpose of providing fuel for vehicles. If the Company specifically consents in
writing to a franchise or separate ordinance collecting or failing to collect a
fee from another energy supplier in contravention of this Section 9.5, the
foregoing conditions will be waived to the extent of such written consent.
(Ordinance 14-02, Adopted February 25, 2014)
SECTION 10. PROVISIONS OF ORDINANCE.
   10.1   Severability. Every section, provision, or part of this Ordinance is
declared separate from every other section, provision, or part and if any
section, provision, or part shall be held invalid, it shall not affect any
other section, provision, or part. Where a provision of any other City
ordinance conflicts with the provisions of this Ordinance, the provisions of
this Ordinance shall prevail.
   10.2   Limitation on Applicability. This Ordinance constitutes a franchise
agreement between the City and Company as the only parties, and no provision of
this franchise shall in any way inure to the benefit of any third person
(including the public at large) so as to constitute any such person as a third
party beneficiary of the agreement or of any one or more of the terms hereof,
or otherwise give rise to any cause of action in any person not a party hereto.
(Ordinance 14-02, Adopted February 25, 2014)
SECTION 11. AMENDMENT PROCEDURE.
   Either party to this franchise agreement may at any time propose that the
agreement be amended to address a subject of concern and the other party will
consider whether it agrees that the amendment is mutually appropriate. If an
amendment is agreed upon, this Ordinance may be amended at any time by the City
passing a subsequent ordinance declaring the provisions of the amendment, which
amendatory ordinance shall become effective upon the filing of Company’s
written consent thereto with the City Clerk within 90 days after the date of
final passage by the City of the amendatory ordinance. (Ordinance 14-02,
Adopted February 25, 2014)
SECTION 12. PREVIOUS FRANCHISES SUPERSEDED.
   This franchise supersedes any previous electric franchise granted to Company
or its predecessor. (Ordinance 14-02, Adopted February 25, 2014)
