CITY CODE
of
ROSEMOUNT, MINNESOTA
1983
Code current through:
Ord. B-321, passed 7-15-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
This code of the City of Rosemount, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to
and including ordinance B-321, passed July 15, 2025. Ordinances of the City
adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
American Legal Publishing
Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
Ordinance No. B-322
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY OF ROSEMOUNT ZONING
ORDINANCE B RELATING TO SECTIONS 11-4-2: NON-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
USES; 11-6-3: PRINCIPAL USES, COMMERCIAL; 11-6-8: ACCESSORY USES, N-Z; 11-7-5:
FENCING STANDARDS; 11-7-6: LANDSCAPING, SCREENING, AND BUFFERING STANDARDS
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ROSEMOUNT, MINNESOTA, ORDAINS that
Ordinance B, adopted September 19, 1989, entitled “City of Rosemount Zoning Ordinance,” is
hereby amended as follows:
Section 1. Rosemount Zoning Ordinance B, Section 11-4-2: Non-
Residential District Uses Table
4.1 Principal Use Table to make Educational Services a permitted use in the B-
2 Employment District
 
Section 2. Rosemount Zoning Ordinance B, Section 11-6-3:
 
I.   Commercial Event Centers:
3.   The property owner and venue operator must be the same individual
(s) and the site shall be its primary residence. The operator, or its designee, must be on the
premises for the duration of each event.
4.   The maximum number of guests is two hundred 
(200). A larger number of guests may be approved by the city shall be based on the size of site, structures, parking
availability, and other relevant factors.
 
Section 3. Rosemount Zoning Ordinance B, Section 11-6-8: A. 2.
 
b.  When a liquor license is granted, an uninterrupted enclosure is required
and the enclosure shall only have access through the principal building. the
patio or deck area must be compact and contiguous to the licensed premises and
shall
be quarantined off by an appropriate fence, wall or staff monitor as approved by City 
staff.
 
Section 4. Rosemount Zoning Ordinance B, Section 11-7-5: Fencing Standards:
 
B. Fence Height:
1.   Fences and walls in residential districts shall be subject to the following
maximum heights:
a.   Six (6) feet in the rear or side yard.
b.   Forty-two (42) inches in the front yard.
c.    ? Forty-eight (48) inches in street side yards of corner lots that
abut another front yard, provided that no structure shall interfere with sight distances
for vehicles approaching intersections.
 
Section 5. Rosemount Zoning Ordinance B, Section 11-7-5: Fencing Standards,
Figure 7.1 shall
 
be updated to reflect the amendment contained in Section 4 as shown below:
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4b51a377144822298e340f2016f76ebbfa73789c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3386_7890x5505.jpg]
 
 
Section 6. Rosemount Zoning Ordinance B, Section 11-7-6:
 Landscaping, Screening, and Buffering Standards:
 
A. Landscaping
5.   Parking Lot Landscaping:
a.   All parking areas for multi-unit residential, mixed-use, and non-
residential developments (including driveways and drive aisles) shall be
screened and landscaped subject to Planning Commission review to reduce the
impact of large expanses of paved surfaces, provide a more pedestrian friendly
environment and provide adequate room for snow storage.
b.   Trees, Shrubs, flowers, and ground cover needed in these areas shall be in
addition to the minimum number of trees and foundation plantings required by
this title.
 
 
Section 8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage and publication according to law.
 
ENACTED AND ORDAINED into an Ordinance this 7 th  day of October, 2025.
 
 
CITY OF ROSEMOUNT
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4b51a377144822298e340f2016f76ebbfa73789c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3389_2640x10.jpg]
Jeffery D. Weisensel, Mayor
ATTEST:
 
 
Erin Fasbender, City Clerk
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2020-01
 
ORDINANCE RELATING TO THE HUNTING MAP;
AMENDING SECTION 7-5-7: HUNTING MAP
OF THE ROSEMOUNT CITY CODE.
 
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ROSEMOUNT, MINNESOTA ORDAIN
as follows:
 
Section 1.     Section 7-5-2. of the Rosemount City Code is amended as follows:
 
7-5-2: DESIGNATED AREAS:
 
For purposes of regulating the use of bows and firearms within the city, all
area within the corporate city limits is divided into certain restricted R and
non-restricted NR areas. The area designated restricted bow and restricted
shotgun, restricted bow, non-restricted, and no hunting are depicted in the
approved Hunting Restrictions Map.
 
Section 2.    7-5-7: HUNTING MAP The ordinance map will be replaced with the
new Hunting
Map dated January 3, 2020.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4b51a377144822298e340f2016f76ebbfa73789c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3392_5053x3266.jpg]
 
Section 3.    This ordinance shall be effective immediately upon its passage
and publication
according to law.
 
[Underlined material is new. Stricken material is deleted.]
 
 
 
 
 
 
Adopted by the City Council of the City of Rosemount, Minnesota, the 7th day of
January, 2020.
 
 
 
                     ____________________________________
                     William H. Droste, Mayor
ATTEST:
 
___________________________
Erin Fasbender, City Clerk
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Published in the Rosemount Town Pages the _____ day of ______________, 2017.
 
 
 
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alteration
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the City Council, this City Code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official City Code of the City of Rosemount.
This City Code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the ROSEMOUNT CITY
CODE, and it is hereby published by authority of the Council and shall be kept
up to date as provided in Section
1-1-3 of this Chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause,
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this City Code by title in any legal documents.
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The City Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this
State as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in Section
1-2-1 of this Code.
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the City Code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this City Code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be prepared for insertion in its
proper place in each copy of this City Code. Each such replacement page shall
be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of the
City Code.
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATION:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this City Code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
City Council. The Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the Clerk. Any
person having in his custody an official copy of the City Code shall make every
effort to maintain said Code in an up to date and efficient manner. He shall
see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the City Clerk.
Said Code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested
persons, shall be and remain the property of the City and shall be returned to
the office of the Clerk when directed so to do by order of the City Council.
(1983 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this City
Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this City Code or are
by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections, and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporation; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
City; zoning and subdivision ordinances; and all special ordinances.
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this City Code or by virtue of the
preceding section, excepting as this City Code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case this City Code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only.
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to
any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now
pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City herein repealed
and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be
deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same
provision; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
City under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this City Code.
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this City Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The City Council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (1983 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural number is
used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single
matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive
words may not have been used.
When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this code by words
importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters,
parties or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be
deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction shall not be
applied to any section of this code which contains any express provision
excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context may be
repugnant thereto.
The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city has been changed
in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section" and/or
"subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such change to the city's ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1983 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
CITY: The city of Rosemount, county of Dakota, state of Minnesota.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city of
Rosemount".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: A crime for which a sentence of not more than ninety (90) days or
a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or both, may be
imposed.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the city; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a hazard
to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the
community.
OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city of
Rosemount".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: Applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner,
tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of such
building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities
direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: Applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the
whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
WHOLESALER AND WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall
be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things
in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in
the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his
proper mark. (1983 Code; amd. Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (1983 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Liability Of Officers
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this code,
where no other penalty is set forth, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any one
offense, or by imprisonment for a period of not more than ninety (90) days, or
by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004; amd. Ord. 2024-03,
4-16-2024)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of
this code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section.
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code where a duty is
prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any action which is of a continuing
nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such
duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise
specifically provided in this code.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other
penalty being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a
breach of any section or provision of this code and there shall be no fine or
penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter
shall apply. (1983 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intent of
the council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1983
Code)
CHAPTER 5
ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-5-1: Date Of Elections
1-5-2: Terms Of Office
1-5-3: Vacancies
1-5-1: DATE OF ELECTIONS:
   A.   The municipal primary election for the purpose of nominating elective
officers for election at a municipal general election in the city shall be held
on the same day as the state primary election of any year in which a municipal
general election is to be held. A municipal primary election shall only be held
if more than twice the number of individuals to be elected to a particular
elective office file for nomination to that elective office.
   B.   The municipal general election in the city shall be held on the first
Tuesday after the first Monday in November of every even numbered year. (Ord.
2010-03, 2-16-2010; amd. Ord. 2022-02, 7-19-2022; Ord. 2024-01, 3-20-2024)
1-5-2: TERMS OF OFFICE:
   A.   The mayor shall be elected for a four (4) year term.
   B.   Council members shall be elected for four (4) year terms at each
biennial municipal general election. (Ord. 2022-02, 7-19-2022; amd. Ord. 2024-
01, 3-20-2024)
1-5-3: VACANCIES:
Pursuant to M.S. § 412.02, Subd. 2a, if a vacancy in the office of mayor or
city council member occurs before the first day to file affidavits of candidacy
for the next regular municipal election and more than two years remain in the
unexpired term, the position will be filled by a person elected at a special
election to be held at or before the regular municipal election. The vacancy
shall be filled by council appointment until an election is held. If the next
general municipal election will occur within 365 days of the occurrence of the
vacancy, then the special election will be held concurrently with the general
municipal election. If the next general municipal election will occur more than
365 days after the occurrence of the vacancy, then the special election will be
held before the next general municipal election on a date authorized by state
law.
If the vacancy occurs on or after the first day to file affidavits of candidacy
for the regular municipal election or when less than two years remain in the
unexpired term, there need not be a special election and the appointed person
shall serve until the qualification of a successor.
There shall not be a special primary election conducted in association with the
special election to fill the vacancy. (Ord. IV.3, 11-19-2003; amd. Ord. 2022-
02, 7-19-2022; Ord. 2024-01, 3-20-2024)
CHAPTER 6
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-6-1: Salaries And Compensation
1-6-1: SALARIES AND COMPENSATION:
   A.   Salaries Established: Commencing January 1, 2025, the salaries for
Mayor and Council for the City shall be as follows:
 
Mayor            $10,400.00 annually
Council members  $7,900.00 annually
 
   B.   Salary Adjustment: Every other year, the Mayor and Council shall
receive a salary adjustment in an amount that equals the cost of living
increase provided to the City's non-union employees. Any salary adjustment must
be approved by ordinance of the City Council.
   C.   Workers' Compensation Act: Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, section
176.011, subdivision 9, clause 6, the elected officials of the City are hereby
included in coverage of the Minnesota Workers' Compensation Act. (Ord. 2018-3,
7-17-2018, amd. Ord. 2020-03, 7-21-2020; Ord. 2022-01, 2-15-2022; Ord. 2024-06,
6-28-2024)
CHAPTER 7
CODE OF ETHICS
SECTION:
1-7-1: Statement of Policy
1-7-2: Creation and Purpose of Code
1-7-3: Definitions
1-7-4: Responsibilities of Public Officials
1-7-5: Standards of Service
1-7-6: Prohibition of Special Treatment
1-7-7: Conflict of Interest
1-7-8: Prohibited Political Activities
1-7-9: Applicability of Code
1-7-10: Penalties and Forfeit of Position
1-7-11: Distribution of Code
1-7-12: Severability
1-7-1: STATEMENT OF POLICY:
Proper and efficient operation of Municipal government in the City, requires
that its public officials be independent, impartial and responsible to the
citizens; that Municipal governmental decisions and policy be made in accord
with the proper procedures established by the City; that Municipal public
office not be used for personal gain; and that the citizens of the City have
confidence in the integrity of its Municipal government. (Ord. II.7, 6-1-93)
1-7-2: CREATION AND PURPOSE OF CODE:
In recognition of the above-stated policy, there is hereby established this
Code of Ethics for all public officials of the City. The purpose of this Code
is to establish ethical standards of conduct for all public officials by
delineating those actions that are incompatible with the best interests of the
City and by directing disclosure by public officials of private financial or
other interests in matters affecting the City. (Ord. II.7, 6-1-93)
1-7-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, terms defined herein shall have the following
meaning ascribed to them:
BUSINESS ENTITY: Any business, proprietorship, firm, partnership, person in
representative or fiduciary capacity, association, venture, trust or
corporation.
CITY: The City of Rosemount, Minnesota.
INTEREST: Direct or indirect financial or material benefit realized by a public
official as a result of a contract or transaction which is or may be the
subject of an official act or action by or with the City except for such
contracts or transactions which confer a similar benefit on a significant
number of persons who are not public officials.
For the purposes of this Code, a public official shall be deemed to have an
interest in the affairs of:
   A.   Any person related to him/her by blood or marriage in a degree closer
than the fourth degree of consanguinity or affinity (determined by civil law).
   B.   Any person or business entity with whom a contractual relationship
exists with the public official.
   C.   Any business entity in which the public official is an employee,
officer or director or member having a financial interest.
   D.   Any business entity in which in excess of five percent (5%) of the
total stock or total legal and beneficial ownership is controlled or owned
directly or indirectly by the public official.
PUBLIC OFFICIAL: Any person, officer or employee holding a position by
election, appointment or employment in the service of the City, whether paid or
unpaid, including members of any board, committee or commission thereof. (Ord.
II.7, 6-1-93)
1-7-4: RESPONSIBILITIES OF PUBLIC OFFICIALS:
Public officials are agents of public purpose and hold office for the benefit
of the public. They are bound to uphold the constitution of the United States,
the constitution of the State of Minnesota and to carry out impartially, all
laws of the United States, State of Minnesota, Dakota County and the City of
Rosemount. Public officials must undertake their official duties with the
highest standards of morality and discharge the specific duties of their
respective offices, regardless of personal considerations, recognizing that the
public interest must be their primary concern. Their conduct in carrying out
their official responsibilities must be above reproach. (Ord. II.7, 6-1-93)
1-7-5: STANDARDS OF SERVICE:
   A.   Adherence to Objectives: All public officials of Rosemount should be
loyal to the political objectives expressed by the electorate and the programs
developed by appropriate Municipal action to achieve those objectives.
Appointed officials and employees should adhere to the rules of work and
performance established as the standards for the positions by their appointing
authorities.
   B.   Conformance with Law/Cooperation: Public officials shall not exceed
their authority or breach the law or ask others to do so. They should work in
full cooperation with other public officials, unless prohibited from doing so
by law or by legally recognized confidentiality of their work. (Ord. II.7, 6-1-
93)
1-7-6: PROHIBITION OF SPECIAL TREATMENT:
   A.   Use of Public Property: No public official shall request or permit the
use of City-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property for personal
convenience or profit, except when such items are available to the public
generally or are provided pursuant to Municipal policy for the use of such
public official in the conduct of Rosemount Municipal business.
   B.   Equal Treatment of Citizens: No public official shall grant any special
consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is
available to every other citizen. (Ord. II.7, 6-1-93)
1-7-7: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
No public official shall engage in any business or transaction or shall have an
interest which is incompatible with the discharge in the public interest of
his/her official duties or which would tend to impair his/her independence of
judgment or action in the performance of his/her official duties. Conflicts of
interest include, but are not limited to the following:
   A.   Incompatible Employment: No public official shall engage in or accept
private employment or render services for private interest when such employment
or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his/her official duties
or would tend to impair his/her independence of judgment or action in the
performance of those official duties.
   B.   Use of Information: No public official shall use any information gained
exclusively from his/her public position or endeavors to in any way further
his/her interests.
   C.   Disclosure of Confidential Information: No public official shall,
without proper legal authorization, disclose confidential information
concerning the property, governmental or other affairs of the City.
   D.   Gifts and Favors: No public official shall accept any gift of more than
token value, whether in the form of a service, loan, thing or promise, from any
person, firm or corporation which to the public official's knowledge is
interested directly or indirectly in any manner whatsoever, in business
dealings with the City. Additionally, the public official shall not accept any
gift, favor or thing of more than token value that may tend to influence him/
her in the discharge of official duties or grant in the discharge of said
duties, any improper favor, service or thing of more than negligible value. For
purposes of this Section, "token value" shall mean a gift, favor or thing worth
no more than twenty five dollars ($25.00).
   E.   Representation of Private Interests: No official whose salary is paid
in full or in part by the City shall undertake any of the following actions.
      1.   Appearances Before City Agencies: Except as provided in subsection
1-7-7E4 of this Section, no public official shall appear on behalf of the
private interests of any person or entity before any agency, board, committee,
commission or other entity of the City.
      2.   Proceedings Involving the City: Except as provided in subsection
1-7-7E4 of this Section, no public official shall represent the private
interests of a person or entity in any threatened or commenced legal action or
legal proceeding in which the City is a party when such private interests are
contrary to the interests of the City.
      3.   Consultation/Advice to Private Interests: No public official shall
counsel or provide advice regarding the private interests of any person or
entity with respect to a threatened or commenced legal action or legal
proceeding in which the City is a party when such private interests are
contrary to the City's interests.
      4.   Representation Exception: A public official may represent his/her
own private interests before the City in matters or proceedings set forth in
subsections
1-7-7E1 and
1-7-7E2 of this Section if:
         a.   The public official renounces his/her public position and
authority at all times relevant to representation of his/her own interests; and
         b.   Such representation is limited to the public official's own
interests and does not directly encompass representation of the private
interests of another person or entity.
   F.   Contracts with the City: Except as otherwise provided in Minnesota
Statutes, sections 471.87 through 471.89, no public official shall take part in
the making of a sale, lease or contract for the City when he/she has an
interest in the transaction; nor shall a member of the City be directly or
indirectly interested in any contract the City Council makes.
   G.   Interest in Legislation: No public official shall use his/her official
position with the City to influence the passage or defeat of legislation,
whether at the Municipal or State level, in which the public official has an
interest. (Ord. II.7, 6-1-93)
1-7-8: PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Solicitations: No public official shall in any way solicit funds for
any political party or for any political purpose from another public official.
   B.   Promises and Appointments: No public official shall promise an
appointment to any City position or any other benefit or reward emanating from
the official powers of the public official to a person in exchange for
political activity. (Ord. II.7, 6-1-93)
1-7-9: APPLICABILITY OF CODE:
   A.   Broad Construction: It is intended that this Code of Ethics be
construed broadly so as to encompass all questionable situations and actions.
   B.   Advisory Opinions:
      1.   How Requested: Where any public official has a doubt as to the
applicability of any provision to this Code to a particular situation, or as to
the definition of terms used herein, he/she may apply to the City Attorney for
an advisory opinion. The public official shall have the opportunity to present
his/her interpretation of the facts at issue and the applicability of
provisions of this Code before such advisory opinion is rendered.
      2.   Status of Advisory Opinion: The opinion rendered by the City
Attorney, until amended or revoked, shall be binding on the City, the City
Council and the City Attorney in any subsequent actions concerning the public
official who sought the opinion and acted on it in good faith, unless material
facts were omitted or misstated in the public official's request for the
advisory opinion. The opinion shall not be binding in any action initiated by
any citizen.
      3.   Availability of Information: Any advisory opinion of the City
Attorney shall be made public upon request. However, the names of all persons
or business entities mentioned in the opinion, except that of the public
official requesting the opinion, shall be deemed private information and shall
not be disclosed by the City Attorney, unless the persons or business entities
mentioned in the opinion waive such confidentiality. (Ord. II.7, 6-1-93)
1-7-10: PENALTIES AND FORFEIT OF POSITION:
   A.   City Council Members: Any member of the City Council who violates this
Code should consider whether voluntary resignation or other disciplinary action
is indicated to promote the best interest of the City. The remainder of the
City Council may censure any member of the Council who violates this Code.
   B.   Other Public Official: Any appointed officials or other employees of
the City may be subject to suspension or dismissal from office as a result of
violation of this Code. (Ord. II.7, 6-1-93)
1-7-11: DISTRIBUTION OF CODE:
The City Clerk shall cause a copy of this Code to be distributed to every
public official of the City within thirty (30) days after enactment of this
Code. Each new public official appointed or engaged after initial distribution
to this Code shall be furnished a copy before entering upon his/her Municipal
duties. (Ord. II.7, 6-1-93)
1-7-12: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this Code is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to
be invalid or unconstitutional, or if the application of this Code to any
person or circumstances is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, such
invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the remaining provisions of
this Code, which shall be given effect without the invalid or unconstitutional
provision. (Ord. II.7, 6-1-93)
CHAPTER 8
CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND
SECTION:
1-8-1: Investigation
1-8-1: INVESTIGATION:
The Police Department is authorized to do a criminal history background
investigation on applicants for positions and licenses with the City as
provided by this Section. This Section applies only to applicants who are
finalists for paid or volunteer positions or who are applicants for City
licenses. Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize
the Police Department in writing to undertake the investigation and to release
the information to the City Council, City Administrator and other City staff as
appropriate. Except in the case of exceptions set forth in Minnesota Statutes,
section 364.09, should the City reject the applicant's request for employment
due, partially or solely, to the applicant's prior conviction of a crime, or
deny the applicant's request for a license due, partially or solely, to the
applicant's prior conviction of a crime, the City Administrator shall notify
the applicant in writing of the following:
   A.   The grounds and reasons for the denial;
   B.   The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in Minnesota
Statutes, section 364.06;
   C.   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment or a
license; and
   D.   That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon
reapplication. (Ord. II.8, 11-4-1997)
CHAPTER 9
AUTHORITY TO ISSUE CITATIONS
SECTION:
1-9-1: Authority To Issue Citations
1-9-1: AUTHORITY TO ISSUE CITATIONS:
   A.   Except as expressly modified by this section, no person other than a
peace officer, or part-time peace officer may issue a citation in lieu of
arrest or continued detention, ask a person receiving a citation to give a
written promise to appear in court, or take a person into custody as permitted
by Minnesota Statutes, section 629.34.
   B.   The city code enforcement official, building official or any other
person with authority to enforce the city code may issue a citation in lieu of
arrest where there is probable cause to believe that a person or corporation to
whom the citation is issued has violated any of the following provisions of
this code, or any state statutes that relate to the same subject matter and
provide for a criminal penalty:
      1.   Title 8, chapter 2 (parking).
      2.   Title 9, chapter 4 (building and property maintenance).
      3.   Ordinance B (zoning regulations). (Ord. II.10, 12-5-2000; amd. Ord.
2024-03, 4-16-2024)
CHAPTER 10
ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
1-10-1: Purpose
1-10-2: General Provisions And Definitions
1-10-3: Administrative Citation Procedures
1-10-4: Additional Criminal Penalties
1-10-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this program to execute a new alternative method in
enforcing code compliance. While criminal fines and penalties have been the
most frequent enforcement mechanism, there are certain negative consequences
for both the City and the violator. The penalties associated with the criminal
court system are not always effective solutions to address Code violations.
Accordingly, the City finds that the use of administrative citations and the
imposition of civil penalties is a legitimate and necessary alternative method
of enforcement and will serve to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the
residents of the City. This method of enforcement shall be in addition to any
other legal remedy which may be pursued for code violations. The City is
enacting this administrative citation process pursuant to its authority under
Minn. Stat. §§ 412.221 and 412.231, as well as legal precedent that cities have
the power to direct the mode and manner of enforcing city ordinances. (Ord.
2024-03, 4-16-2024)
1-10-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS:
Any person in violation of this Code shall be subject to an administrative
notice, citation and penalty process outlined in this chapter.
   A.   Administrative Offense: An administrative offense is a violation of any
of the following provisions of this code and is subject to an administrative
citation and civil penalties. Each day a violation exists constitutes a
separate offense.
   B.   Civil Penalty: A civil penalty imposed under this chapter will not
exceed the maximum fine for a misdemeanor under state law.
   C.   Schedule Of Civil Penalties And Fees: The City Council will adopt a fee
schedule of administrative civil penalties for various types of administrative
offenses.
   D.   Abatement Procedures: An administrative offense may be subject to an
abatement order whereby the City or City's agent corrects or removes the
violation.
   E.   Exemption: Alcohol and tobacco license violations are not subject to
administrative citations under this chapter. Traffic and criminal offenses are
not subject to administrative citations under this chapter.
   F.   Confidentiality: Code violation data maintained by the City are
governed by Minnesota Statutes Chapter 13 and are generally considered public
data. The identity of individuals who register complaints with the City
concerning real property is classified as confidential data pursuant to Minn.
Stat. § 13.44. (Ord. 2024-03, 4-16-2024)
1-10-3: ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION PROCEDURES:
   A.   Authority: Any Rosemount peace officer or community service officer,
code enforcement official, building official, or any other person with
authority to enforce the City Code is authorized to issue administrative
notices and citations pursuant to this chapter.
   B.   Administrative Notice: Any person authorized under
1-10-3(A), shall, upon determining there has been a violation, notify the
violator as follows.
      1.   In the case of a vehicular violation, a notice will be attached to
the vehicle in violation.
      2.   The City will deliver the administrative notice to the violator in
person or by regular mail within ten (10) days of the offense. The notice shall
set forth the nature, date, and time of the violation, a description of the
property on which the violation occurred, the name of the official issuing the
notice, the amount of the scheduled penalty should it lead to a citation, and
abatement procedures, if applicable.
      3.   Unless subject to more immediate abatement by the City, pursuant to
City Code section
9-4-11, the violator will have fourteen (14) calendar days to correct the
violation after issuance of the administrative notice. If the violator is
making a good faith attempt to remedy the violation, the City may grant an
extension, the length of which must be agreed upon in writing between the City
and violator.
   C.   Administrative Citation:
      1.   Upon the failure to correct the violation specified in the
administrative notice within the time specified in the notice, the City may
issue an administrative citation.
      2.   The City will deliver the administrative citation in person or by
regular mail, which will contain the following information:
         a.   A description or address of the property on which the code
violation has occurred;
         b.   Reference to the Code that is alleged to be violated;
         c.   The amount of the civil penalty which will be due and payable to
the City within thirty (30) days of the date the citation is mailed or
personally served;
         d.   A statement that the violation must be corrected and the time
frame for compliance;
         e.   A statement that the violation and the amount of the civil
penalty may be contested by notifying the City Clerk in writing within fourteen
(14) calendar days after the citation was mailed or personally delivered; and
         f.   A statement that failure to pay the civil penalty may constitute
a lien upon the property where the violation occurred or a personal obligation
of the violator.
   D.   Contesting Administrative Citation Or Civil Penalty: Any person may
contest an administrative citation or civil penalty by requesting a hearing.
Such request must be in writing and delivered or mailed to the City Clerk
within fourteen (14) calendar days of the issuance of the administrative
citation.
   E.   Administrative Hearing Procedures:
      1.   Hearing Officers: The City will establish a procedure for evaluating
the competency of appointed hearing officers. The City will select a hearing
officer to hear and determine a matter for which a hearing is requested. The
hearing officer will be an impartial citizen with the authority to sustain,
reduce, or dismiss a citation. The hearing officer will be a public officer as
defined by Minn. Stat. § 609.415.
      2.   Notice Of Hearing: Within thirty (30) days of receiving a hearing
request, the City will notify the violator of the date, time, and location of
hearing and the citation or penalty that is being contested.
      3.   File Transmittal: Upon receiving a hearing request, the City will
prepare a file for the case to be delivered or transmitted to the hearing
officer. The case file will contain:
         a.   A copy of the administrative notice to the property owner, if
applicable;
         b.   A copy of the administrative citation;
         c.   Any case history in the applicable City department's files;
         d.   Photographs and/or videotape of the property or the code
violation if available; and
         e.   Any supplemental reports or documents supporting the City's
findings of a violation.
      4.   Violator Evidence: No later than forty-eight (48) hours (two (2)
business days) before the administrative hearing, the violator may provide the
City with a case file that may contain the following information: their summary
of the violation, a personal statement, or any other supporting documentation
or materials (e.g., photographs, audio/visual materials) they wish to use as
evidence. The City will not accept any hearing materials after the 48-hour time
window has passed.
      5.   Presentation Of Case: At the hearing, the parties will have the
opportunity to present testimony and question any witnesses, but strict rules
of evidence will not apply. The hearing officer must tape record the hearing
and may receive testimony and exhibits. The hearing officer must receive and
give weight to evidence, including hearsay evidence, that possesses probative
value commonly accepted by reasonable and prudent people in the conduct of
their affairs.
      6.   Decision: The hearing officer's decision and supporting reasons must
be in writing. The decision will be mailed to the parties within ten business
(10) days after the hearing. The hearing officer has the authority to determine
that a violation occurred, to dismiss a citation, to impose the scheduled
penalty, or to reduce, stay, or waive a scheduled penalty either
unconditionally or upon compliance with appropriate conditions. The hearing
officer may consider any or all of the following factors when imposing a
penalty:
         a.   The duration of the violation;
         b.   The frequency or reoccurrence of the violation;
         c.   The seriousness of the violation;
         d.   The violator's conduct after issuance of the administrative
notice or citation, or notice of hearing;
         e.   The good faith effort by the violator to comply;
         f.   The impact of the violation upon the community; and
         g.   Any other factors appropriate to a just result.
      The hearing officer may not impose a penalty greater than the established
penalty, except that the hearing officer may impose a penalty for each week
that the violation continues if the violation caused a serious threat of harm
to the public health, safety, or welfare as determined by the hearing officer,
or if the violator intentionally and unreasonably refused to comply with the
code requirement. If the hearing officer sustains the citation, the violator
will be given a specified timeframe to remedy the violation. If the violation
is not remedied within the timeframe, the City will issue a second separate
citation to the property owner.
      7.   Failure To Appear: Failure to attend the hearing constitutes an
admission of the violation. A hearing officer may waive this result upon good
cause shown. Examples of "good cause" are death, incapacitating illness or
disability of the accused, or lack of proper service of the citation or notice
of the hearing. "Good cause" does not include forgetfulness and intentional
delay.
      8.   Owner Found In Violation: If the violation is upheld, then the
violator must pay a fee toward the cost of the hearing per the City's fee
schedule.
      9.   Withdrawal Of Hearing Request: At any time prior to the hearing, a
violator may withdraw the hearing request and pay the civil penalty.
   F.   Civil Penalty: The person responsible for the violation who has been
issued a citation and chooses not to appeal for a hearing must pay the
scheduled penalty. Payment of the penalty constitutes admission of the
violation.
      1.   A late payment fee of six percent (6%) of the scheduled penalty must
be assessed quarterly, or part thereof, that the penalty remains unpaid after
the due date.
      2.   A subsequent violation within a 12-month period for the same or
substantially similar offense, the penalty increases to the amount set forth in
the City's fee schedule.
      3.   The City may issue a second citation or take other legal action to
achieve code compliance including, but not limited to, abatement actions
correcting or removing the violation.
   G.   Recovery Of Civil Penalties:
      1.   If a civil penalty is not paid within the time specified, it shall
constitute:
         a.   A personal obligation of the violator; or
         b.   A lien against the real property upon which the violation
occurred if the property or improvements on the property was the subject of the
violation.
      2.   A lien may be assessed against the property and collected in the
same manner as taxes.
      3.   A personal obligation may be collected by appropriate legal means.
      4.   Failure to pay a civil penalty is grounds for suspending or revoking
a permit associated with the violation.
      5.   During the time a civil penalty remains unpaid, no city approval
will be granted for a license, permit, or other city approval sought by the
violator or for property under the violator's ownership or control.
   H.   Abatement Procedure: Nothing in this chapter is intended to limit the
City's authority in Section
9-4-11 of this Code. (Ord. 2024-03, 4-16-2024)
1-10-4: ADDITIONAL CRIMINAL PENALTIES:
Criminal Penalties: The following are misdemeanors, punishable in accordance
with the state law: Failure to pay a civil penalty imposed by the City or a
hearing officer within the specified time frame. (Ord. 2024-03, 4-16-2024; amd.
Ord. 2025-02, 1-21-2025)
 
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Establishment Of Commission
2-1-2: Organization And Meetings
2-1-3: Oath; Compensation
2-1-4: Zoning Powers And Duties
2-1-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION:
A city planning commission for the city is hereby established. The commission
shall be the city planning agency.
Such planning commission shall consist of up to seven (7) members to be
appointed by the city council and may be removed by a four- fifths (4/5) vote
of the council. Planning commission members may be removed by the city council
at any time when, in the judgment of the council, the public welfare will be
promoted by such removal.
Terms of the commissioners shall be determined in the planning commission
bylaws. (Ord. 2015-03, 4-7-2015)
2-1-2: ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS:
   A.   Supporting Staff: The city council shall provide adequate personnel to
assist the commission in fulfilling its duties as stated herein.
   B.   Meetings, Records, Expenditures: The commission shall hold at least one
regular meeting each month. It shall adopt rules for the transaction of
business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions and findings,
which record shall be a public record. Expenditures of the commission shall be
within amounts appropriated for certain purposes by the city council. (Ord.
VIII.3, 3-6-2000)
   C.   Officers: The commission will elect a chairperson, vice chairperson and
other officers as determined in the bylaws. (Ord. VIII.6, 3-6-2003)
2-1-3: OATH; COMPENSATION:
Every appointed member shall, before entering upon the discharge of his duties,
take an oath that he will faithfully discharge the duties of his office.
Compensation for the members shall be determined by the city council. (Ord.
VIII.5, 4-17-2001)
2-1-4: ZONING POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Prepare Comprehensive Plan: It shall be the function and duty of the
planning commission to prepare and update a comprehensive city plan for the
physical, economic and social development of the city. The plan shall be
submitted to the city council for adoption according to procedures set forth by
the city council.
   B.   Prepare Zoning Ordinance: After the adoption of a land use plan for the
municipality, the planning commission, for the purpose of carrying out the
policies and goals of the land use plan, may, and upon instructions by the city
council, shall prepare a proposed zoning ordinance and submit it to the
governing body with its recommendations.
   C.   Development Review: The commission shall review and act upon all
development proposals in the city according to the authority and procedures set
forth in the zoning and subdivision regulations. The commission shall annually
review the five (5) year capital improvement program and submit its
recommendations to the city council. (Ord. XVII-1, 3-4-1971; amd. 1983 Code;
Ord. VIII.5, 4-17-2001)
CHAPTER 2
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-2-1: Establishment Of Commission
2-2-2: Organization And Meetings
2-2-3: Oath; Compensation
2-2-4: Powers And Duties
2-2-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION:
A City Parks and Recreation Commission is hereby established for the City.
The commission shall consist of up to nine (9) members appointed by the City
Council. Terms of the members shall be determined in the commission bylaws.
(Ord. 2017-01, 4-4-2017)
2-2-2: ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS:
The commission shall elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from its members
together with such other officers it deems necessary. The commission shall meet
at least once a month and shall submit its official meeting minutes to the City
Council each and every month. (Ord. VIII.6, 3-6-2003)
2-2-3: OATH; COMPENSATION 1 :
Every appointed member shall, before entering upon the discharge of his duties,
take an oath that he will faithfully discharge the duties of his office.
Compensation for the members shall be determined by the City Council. (Ord.
VIII-1, 10-5-1971; amd. 1983 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See resolution 1992-141 on file in the Office of the City Clerk.
2-2-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Advice And Recommendations: The commission shall have the duty to
advise the City Council in the acquisition and maintenance of parks,
playgrounds and other public lands. It shall also have the duty of making
recommendations and supervising the City recreation system. The commission
shall recommend to the City Council expansion and plans for the development of
the City park and recreation system. The commission shall further make
recommendations as to desired regulatory ordinances and make recommendations as
to any matters relating to the park and recreation system of the City.
   B.   Investigate Needs Of System: The commission shall have no power to make
contracts, levy taxes, borrow money or condemn property, but shall have the
full power and responsibility to investigate requirements and needs of the City
park and recreation system and to assist the Council in formulating the terms
of and the procedure for accomplishing that goal. (Ord. VIII-1, 10-5-1971)
CHAPTER 3
CIVIL DEFENSE AGENCY AND COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-3-1: Civil Defense Agency
2-3-2: Civil Defense Coordinator
2-3-3: Civil Defense Personnel, Volunteers
2-3-4: Civil Defense Advisory Committee Created
2-3-5: Civil Defense Fund Created
2-3-1: CIVIL DEFENSE AGENCY:
   A.   Establishment: There is hereby established a local Civil Defense
Agency, pursuant to the requirement of Minnesota Statutes, chapter 12, to
provide for the exercise of necessary powers during civil defense emergencies,
for the purpose set forth in said chapter 12.
   B.   Coordination with Other Agencies: The civil defense functions of the
City shall be coordinated to the extent practicable with comparable functions
of the Federal, State and other local governments, as well as private agencies.
   C.   Liability Provisions: All functions hereunder and all other activities
relating to civil defense are hereby declared to be governmental functions. The
City and, except in cases of wilful misconduct, its officers, agents, employees
or representatives engaged in any civil defense activities, while complying
with or attempting to comply with the Minnesota Civil Defense Act 1  or with
this Chapter or any rule, regulation or order made thereunder, shall not be
liable for the death of or injury to persons or damage to property as a result
of such activity. The provisions of this subsection shall not affect the right
of any person to receive benefits to which he would otherwise be entitled under
this Chapter or under the Workmen's Compensation Law, or under any pension law,
nor the right of any such person to receive benefits or compensation under acts
of Congress.
 
Notes
1 1. M.S.A. §§12.01 et seq.
2-3-2: CIVIL DEFENSE COORDINATOR:
   A.   Appointment; Responsibility: The Civil Defense Agency shall be under
the supervision and control of a Coordinator of Civil Defense, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor for an indefinite term and who may be removed by him at
any time. The Coordinator shall be paid his ordinary and necessary operating
expenses and such salary as the Council shall from time to time provide by
resolution. The Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the
administration of the Civil Defense Agency, subject to the direction and
control of the Mayor. The Agency shall be organized into such divisions and
bureaus, consistent with the State and local civil defense plans, as the
Coordinator deems necessary.
   B.   Powers and Duties:
      1.   Studies and Surveys: The Coordinator shall make such studies and
surveys of the manpower, industries, resources and facilities of the City as he
deems necessary to determine their adequacy for civil defense and to plan for
their most efficient use in time of a civil defense emergency.
      2.   Preparation of General Plan: The Coordinator shall prepare a
comprehensive general plan for the civil defense of the City and shall present
such plan to the Council for approval. When the Council has approved the plan
by resolution, it shall be the duty of all Municipal agencies and all civil
defense forces of the City to perform the duties and functions assigned by the
plan as approved. The plan may be modified in like manner from time to time.
      3.   Report to Council: The Coordinator shall, as soon as possible after
the end of each fiscal year, prepare and present to the Council for the
information of the Council and the public, a comprehensive report of the
activities of the Civil Defense Agency during the year.
      4.   Emergency Hospitals: Consistent with the civil defense plan, the
Coordinator shall provide and equip emergency hospitals, casualty stations,
ambulances, canteens, evacuation centers and other facilities or conveyances
for the care of injured or homeless persons.
   C.   Cooperation With Other Agencies: The Coordinator shall utilize the
personnel, services and equipment, supplies and facilities of existing
departments and other agencies of the City to the maximum extent practicable.
The officers and personnel of all such departments and agencies shall, to the
maximum extent practicable, cooperate with and extend such services and
facilities to the local Civil Defense Agency and to the Governor upon request.
The head of each department and agency, in cooperation with and under the
direction of the Coordinator, shall be responsible for the planning and
programming of such civil defense activities as will involve the utilization of
the facilities of his department or agency.
   D.   Training and Preparation:
      1.   Training and Information: In accordance with the State and City
civil defense plans, the Coordinator shall institute such training programs and
public information programs and shall take all other preparatory steps,
including the partial or full mobilization of civil defense forces in advance
of actual disaster, as may be necessary to the prompt and effective operation
of the City civil defense plan in time of a civil defense emergency. He may
from time to time conduct such practice air raid alerts or other civil defense
exercises as he may deem necessary.
      2.   Recruitment and Training: The Coordinator shall, in cooperation with
existing City departments and agencies affected, organize, recruit and train
air raid wardens, auxiliary police, auxiliary firemen, emergency medical
personnel and any other personnel that may be required on a volunteer basis to
carry out the civil defense plan of the City and the State. The Coordinator may
dismiss any civil defense volunteer at any time and require him to surrender
any equipment and identification device furnished by the City.
2-3-3: CIVIL DEFENSE PERSONNEL, VOLUNTEERS:
   A.   Personnel Designated: Civil defense forces shall consist of personnel
employed by the City and any other volunteer or paid member of the local Civil
Defense Agency engaged in carrying on civil defense functions in accordance
with the provisions of this Chapter.
   B.   Emergency Call For Volunteers: Civil defense volunteers shall be called
into service only in case of a civil defense emergency for which the regular
Municipal forces are inadequate or for necessary training and preparation for
such emergencies.
   C.   Personnel Procedures, Application: Personnel procedures of the City
applicable to regular employees shall not apply to volunteer civil defense
workers but shall apply to paid employees of the Civil Defense Agency.
   D.   Identification Required: Each civil defense volunteer shall be provided
with such suitable insignia or other identification as may be required by the
Coordinator. Such identification shall be in a form and style approved by the
Federal government. No volunteer shall exercise any authority over the persons
or property of others without his identification of a volunteer or otherwise
represent himself to be an authorized volunteer.
2-3-4: CIVIL DEFENSE ADVISORY COMMITTEE CREATED:
There is hereby created within the Civil Defense Agency a Civil Defense
Advisory Committee, hereinafter called the Committee, the members of which
shall be appointed by the Mayor. The Mayor shall be chairman and the
Coordinator shall be secretary of the Committee. The Committee shall advise the
Coordinator and the Council on all matters pertaining to civil defense. Each
member shall serve without compensation and shall hold office at the pleasure
of the Mayor.
2-3-5: CIVIL DEFENSE FUND CREATED:
There is hereby established in the City Treasury a special fund to be known as
the Civil Defense Fund. Into this Fund shall be placed the proceeds of taxes
levied for civil defense, money transferred from other funds, gifts and other
revenues to the Civil Defense Agency. From it shall be made expenditures for
the operation and maintenance of the Civil Defense Agency and other
expenditures for civil defense. Regular accounting, disbursement, purchasing,
budgeting and other financial procedures of the City shall apply to the Civil
Defense Fund insofar as practicable, but budgeting requirements and other
financial procedures shall not apply to expenditures from the Fund in any case
when their application would prevent compliance with terms and conditions of a
Federal or State grant of money or property for civil defense purposes. (Ord.
IX.1, 7-15-75)
CHAPTER 4
PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-4-1: Establishment Of Commission
2-4-2: Organization
2-4-3: Oath; Compensation
2-4-4: Powers And Duties, Jurisdiction
2-4-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION:
The public utilities commission of the city as authorized by Minnesota
Statutes, sections 412.321 through 412.391, which sections are hereby expressly
accepted, is hereby established.
The commission shall consist of three (3) members appointed by the city council
for three (3) year terms. Terms will commence on April 1 of the year appointed.
(Ord. VIII.5, 4-17-2001)
Ex officio members of the commission shall be the city administrator and the
mayor. (Ord. VII.6, 2-18-1992)
The public works director for the city will act as the executive director for
the utilities commission. In that capacity the executive director will take
direction from the commission, report to the commission with information and
recommendations on all matters at the direction of the commission or on his/her
own initiative.
Secretarial service to the commission shall be provided by city staff as
directed by the commission executive director.
The commission will meet at least once monthly at a time and place set by
majority votes of the commission. These will be considered public meetings.
(Ord. VII.5, 4-5-1988)
2-4-2: ORGANIZATION:
The provisions of Minnesota Statutes, section 412.321 shall apply to the
composition, terms, appointment, qualifications and removal of members of the
commission. (Ord. VII.5, 4-5-1988)
2-4-3: OATH; COMPENSATION 1 :
Every appointed member shall, before entering upon the discharge of his/her
duties, take an oath that he will faithfully discharge the duties of his
office. Compensation for the members shall be determined by the city council.
(Ord. VIII.5, 4-17-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. See resolution 1992-141 on file in the office of the city clerk.
2-4-4: POWERS AND DUTIES, JURISDICTION:
   A.   The public utilities commission shall have responsibility over the
following public utilities of the city 1 :
      1.   City operated water systems.
      2.   City operated sanitary sewer systems.
      3.   City operated storm water systems.
      4.   Other utility systems serving the general public in Rosemount where
the city has a determined part in determining the need and level of such
service.
      5.   Any public buildings owned and operated by the city for functions
directly relating to items in subsections A1 through A4 of this section.
   B.   With respect to the public utilities commission areas of jurisdiction
enumerated above, the public utilities commission shall have the powers
prescribed by law 2  and more specifically as follows: (Ord. VII.5, 4-5-1988)
      1.   To review and adopt operating budgets and authorize expenditures for
funds specifically set out for use in the operation and maintenance of the
above referenced utilities.
      2.   To review all proposed developments in the city including
residential, industrial and commercial in nature and make recommendations, as
part of that review process, to the city council on these proposed developments
as they relate to the needs of the community in all areas of the above
referenced utilities. These reviews being a required part of the approval
process for proposed developments.
      3.   At least annually, at the commission's regularly scheduled January
meeting, or more frequently if deemed necessary by the commission, review all
user fees, connection charges and other associated forms of revenue to these
utilities and present recommendations to the city council regarding these fees.
Adding or deleting of such fees will also be determined, through this process.
(Ord. VIII.3, 3-6-2000)
   C.   The public utilities commission shall also be responsible for review of
cable services within the city for the following purposes:
      1.   To monitor the cable company's performance as to level of service.
      2.   To advise and make recommendations to the city council concerning
use of franchise fees.
   D.   The commission jurisdiction is limited to what is specified in the
cable franchise agreements. It has no power to adjust or approve cable rates or
to require the cable company to improve level of service or to expand into new
service areas within the city. The commission may do the following:
      1.   Review and adopt operating budgets with respect to the amount of
revenue the city receives from the franchise fee.
      2.   Authorize expenditures for funds specifically budgeted by the
commission.
      3.   Conciliate disagreements among the cable company, subscribers and
users of the system.
      4.   Submit an annual report to the cable company and city council
assessing the company's performance according to the terms of the franchise
agreement. (Ord. VII.6, 2-18-1992)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 4 of this code.
2 2. M.S.A. § 216A.05.
CHAPTER 5
ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABILITY COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-5-1: Establishment Of Commission
2-5-2: Organization And Meetings
2-5-3: Oath; Compensation
2-5-4: Powers And Duties
2-5-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION:
An Environment and Sustainability Commission is hereby established for the
City.
The commission shall consist of up to seven (7) members and one (1) youth
member appointed by the City Council. Terms of the members shall be determined
in the commission bylaws. (Ord. 2020-02, 2-4-2020)
2-5-2: ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS:
The commission shall elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from its members
together with such other officers it deems necessary. The commission shall meet
at least once a month and shall submit its official meeting minutes to the City
Council every month. (Ord. 2020-02, 2-4-2020)
2-5-3: OATH; COMPENSATION:
Every appointed member shall, before entering upon the discharge of his or her
duties, take an oath that he or she will faithfully discharge the duties of the
office. Compensation for the members shall be determined by the City Council.
(Ord. 2020-02, 2-4-2020)
2-5-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Advice and Recommendations: The commission shall have the duty to
advise the City Council on issues related to sustainability, environmental
stewardship, and opportunities for advancement on those fronts. The commission
shall recommend any policies or initiatives to the City Council that enhance
and preserve the environment and natural resources.
   B.   Investigate Environmental Opportunities: The commission shall have no
power to make contracts, levy taxes, borrow money or condemn property, but
shall have the full power and responsibility to investigate needed modification
or programs to enhance and preserve the local environment, and to assist the
Council in formulating the terms of and the procedure for accomplishing that
goal. (Ord. 2020-02, 2-4-2020)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
LIQUOR REGULATIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Provisions Of State Law Adopted
3-1-2: Definitions
3-1-3: Licenses Required
3-1-3-1: License Types
3-1-3-2: Apportionment Of Intoxicating Liquor Licenses
3-1-4: License Applications
3-1-4-1: Contents Of Initial Applications
3-1-4-2: Execution Of Application
3-1-4-3: Renewal Applications
3-1-4-4: Amendment Application
3-1-5: License Fees
3-1-6: Granting Of Licenses
3-1-7: Persons Ineligible For License
3-1-8: Places Ineligible For License
3-1-9: Conditions Of License
3-1-10: Restrictions Involving Underage Person(s)
3-1-11: Liability Insurance
3-1-12: Temporary Licenses
3-1-13: On-Sale License On Public Premises
3-1-14: Outdoor Patios And Decks
3-1-15: License Revocation Or Suspension; Civil Penalty
3-1-16: Consumption In Public Places
3-1-1: PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW ADOPTED:
Except to the extent the provisions of this chapter are more restrictive, the
provisions of Minnesota statutes, chapter 340A, as amended from time to time,
relating to the definition of terms, licensing, consumption, sales, hours of
sale, and all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution and
consumption of intoxicating liquor and 3.2 percent malt liquor are adopted and
made a part of this chapter as if set out in full. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
3-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Any beverage containing more than 0.5 percent alcohol by
volume.
APPLICANT: Any person making an application for a license under this chapter.
BREWERY, SMALL: A facility that produces not more than twenty thousand (20,000)
barrels of malt liquor in a calendar year as regulated by Minnesota statutes,
as may be amended.
BREWPUB: A restaurant with a microbrewery use operated on the same premises as
the restaurant.
CLUB: As defined in Minnesota statutes, chapter 340A, as amended.
COCKTAIL ROOM: An area within a microdistillery, or a premises adjacent to the
microdistillery and under the same ownership as the microdistillery, that
provides the on-sale of the distilled liquor produced by the microdistillery.
COMMISSIONER: The state commissioner of public safety.
DISTILLERY, MICRO: A facility that produces not more than forty thousand
(40,000) proof gallons of distilled spirits in a calendar year as regulated by
Minnesota statutes, as may be amended.
HOTEL: An establishment where, in consideration of payment therefor, food and
lodging are regularly furnished to transients and which has a resident
proprietor or manager; a dining room serving the general public at tables and
having facilities for seating at least thirty (30) guests at one time; and at
least twenty five (25) guestrooms.
INTOXICATING LIQUOR: Ethyl alcohol, distilled, fermented, spirituous, vinous
and malt beverages containing more than 3.2 percent of alcohol by weight.
LICENSE: A document, issued by the city, permitting an applicant to carry on
and transact the business stated therein.
LICENSEE: An applicant who, pursuant to the approved application, holds a
valid, current, unexpired license, which has neither been revoked nor is then
under suspension, from the city for carrying on the business stated therein.
MALT LIQUOR: Any beer, ale, or other beverage made from malt by fermentation
and containing not less than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume.
OFF-SALE: The sale of alcoholic beverages in original packages for consumption
off the licensed premises only.
OPERATING OFFICER, MANAGER OR AGENT: A natural person, who is a resident of the
state of Minnesota, appointed in writing to take full responsibility for the
conduct of the licensed premises and serves as agent for service of notices and
other process relating to the license.
PREMISES: The licensed premises as described in the issued license. In the case
of a restaurant or a club licensed for on- sales of alcoholic beverages and
located on a golf course, "licensed premises" means the entire golf course
except for areas where motor vehicles are regularly parked or operated.
RESTAURANT: An establishment, other than a hotel, under the control of a single
proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the premises and
served at tables to the general public, and having a minimum seating capacity
for guests as prescribed by the appropriate license issuing authority.
SALE, SELL AND SOLD: Includes all barters and all manners or means of
furnishing intoxicating and 3.2 percent malt liquors or wine in violation or
evasion of law and also includes the usual meaning of the terms.
TAPROOM: An area within a microbrewery, small brewery or brewery; or a premises
adjacent to the microbrewery, small brewery or brewery and under the same
ownership as the microbrewery, small brewery or brewery; that provides the on-
sale of the malt liquor produced by the microbrewery, small brewery or brewery.
3.2 PERCENT MALT LIQUOR: Malt liquor containing not less than 0.5 percent
alcohol by volume nor more than 3.2 percent alcohol by weight.
TOTAL REVENUES: All revenues from the sale of food, alcoholic beverages and
nonalcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises during the hours when
the sale of alcoholic beverages is allowed.
WINE: A beverage made by normal alcoholic fermentation of grapes, grape juice,
other fruits or honey or a beverage made from other agricultural products,
imitation wine, compounds sold as wine, vermouth, cider, perry, and sake,
containing not less than 0.5 percent nor more than twenty four percent (24%)
alcohol by volume for nonindustrial use. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015; Ord. 2021-05,
10-5-2021)
3-1-3: LICENSES REQUIRED:
   A.   General Requirement: No person, except as provided in Minnesota
statutes, sections 340A.301 and 340A.510, regarding samples at off-sale
establishments, and manufacturers and wholesalers to the extent authorized by
law, shall directly or indirectly deal in, sell, keep for sale or deliver any
intoxicating liquor, 3.2 percent malt liquor or wine without first having
received a license to do so as provided in this chapter; nor shall any private
club or public place, directly or indirectly, or upon any pretense or by any
device, allow the consumption or display of intoxicating liquor or serve any
liquid for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquor without first
obtaining a license from the city as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2015-06,
7-7-2015)
3-1-3-1: LICENSE TYPES:
   A.   On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor Licenses: On-sale licenses shall be issued
only to those establishments allowed under Minnesota statutes, section
340A.404.
   B.   On-Sale Wine Licenses: On-sale wine licenses shall be issued only to
restaurants meeting the qualifications of Minnesota statutes, section 340A.404,
subdivision 5, and whose total revenues are at least fifty one percent (51%)
attributable to the sale of food and shall permit only the sale of wine not
exceeding twenty four percent (24%) alcohol by volume, for consumption on the
licensed premises only, in conjunction with the sale of food. A holder of an
on-sale wine license who is also licensed to sell 3.2 percent malt liquors at
on-sale may sell intoxicating malt liquor at on-sale without an additional
license.
   C.   Club On-Sale Intoxicating Licenses: Club on-sale intoxicating liquor
licenses shall be issued only to clubs or congressionally chartered veterans
organizations which meet the qualifications of Minnesota statutes, section
340A.404, subdivision 1.
   D.   Special License For Sunday Sales: A special license authorizing sales
on Sunday in conjunction with the serving of food may be issued to any hotel,
restaurant or club which has facilities for serving at least thirty (30) guests
at one time, and which has an on-sale license.
   E.   Off-Sale Intoxicating Liquor Licenses: Off-sale intoxicating liquor
licenses shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages in original packages for
consumption off the premises only.
   F.   On-Sale 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor Licenses: On-sale 3.2 percent malt
liquor licenses may be granted only to clubs, restaurants and hotels where food
is prepared and served for consumption on the premises, and golf courses. On-
sale 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses shall permit the sale for consumption on
the premises only.
   G.   Off-Sale 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor Licenses: Off-sale 3.2 percent malt
liquor licenses shall permit the sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor at retail in
the original package for consumption off the premises only.
   H.   On-Sale Brewer Taproom License: A brewer taproom license may be issued
to a brewer for on-sale consumption of the malt liquor manufactured at the
adjoining brewery pursuant to the requirements of Minnesota statutes 340A, but
only to the extent permitted by this code and the zoning ordinance. Council may
authorize a taproom to conduct on-sale business on Sundays with no additional
license needed.
   I.   Off-Sale Small Brewer License: An off-sale small brewer license may be
issued to a brewer who has a license from the commissioner in accordance with
the requirements of Minnesota statutes 340A. Council may authorize a small
brewer to conduct sales of growlers only at off-sale on Sundays with no
additional license needed.
   J.   Brewpub Off-Sale Intoxicating Liquor License: An off-sale brewpub
license may be issued to a restaurant who has a license from the commissioner
in accordance with the requirements of Minnesota statutes 340A. Council may
authorize a brewpub to conduct sales of growlers only at off-sale on Sundays
with no additional license needed.
   K.   Microdistillery Cocktail Room License: A microdistillery cocktail room
license may be issued to a holder of a microdistillery license from the
commissioner in accordance with the requirements of Minnesota statutes 340A.
   L.   Public Premises Licenses: On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses for
events taking place at a sports, convention or cultural facility owned by the
city may be granted as authorized by section
3-1-13 of this chapter.
   M.   Temporary On-Sale 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor Licenses: Temporary 3.2
percent malt liquor licenses may be granted to a club or charitable, religious,
or nonprofit organization as authorized by section
3-1-12 of this chapter.
   N.   Temporary On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor Licenses: Temporary on- sale
intoxicating liquor licenses may be granted as authorized by section
3-1-12 of this chapter.
   O.   Temporary Brewer On-Sale Licenses: Temporary on-sale intoxicating
liquor licenses may be granted as authorized by section
3-1-12 of this chapter.
   P.   One Day Consumption And Display Permit: A one day permit for the
consumption and display of intoxicating liquor may be granted as authorized by
section
3-1-12 of this chapter.
   Q.   Consumption And Display Permits: Consumption and display permits may be
approved by council for issuance by the commissioner in accordance with the
provisions of Minnesota statutes, section 340A.414, for the consumption or
display of intoxicating liquor or the serving of any liquid for the purpose of
mixing with intoxicating liquor. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015; Ord. 2021-05, 10-5-
2021)
3-1-3-2: APPORTIONMENT OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR LICENSES:
   A.   Intoxicating liquor licenses will be issued within the total liquor
license limits established in Minnesota statutes, section 340A.413, as amended.
   B.   There shall be no limit on the number of off-sale intoxicating liquor
licenses. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015, amd. Ord. 2020-04, 11-4-2020; Ord. 2021-05,
10-5-2021)
3-1-4: LICENSE APPLICATIONS:
3-1-4-1: CONTENTS OF INITIAL APPLICATIONS:
   A.   General: In addition to the information which may be required by the
forms of the commissioner, the application for any type of license to be issued
under this chapter shall contain information required by this section.
   B.   Nature Of Application: The application shall show whether the applicant
is a natural person, corporation, partnership or other firm or organization.
      1.   Natural Person: If the applicant is a natural person, the following
information shall be required:
         a.   True name, place and date of birth, and street residence address
of the applicant.
         b.   Whether the applicant has ever used or been known by a name other
than his or her true name and, if so, what was such name or names, and
information concerning dates and places where used.
         c.   The name of the business if it is to be conducted under a
designation, name or style other than the full individual name of the
applicant; in such case a copy of the certification, as required by Minnesota
statutes, chapter 333, certified by the secretary of state, shall be attached
to the application.
         d.   Street addresses at which the applicant has lived during the
preceding ten (10) years.
         e.   Kind, name and location of every business or occupation the
applicant has been engaged in during the preceding ten (10) years.
         f.   Names and addresses of the applicant's employers and partners, if
any, for the preceding ten (10) years.
         g.   Whether the applicant or his spouse, has ever been convicted of
any crime or violation of any city ordinance, other than traffic. If so, the
applicant shall furnish information as to the time, place and offense for which
convictions were had.
      2.   Partnership: If the applicant is a partnership, the following
information shall be required:
         a.   The names and addresses of all partners and all information
concerning each partner as is required of an individual applicant in subsection
B1 of this section. A managing partner or partners shall be designated. The
interest of each partner in the business shall be disclosed.
         b.   A true copy of the partnership agreement.
         c.   If the partnership is required to file a certificate as to a
trade name under the provisions of Minnesota statutes, chapter 333, a true copy
of such certificate certified by the secretary of state shall be attached to
the application.
      3.   Corporation: If the applicant is a corporation or other association,
the following information shall be required:
         a.   Name and, if incorporated, the state of incorporation.
         b.   A true copy of the certificate of incorporation, articles of
incorporation or association agreement and bylaws and, if a foreign
corporation, a certificate of authority, as described in Minnesota statutes.
         c.   The name of the manager or proprietor or other agent in charge of
the premises to be licensed, giving all the information about said person as is
required of an individual applicant in subsection B1 of this section.
         d.   A list of all persons who, singly or together with their spouses,
or a parent, brother, sister or child of either of them, own or control an
interest in said corporation or association in excess of ten percent (10%) or
who are officers or directors of said corporation or association, together with
all information as is required of an individual applicant in subsection B1 of
this section.
      4.   Club: If an application is submitted by a club, the following
information shall be submitted in addition to that required by the commissioner
of public safety:
         a.   The name of the club and the purpose for which the club was
originally organized and for which it is now existing.
         b.   The date and location that the club was first incorporated, and,
where appropriate, the date that the establishment serving the club was
incorporated or otherwise established. True copies of the articles of
incorporation, bylaws, or other similar governing documents shall be submitted
with the application.
         c.   The number of members.
         d.   The name of the manager, proprietor or other person who shall be
in charge of the licensed premises together with all information concerning
such person as is required of an individual applicant in subsection B1 of this
section.
         e.   A sworn statement by a responsible individual having personal
knowledge of the facts shall be submitted with the application verifying that
the club meets all the requirements of Minnesota statutes, sections 340A.404
and 340A.101, subdivision 7. In the event that no person can make such a
statement, satisfactory documentary proof may be submitted in support of such
facts.
   C.   Type: The application shall state the type of license the applicant
seeks.
   D.   Description Of Premises:
      1.   Legal Description: The exact legal description of the premises to be
licensed together with a plot plan of the area showing dimensions, location of
buildings, street access, parking facilities and the locations of and distances
to the nearest church buildings and school grounds.
      2.   Street Address: The street address where the sale of alcoholic
beverages is to be conducted.
      3.   Plans Of Premises: A set of plans showing the design of the proposed
compact and contiguous premises within which alcoholic beverages may be
dispensed and consumed. The plan shall show room dimensions and shall indicate
the number of persons intended to be served in each of said rooms.
   E.   Financial And Interest Criteria:
      1.   Financial Interest: The names and addresses of all persons, other
than the applicant, who have any financial interest in the business, buildings,
premises, fixtures, furniture, stock in trade; the nature of such interest,
amount thereof, terms for payment or other reimbursement. This shall include,
but not be limited to, any lessees, lessors, mortgagees, mortgagors, lenders,
lienholders, trustees, trustors and persons who have cosigned notes or have
otherwise loaned, pledged or extended security for any indebtedness of the
applicant.
      2.   Amount Of Investment: The amount of investment that the applicant
has in the business, building, premises, fixtures and structures, exclusive of
land, on the premises proposed to be licensed.
   F.   References: The names, and addresses of three (3) persons, residents of
the state, of good moral character, not related to the applicant or financially
interested in the premises or business, who may be referred to as to the
applicant's character or, in the case where information is required of a
manager, the manager's character.
   G.   Taxes: Whether or not all real estate taxes, assessments, or other
financial claim of the city, state or federal government for the business and
premises to be licensed have been paid, and if not paid, the years for which
delinquent.
   H.   Description Of Proposed Business: A detailed narrative description of
the proposed business for which the license is sought including, but not
limited to: type of clientele, type of entertainment (if any), type of food
menu (if any), and fixtures.
   I.   Other Information Required: Such other information as the city council
shall require. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
3-1-4-2: EXECUTION OF APPLICATION:
If the application is by a natural person, it shall be signed and sworn to by
such person; if by a corporation, by an officer thereof; if by a partnership,
by one of the partners; if by an incorporated association, by the operating
officer or managing officer thereof. If the applicant is a partnership, the
application, license and bond or insurance policy shall be made and issued in
the name of all partners. It shall be unlawful to make any false statement in
an application. Applications shall be filed with the city clerk. (Ord. 2015-06,
7-7-2015)
3-1-4-3: RENEWAL APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Time Of Making Application: Applications for the renewal of an existing
license shall be made at least sixty (60) days prior to the date of the
expiration of the license, and shall state that everything in the prior
applications remains true and correct except as otherwise indicated. The city
will mail application forms to existing licensees approximately ninety (90)
days prior to expiration of the licenses. If, in the judgment of the council,
good and sufficient cause is shown by any applicant for his failure to file for
a renewal within the time period provided, the council may, if the other
provisions of this chapter are complied with, grant the application. (Ord.
2015-06, 7-7-2015)
3-1-4-4: AMENDMENT APPLICATION:
   A.   Purpose Of An Amendment: A licensee may request an amendment to the
license during the calendar year term of the license for any of the following
purposes:
      1.   Change in ownership of ten percent (10%) or more of the stock of the
corporation or change in ownership which results in any party acquiring an
interest which, together with that of a spouse, parent, brother, sister or
child, exceeds ten percent (10%).
      2.   Change in the operating officer, manager, or agent of establishment.
      3.   Request to modify a condition(s) within the license.
      4.   Request to expand the permitted license area.
   B.   Material Required: The following application material shall be provided
as part of the amendment application:
      1.   Change In Ownership Of Establishment: An amendment application shall
be submitted with any changes to the original application. In addition,
applicant shall submit all information as is required of an individual
applicant in subsection
3-1-4-1B1 of this chapter, for each party who acquires an interest which,
together with that of a spouse, parent, brother, sister or child, exceeds ten
percent (10%).
      2.   Change In Corporate Officers, Operating Officer, Manager Or Agent Of
Establishment: An amendment application shall be submitted with all information
as is required of an individual applicant in subsection B1 of this section.
      3.   Request To Modify A Condition(s) Within The License: The licensee
shall provide in writing the condition that is requested to be modified, the
modification that is requested, and the factors that the city council should
consider when determining the modification.
      4.   Request To Expand The Licensed Premises: The licensee shall provide
in writing the plans for the expansion including the necessary building permit
application, landscaping plans and all plans as requested by staff. A revised
certificate of liability insurance must also be submitted showing liquor
liability coverage for the expanded area.
   C.   Submission Time Frame: Amendment applications shall be submitted on or
before thirty (30) days prior to the effective dates of any changes. (Ord.
2015-06, 7-7-2015)
3-1-5: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Fees: The fees for licenses, amendments and permits shall be as
established from time to time by resolution of the city council subject to
limitations set by Minnesota statutes 340A and this code.
   B.   Payment Of Fees: The license fee for a new license shall be paid in
full before the application for the license is accepted, and at least ten (10)
days before the public hearing on the application. All fees shall be paid into
the general fund of the city. Upon rejection of any application for a license
or upon withdrawal of an application before approval of the issuance by the
council, the license fee shall be refunded to the applicant.
   C.   Term, Pro Rata Fee: Each license shall be issued for a period of one
year except that if the application is made during the license year, a license
may be issued for the remainder of the year for a pro rata fee, with any
unexpired fraction of a month being counted as one month. Every license shall
expire as provided in section
3-1-6 of this chapter.
   D.   Refunds: No refund of any fee shall be made except as authorized by
Minnesota statutes, section 340A.408.
   E.   Investigation Fees: Investigation fees for other than temporary
licenses shall be as follows:
      1.   For initial license investigations conducted within the state of
Minnesota, the investigation fee shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) or the
maximum set by Minnesota statutes 340A.412.
      2.   For initial license investigations conducted outside of the state of
Minnesota, the investigation fee shall be the actual cost of the investigation,
but not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). At the time of the
original application for a license, the applicant shall deposit one thousand
five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) with the city for the investigation fee. Any
fees due in excess of the one thousand five hundred dollar ($1,500.00) deposit
must be paid prior to the license hearing and before the city council considers
the application. Any deposit amount in excess of the actual cost of the
investigation shall be returned to the applicant.
      3.   At any time an additional investigation is required due to one or
more of the following, the city may charge an additional investigation fee up
to five hundred dollars ($500.00) or the maximum set by Minnesota statutes
340A.412:
         a.   Change In Ownership: A change in the ownership of any licensee or
control of a corporate license within the meaning of section
3-1-4 of this chapter,
         b.   Change In Operating Officer Or Agent: A change in the operating
officer, proprietor, manager, or other agent in charge of the licensed
premises.
         c.   Enlargement Or Substantial Alteration: An enlargement or
substantial alteration of the premises already licensed which, in the city's
opinion, changes the character of the establishment,
         d.   Change Of Ownership, Exception: Where a new application is filed
as a result of incorporation by an existing licensee and the ownership control
and interest in the license are unchanged, no additional investigation fee will
be required.
      4.   If requested, the city will furnish the applicant verification of
all costs in excess of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
      5.   Investigation fees for temporary license shall be established from
time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
3-1-6: GRANTING OF LICENSES:
   A.   Investigation: At the time of making application, the applicant shall,
in writing, authorize the police department to investigate all facts set out in
the application and do a personal background and a criminal record check on the
applicant. The applicant shall further authorize the police department to
release information received from such investigation to the city council.
Should the city council deny the applicant the request for a license, due
partially or solely to the applicant's prior conviction of a crime, the city
council shall notify the applicant in writing of the following information:
      1.   The grounds and reasons for the denial;
      2.   The applicable complaint and grievance procedure as set forth in
Minnesota statutes, section 364.06;
      3.   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for a license; and
      4.   That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered
upon reapplication.
   B.   Hearing Requirements:
      1.   Public Hearing Required: A public hearing shall be required for any
new application or amendment application for the purpose of permanently
expanding the licensed premises.
      2.   Hearing On Renewal Applications And Amendment Applications Other
Than Expansion Of Licensed Premises: The council may choose to hold a public
hearing prior to amendment or renewal of any license where opportunity may be
given to any person to be heard for or against the granting of a renewal
license. Such hearing shall take place not less than ten (10) nor more than
thirty (30) days after the date for submitting renewal applications. Upon
request of such hearing, the clerk shall cause to be published in the official
newspaper ten (10) days in advance, a notice of hearing to be held by the
council, setting forth the day, time and place when the hearing will be held
and the names of all renewal applicants.
      3.   Notice Of Hearing: Upon receipt of the written report and
recommendation by the police department, and within twenty (20) days
thereafter, the clerk shall cause to be published in the official newspaper ten
(10) days in advance, a notice of hearing to be held by the council, setting
forth the day, time and place when the hearing will be held; the name of the
applicant; the premises where the business is to be conducted; the nature of
the business and such other information as the council may direct.
      4.   Conduct Of Hearing: At the hearing, opportunity shall be given for
persons to be heard for or against the granting of the license.
      5.   Exception: The provisions of this section are not applicable to
applications for temporary licenses.
   C.   Granting License: After such investigation and hearing, the council
shall grant or refuse the application in its discretion.
   D.   Issuance:
      1.   License For Premises Described In Application: Each license shall be
issued to the applicant only for the premises described in the application.
      2.   License Period, Expiration: Each license shall be issued for a
maximum period of one year. All 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses, except
temporary licenses, expire on June 30 of each year, and all intoxicating liquor
licenses, except temporary licenses, expire on December 31 of each year.
Temporary licenses shall expire according to their terms.
      3.   Premises Under Construction: Where a license is granted for premises
where the building is under construction or otherwise not ready for occupancy,
the clerk shall not issue the license until notified by the building inspector
that the building is ready for occupancy.
   E.   Report To State: The clerk shall, within ten (10) days after the
issuance of any license under this section, submit to the commissioner of
public safety the full name and address of each person granted a license, the
true name, the effective license date, and the date of expiration of the
license. He shall also submit to the commissioner of public safety any change
of address, transfer, cancellation or revocation of any license by the council
during the license period.
   F.   Transfer:
      1.   Each license shall be issued only for the licensee and premises
described in the application. No license may be transferred to another person
or to another place without the approval of the council;
      2.   Licenses issued to corporations shall be valid only so long as there
is no change in the officers or ownership interest of the corporation, within
the meaning of section
3-1-4 of this chapter unless such change is approved by the council via
amendment.
      3.   Licenses issued to associations or partnerships shall be valid only
so long as there is no change in the partnership or association agreement or in
the ownership of said partnership or association unless such change is approved
by the council via amendment.
      4.   Any transfer of the license or a transfer of stock or interest in
excess of ten percent (10%) or where a transfer results in any party acquiring
an interest which, together with that of a spouse, parent, brother, sister or
child, exceeds ten percent (10%), without council approval is grounds for
revocation of the license. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
3-1-7: PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:
   A.   State Law: No license shall be granted to or held by any person made
ineligible for such a license by state law.
   B.   Manager Required: No license shall be granted to a corporation that
does not have an operating officer who is eligible pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter.
   C.   Real Party In Interest: No license shall be granted to a person who is
the spouse of a person ineligible for a license pursuant to the provisions of
subsection A of this section or who, in the judgment of the council, is not the
real party in interest or beneficial owner of the business operated, or to be
operated, under the license.
   D.   Interest Defined: The term "interest" as used in this section includes
any pecuniary interest in the ownership, operation, management or profits of a
retail intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor establishment, but does
not include: bona fide loans; bona fide fixed sum rental agreements; bona fide
open accounts or other obligations held with or without security arising out of
the ordinary and regular course of business or selling or leasing merchandise,
fixtures or supplies to such establishment; or an interest of five percent (5%)
or less in any corporation holding a city liquor license. A person who receives
monies from time to time directly or indirectly from the licensee in the
absence of a bona fide consideration therefor and excluding bona fide gifts or
donations, shall be deemed to have a pecuniary interest in such retail license.
In determining bona fide, the reasonable value of the goods or things received
as consideration for the payment by the licensee and all other facts reasonably
tending to prove or disprove the existence of any purposeful scheme or
arrangement to evade the prohibitions of this section shall be considered.
(Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
3-1-8: PLACES INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:
   A.   General Prohibition: No license shall be issued for any place or any
business ineligible for such a license under state law.
   B.   License Refused Where Taxes Due: No license shall be granted or renewed
for operation on any premises on which real estate taxes, assessments or other
financial claims of the city or of the state are delinquent or unpaid. If an
action has been commenced pursuant to the provisions of Minnesota statutes,
chapter 278, questioning the amount or validity of taxes, the council may, on
application by the licensee, waive strict compliance with this provision; no
waiver may be granted, however, for taxes, or any portion thereof, which remain
unpaid for a period exceeding one year after becoming due unless such one year
period is extended through no fault of the licensee.
   C.   Distance From School Or Church: No license shall be granted to any
applicant whose place of business is within three hundred feet (300') of any
school or church. In applying this restriction the distance shall be measured
from the main front entrance of the school or church and the liquor
establishment following the route of ordinary pedestrian travel.
   D.   Nudity On The Premises Of Licensed Establishments Prohibited.
      1.   The City Council finds that it is in the best interests of the
public health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city that
nudity is prohibited as provided in this subsection on the premises of any
establishment licensed under this chapter. This is to protect and assist the
owners, operators, and employees of the establishment, as well as patrons and
the public in general, from harm stemming from the physical immediacy and
combination of alcohol, nudity, and sex. The council especially intends to
prevent any subliminal endorsement of sexual harassment or activities likely to
lead to the possibility of various criminal conduct, including prostitution,
sexual assault, and disorderly conduct. The council also finds that the
prohibition of nudity on the premises of any establishment licensed under this
chapter, reflects the prevailing community standards of the city.
      2.   It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person or
persons on the licensed premises when the person does not have his or her
buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a non- transparent material.
It is unlawful for any person to be on the licensed premises when the person
does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a
non-transparent material.
      3.   A violation of this subsection is a misdemeanor punishable as
provided by law, and is justification for revocation or suspension of any
liquor, wine, or 3.2 percent malt liquor license or any other license issued
under this section or the imposition of a civil penalty under the provisions of
section 3-1-15. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015; Ord. 2021-05, 10-5-2021)
3-1-9: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   A.   Conditions And Regulations: Every license is subject to the conditions
of this chapter and of all other applicable ordinances, laws or regulations.
   B.   Licensee's Responsibility: Every licensee is responsible for the
conduct of his place of business and the conditions of sobriety and order in
it. The act of an employee on the licensed premises authorized to sell
alcoholic beverages there is deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the
licensee shall be liable to all penalties provided by this chapter and the law
equally with the employee. Every licensee shall also cooperate with the city in
controlling activity attributable to the business in surrounding areas.
   C.   Inspections: Any police officer, building inspector or any properly
designated officer or employee of the city shall have the unqualified right to
enter, inspect and search the premises of any licensee hereunder during the
business hours without a warrant.
   D.   Nonemployees On Premises: No person, other than the licensee and any
employee, shall remain on the on-sale licensed premises more than thirty (30)
minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.
   E.   Beverage Restriction: No alcoholic beverage shall be sold, furnished or
delivered to any obviously intoxicated person, to any known habitual drunkard,
to any minor, or to any person to whom a sale is prohibited by state law.
   F.   Sales Prohibited: No person shall give, sell, procure or purchase
intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor to or for any person to whom the
sale would be forbidden by law.
   G.   Employment Of Minors: No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall
be employed in any rooms constituting the place in which alcoholic beverages
are sold at retail on-sale, except that persons under eighteen (18) years of
age may be employed as musicians or to perform the duties of a bus person or
dishwashing services in places defined as a restaurant, hotel, motel or other
multipurpose building servicing food in which alcoholic beverages are sold at
retail on-sale.
   H.   Ownership Of Equipment: No equipment or fixture in any licensed place
shall be owned in whole or in part by any manufacturer or distiller except such
as shall be expressly permitted by state law.
   I.   Prostitution: No licensee shall knowingly permit the licensed premises
or any room in those premises or any adjoining building directly under his
control to be used by prostitutes.
   J.   Controlled Substances: No licensee shall knowingly permit the sale,
possession or consumption of controlled substances on the licensed premises in
violation of Minnesota statutes, chapter 152.
   K.   Premises Limited: No license shall be effective beyond the compact and
contiguous space named therein for which the same was granted. All licenses
granted hereunder shall set forth the exact location within the building
structure where such sales may be made and no sales shall be permitted except
in that part of the premises defined in the license.
   L.   Leaving Premises: No on-sale licensee or an employee thereof shall
allow a person to leave the licensed premises in possession of an alcoholic
beverage, except as allowed by Minnesota statutes 340A.404, subdivision 11.
   M.   Special Conditions: At the time a license renewal is issued, the city
may attach additional conditions to the license to protect the welfare of the
community. Violation of any of the conditions shall be grounds for revocation
of the license. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015; Ord. 2021-05, 10-5-2021)
3-1-10: RESTRICTIONS INVOLVING UNDERAGE PERSON(S):
   A.   No Sale To Underage Person(s): No licensee, his or her agent or
employee shall serve or dispense upon the licensed premises any intoxicating
liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquors to a person under the legal drinking age;
nor shall such licensee, or his or her agent or employee, permit any such
person to be furnished or consume any such liquors on the licensed premises;
nor shall such licensee, his or her agent or employee, permit any such person
to be delivered any such liquors.
   B.   Delivery To Underage Person(s): No person under the legal drinking age
shall receive delivery of intoxicating or 3.2 percent malt liquor.
   C.   Misrepresenting Age: No person under the legal drinking age shall
misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of obtaining intoxicating liquor or
3.2 percent malt liquor, nor shall he or she enter any premises licensed for
the retail sale of intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor for the
purpose of purchasing or having served or delivered to him or her for consuming
any such intoxicating liquor or beer, nor shall any such person purchase,
attempt to purchase, consume or have another person purchase for him any
intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor.
   D.   Identification Required: Any person shall, upon demand of the licensee,
his or her employee or agent, produce and permit to be examined a current
driver's license or photo identification issued by the state department of
public safety. In the case of a foreign national, a valid passport may be used
as an alternative to the foregoing methods of identification.
   E.   Compliance Checks: From time to time, the city shall conduct compliance
checks. Such checks may involve, but are not limited to, engaging underage
persons to enter the licensed premises to attempt to purchase alcoholic
beverages. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015; Ord. 2021-05, 10-5-2021)
3-1-11: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
All applicants for any type of intoxicating liquor, 3.2 percent malt liquor or
wine license to be issued or renewed must, as a condition to the issuance of
the license, demonstrate proof of financial responsibility as defined in
Minnesota statutes 340A.409 and with regard to liability imposed by Minnesota
statutes, section 340A.801, to the city. Proof of financial responsibility may
be given by filing one of the following:
   A.   A certificate that there is in effect for the period of the license an
insurance policy or pool providing the following minimum coverages:
      1.   One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) because of bodily injury
to any one person in any one occurrence and, subject to the limit for one
person, in the amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) because
of bodily injury to two (2) or more persons in any one occurrence, and in the
amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) because of injury to or
destruction of property of others in any one occurrence;
      2.   One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for loss of means of
support of any one person in any one occurrence, and, subject to the limit of
one person, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for loss of means of
support of two (2) or more persons in any one occurrence; or
   B.   A bond or a surety company with the minimum coverages as provided in
subsection A of this section; or
   C.   A certificate of the state treasurer that the licensee has deposited
with him three hundred fifty thousand dollars ($350,000.00) in cash or
securities which may legally be purchased by savings banks or for trust funds
having a market value of three hundred fifty thousand dollars ($350,000.00).
   D.   In lieu of the above insurance requirements an applicant for a
temporary 3.2 percent malt liquor license may provide proof of financial
responsibility by filing a certificate that there is in effect for the license
period an insurance policy or pool providing at least fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) of coverage because of bodily injury to any one person in any one
occurrence, one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) because of bodily injury
to two (2) or more persons in any one occurrence, ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any
one occurrence, fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for loss of means of
support of any one person in any one occurrence, and one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) for loss of means of support of two (2) or more persons
in any one occurrence. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
3-1-12: TEMPORARY LICENSES:
   A.   Temporary 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor License: The city council may issue a
temporary on-sale license for the sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor to a club,
charitable, religious, or nonprofit organization. The temporary licenses shall
be subject to such terms and conditions as the council shall subscribe. Except
where specifically excluded, applicants for temporary licenses shall be subject
to the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Temporary Intoxicating Liquor License: The city council may issue to a
club or charitable, religious or nonprofit organization in existence for at
least three (3) years, a political committee registered under Minnesota
statutes, section 10A.14, or a state university, a temporary license for the
on- sale of intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event within the
city sponsored by the licensee. The license may authorize the on-sale of
intoxicating liquor for not more than four (4) consecutive days, and may
authorize on-sales on premises other than premises the licensee owns or
permanently occupies. The license may provide that the licensee may contract
for intoxicating liquor catering services with the holder of a full year on-
sale liquor license issued by a municipality. The licenses are subject to the
terms, including the license fee, normally imposed by the city. The licenses
issued under this section are subject to all laws and ordinances governing the
sale of intoxicating liquor except Minnesota statutes, section 340A.409,
dealing with liability insurance. Temporary licenses must first be approved by
the commissioner of public safety before they become valid.
   C.   Temporary Brewer On-Sale License: The city council may issue to a
brewer who meets the qualifications in Minnesota statutes 340A.404, subdivision
10, paragraph (c), a temporary license for the on-sale of intoxicating liquor
in connection with a social event within the municipality sponsored by the
brewer. The terms and conditions specified for temporary intoxicating liquor
licenses under subsection B of this section shall apply to a license issued
under this paragraph.
   D.   One Day Consumption And Display Permit: A one day permit for the
consumption and display of intoxicating liquor may be issued to a nonprofit
organization subject to conditions set forth in Minnesota statutes 340A.414,
subdivision 9. The permit must be approved by the public safety commissioner
and is valid only for the day indicated on the permit. The fee for the permit
shall be set by council but may not exceed amount allowed in Minnesota statutes
340A.414, subdivision 9. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
3-1-13: ON-SALE LICENSE ON PUBLIC PREMISES:
   A.   Sports, Convention Or Cultural Facility: The city council may issue to
the holder of an on-sale intoxicating liquor license issued by the city or a
municipality adjacent to the city, a license to allow the dispensing of
intoxicating liquor at any convention, banquet, conference, meeting or social
affair conducted on the premises of a sports, convention or cultural facility
owned by the city. The licensee must be engaged to dispense intoxicating liquor
at an event held by a person or organization permitted to use the premises and
may dispense intoxicating liquor only to persons attending the event. The
licensee may not dispense intoxicating liquor to any person attending or
participating in an amateur athletic event held on the premises.
   B.   Community Festivals: The city council may issue to the holder of an on-
sale intoxicating liquor license issued by the city, a license to allow the
dispensing of intoxicating liquor off premises at a community festival held
within the municipality. The authorization shall specify the area in which the
intoxicating liquor must be dispensed and consumed, and shall not be issued
unless the licensee demonstrates that it has liability insurance.
   C.   Application Process: Applicants for public premises licenses set forth
in this section, shall be subject to the following process:
      1.   Annual Application: Applicants for a public premises license shall
annually apply to the city for such license. The application shall set forth
the applicant's desire for such license, the nature and duration of its
existing on-sale intoxicating liquor license and contain the license fee set
forth in subsection
3-1-5A of this chapter.
      2.   Hearing Not Required: No public hearing as set forth in subsection
3-1-6B of this chapter shall be required for the granting of an on-sale license
on public premises.
      3.   Application Approval: The city council shall approve the application
if it determines the applicant has a duly issued on- sale intoxicating liquor
license issued by the city or an adjacent municipality and if it further
determines that the applicant is in good standing with regard to the
applicant's on- sale intoxicating liquor license.
      4.   Duration: The license granted under this section shall remain in
effect from its issuance until December 31 of the year in which it is issued.
Licenses issued under this section are subject to annual renewal.
   D.   Other Conditions: In addition to the requirements otherwise set forth
in this section, public premises licensees shall be subject to the following
conditions:
      1.   Event Fees: In addition to the annual license fee set forth in
subsection
 3-1-5A of this chapter, a licensee shall pay a per event fee. Such fee shall
be established from time to time by resolution of the city council.
      2.   Minnesota Products: If a licensee under this section is selling beer
for on premises consumption, the licensee shall make provision for the sale of
at least one Minnesota produced beer at each station on the premises where beer
is being sold.
      3.   Events; Special Conditions: Whenever the city council determines
that a specific event for which the licensee will be providing on-sale
intoxicating liquor requires special or unique conditions, the city council may
impose same and the licensee shall abide by all such conditions. (Ord. 2015-06,
7-7-2015)
3-1-14: OUTDOOR PATIOS AND DECKS:
   A.   Conditions Under Which Permitted: Service and consumption of alcohol on
outdoor patios and decks in conjunction with an intoxicating liquor "on-sale"
license, an "on-sale" wine license, a special club license, a special license
for Sunday sales or a 3.2 percent malt liquor license may be permitted by the
city council under the following conditions:
      1.   The patio or deck area must be compact and contiguous to the
licensed premises and shall be quarantined off by an appropriate fence, wall or
staff monitor as approved by City staff.
      2.   Appropriate receptacles for rubbish, garbage, cigarette
paraphernalia, etc., must be provided.
      3.   Lighting must be sufficient to promote public safety, directed
downward, and compatible with the surrounding area.
      4.   A buffer zone should be provided between the patio or deck area and
adjacent parking lot. The area surrounding a patio or deck area must be fenced
so as to not allow entrance from outside the fenced area onto the patio or deck
area.
      5.   Smoking may be allowed on the patio or deck area, provided it is in
compliance with the Minnesota "freedom to breathe act of 2007".
      6.   Music, televisions, bands, amplified sound or any activity that
would disturb the peace of the surrounding area is prohibited on the outdoor
patio or deck area. Background music that does not disturb the peace of the
surrounding area is permitted during hours when service of alcoholic beverages
is permitted.
      7.   The patio or deck area shall be controlled and monitored
continuously during the hours of operation and unruly patrons shall be removed
immediately.
      8.   The hours and days of sale of alcoholic beverages shall be in
accordance with this code.
      9.   Patrons shall not leave the premises with a drink.
      10.   The amendment to the licensee's licenses for the outdoor patio or
deck area shall be approved on a provisional basis. The council may revoke,
suspend or decline to renew the license for the patio or deck area portion of
the licensed premises on the grounds of failure to comply with the conditions
outlined in the resolution or undue annoyance or burden on nearby residents.
      11.   The outdoor patio or deck area must be included in the required
liquor liability insurance for the premises.
      12.   The city council may impose any additional conditions it deems
necessary in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare at the time
of initial approval or any renewal of the license for a patio or deck. The
conditions set forth allowing the patio or deck shall be reviewed during the
yearly renewal period. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015; amd. Ord. 2023-04, 10-3-2023)
3-1-15: LICENSE REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION; CIVIL PENALTY:
   A.   Violation: The council shall suspend a license for a period not to
exceed sixty (60) days, revoke a license, impose a civil fine not to exceed two
thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or impose any combination of these sanctions for
each violation on a finding that the licensee has committed a violation of any
of the following:
      1.   False or misleading statements made on a license application or
renewal, or failure to abide by the commitments, promises or representations
made to the city council.
      2.   Violation of any special conditions under which the license was
granted.
      3.   Violation of any provision of this chapter or other applicable
ordinances.
      4.   Creation of a nuisance on the premises or in the surrounding area.
      5.   Violation of any state or federal law or regulation controlling the
sale of intoxicating liquor or controlled substances.
      6.   Lapse of proof of financial responsibility.
   B.   Civil Penalties: The following is the minimum schedule of presumptive
civil penalties which must be imposed in addition to any suspension unless the
license is revoked:
      1.   For the first violation within any three (3) year period, five
hundred dollars ($500.00).
      2.   For the second violation within any three (3) year period, one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
      3.   For the third and subsequent violations within any three (3) year
period, two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
   C.   Inactive License: The city council may revoke the intoxicating liquor
or 3.2 percent malt liquor license of any establishment granted a license that
is not under construction and exhibiting satisfactory progress toward
completion within six (6) months from its issuance, or any establishment that
ceases operation for a period of six (6) months. A hearing shall be held to
determine what progress has been made toward opening or reopening the
establishment and, if satisfactory progress is not demonstrated, the council
may revoke the license.
   D.   Hearing Notice: Except in cases of lapse of proof of financial
responsibility or liability insurance, revocation or suspension of a license
shall be preceded by a public hearing conducted in accordance with Minnesota
statutes, chapter 14. The city council may appoint a hearing examiner or may
conduct a hearing itself. The city shall give the licensee notice of the
hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. The notice shall include
notice of the time and place of the hearing, and shall state the nature of the
charges against the licensee.
   E.   Lapse Of Proof Of Financial Responsibility: Lapse of required proof of
financial responsibility shall affect an immediate suspension of any license
issued pursuant to this chapter or state law without further action of the
council. Notice of cancellation or lapse of a current liquor liability policy
shall also constitute notice to the licensee of the impending suspension of the
license. The holder of a license who has received notice of lapse of required
insurance or of suspension or revocation of a license may request a hearing
thereon and, if a request is made in writing to the clerk, a hearing before the
council shall be granted within ten (10) days. Any suspension under this
subsection shall continue until the council determines that the financial
responsibility requirements of state law and this chapter have again been met.
   F.   Revocation; Fine: In the event of a revocation of a license, the
licensee must reapply for a license and meet the requirements for a license
under this chapter. In the event that a fine imposed pursuant to this section
is not paid within fifteen (15) days of its imposition by the council, the
license shall be suspended until the fine is paid. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
3-1-16: CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES:
   A.   Open Container In Parking Areas: No person shall consume intoxicating
liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor or have in his possession any bottle or
receptacle containing intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor which is
open while in the parking area of any shopping center or other commercial
establishment.
   B.   Liquor In Public Parks: Possession and/or consumption in city parks
shall be allowed or prohibited according to section
4-3-10 of this code, as amended, except as permitted by public premises
licenses issued in accordance with section
3-1-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
CHAPTER 2
ENTERTAINMENTS, SERVICES
ARTICLE A. SHOOTING RANGES 1
SECTION:
3-2A-1: Licensing Provisions, Fees
3-2A-2: Violation, Revocation
 
Notes
1 1. See title 7, chapter 5 of this code.
3-2A-1: LICENSING PROVISIONS, FEES:
   A.   Required, Fee: All owners of rifle ranges, trap ranges and target
ranges at any place within the city shall, from and after the enactment of this
article, be required to pay a license fee to the city in the amount of fifty
dollars ($50.00) for a permit to operate such ranges.
   B.   Operation: Such ranges shall be operated so as to result in maximum
safety to the residents and property of the city and the owners and operators
of such ranges shall comply with all regulations for such ranges that the city
may hereafter enact.
   C.   Insurance: As a condition of said license, liability insurance on said
operation may be required. (Ord. XIV.6, 10-4-1977)
3-2A-2: VIOLATION, REVOCATION:
   A.   Violation of any of the terms of such regulations shall constitute a
violation of this article and be cause for revocation of the license granted
under the terms of this article. (Ord. XIV.6, 10-4-1977)
   B.   Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as described in title 1,
chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
ARTICLE B. MASSAGE THERAPY
SECTION:
3-2B-1: Purpose
3-2B-2: Definitions
3-2B-3: License Provisions And Fees
3-2B-4: Licensee Responsibility, Conditions Of License
3-2B-5: Granting Or Denial Of Licenses And Certificates
3-2B-6: Conditions Governing Issuance Of A License
3-2B-7: Revocation, Suspension Or Nonrenewal Of License
3-2B-8: Exceptions
3-2B-9: Location Of Massage
3-2B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare. The city council deems it necessary to provide for the regulation and
licensing of persons who administer massages. (Ord. XVI.52, 11-3-2003)
3-2B-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the terms defined in this section shall have the
following meanings ascribed to them:
MASSAGE: The rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping or rolling of the body of
another with the hands or objects.
MASSAGE PRACTITIONER: A person who practices or administers a massage. (Ord.
XVI.52, 11-3-2003)
3-2B-3: LICENSE PROVISIONS AND FEES:
   A.   License Required: No person shall engage in or hold himself or herself
out as being engaged in the practice of massage nor shall any person administer
or practice massage commercially or for hire, or for the exchange of any
valuable consideration without first having obtained a license as herein
provided.
   B.   Contents Of The Application:
      1.   Forms: Application shall be made on forms provided by the city
clerk.
      2.   Application: The application shall contain the following information
together with any other information that the city administrator or designee may
require:
         a.   Evidence of the applicant's certification by the national
certification board for therapeutic massage and bodywork or comparable national
or regional organization or evidence of applicant's practical qualifications to
practice massage.
         b.   Evidence that the applicant is of good moral character.
         c.   The names and addresses of two (2) persons not related to the
applicant who are residents of Dakota County and who can attest to the
applicant's character.
         d.   Statement disclosing whether the applicant has ever been
convicted of a crime or offense and, if so, information as to the time, place
and nature of such crime or offense.
         e.   Evidence that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of
age.
         f.   The street address at which massages will be performed.
   C.   License And Investigation Fees: The license and investigation fees
shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. XVI.52, 11-3-
2003)
3-2B-4: LICENSEE RESPONSIBILITY, CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   A.   The license shall be displayed in the licensee's place of business. If
massages are authorized off premises, the licensee shall carry the license and
display it upon the request of a police officer, code enforcement official or
other city official authorized to enforce this article.
   B.   Persons administering massage shall remain fully clothed while
administering massage.
   C.   Massage therapists shall not touch or massage the genitals of a client
or the breasts of a female client or so massage the client as to cause sexual
arousal.
   D.   The licensee shall maintain the licensed premises in compliance with
the applicable health, safety and building regulations of the city.
   E.   No licensee shall perform or offer to perform massage services within
the city while the massage license is under suspension or revocation by the
city council. (Ord. XVI.52, 11-3-2003)
3-2B-5: GRANTING OR DENIAL OF LICENSES AND CERTIFICATES:
   A.   Application Review: License applications shall be reviewed by the
police department and such other departments as the city administrator shall
deem necessary. At the time of the application, the applicant shall, in
writing, authorize the police department to investigate the facts set out in
the application and conduct a criminal history check on the applicant. Licenses
shall be issued by the city administrator or designee. If the city
administrator refuses to issue a license, the decision may be appealed to the
city council.
   B.   Term Of License: A license permitting the holder thereof to practice or
administer massage commercially is nonrenewable and nontransferable and
application must be made each year for a license permitting and allowing the
holder thereof to administer or practice massage therapy for the succeeding
year. All licenses shall be issued for a term expiring on December 31 following
its issuance. (Ord. XVI.52, 11-3-2003)
3-2B-6: CONDITIONS GOVERNING ISSUANCE OF A LICENSE:
   A.   Applicant: Licenses shall be issued only to persons of good moral
character and repute.
   B.   Training And Certification: Licenses may be issued only to persons who
have a diploma or certificate demonstrating that they have completed at least
five hundred (500) hours of training from either a school approved by the
American Massage Therapy Association or similar reputable massage association,
or from a school that is either accredited by a recognized education
accrediting association or agency, or is licensed by the state or government
agency having jurisdiction over the school, or a certificate from the national
certification board for therapeutic massage and bodywork.
   C.   Prior Offenses: Licenses may be issued only to persons who are free
from convictions or offenses that involve moral turpitude or that relate
directly to the person's ability, capacity or fitness to perform the duties and
discharge the responsibilities of the occupation, or who otherwise have shown
evidence of rehabilitation in accordance with Minnesota statutes, chapter 363.
   D.   Prior Revocation: Licenses may not be issued to persons who, within one
year prior to the date of application, have been denied licensing or who have
had their license revoked or suspended by any community, political entity or by
the state of Minnesota.
   E.   Cooperation Of Applicant: Licenses may be issued only to persons who
have fully and truthfully answered all of the information requested in the
application and have paid the full license fee and investigation fee.
   F.   Age: Licenses may be issued only to persons eighteen (18) years of age
or older. (Ord. XVI.52, 11-3-2003)
3-2B-7: REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR NONRENEWAL OF LICENSE:
The license may be revoked, suspended or not renewed by the city administrator
if the licensee has engaged in any of the following conduct:
   A.   Fraud, deception or misrepresentation in connection with the securing
of the license.
   B.   Habitual drunkenness or intemperance in the use of drugs, including,
but not limited to, the use of drugs defined in either 26 USC section 4731 or
Minnesota statutes, section 152.02, barbiturates, hallucinogenic drugs,
amphetamines, benzedrine, dexedrine, or other sedatives, depressants,
stimulants or tranquilizers.
   C.   Conduct involving moral turpitude or permitting or allowing others
within their employ or agency to engage in conduct involving moral turpitude or
failing to prevent agents, officers or employees from engaging in conduct
involving moral turpitude.
   D.   Conviction of an offense involving moral turpitude by any court of
competent jurisdiction.
   E.   Conduct that would constitute grounds for refusal to issue a license
herein.
   F.   Violating any provision of this article. (Ord. XVI.52, 11-3-2003)
3-2B-8: EXCEPTIONS:
This article does not apply to:
   A.   A person practicing massage at a hospital, nursing home or other
institution for the hospitalization or care of human beings licensed under the
provisions of Minnesota statutes, sections 144.50 through 144.69.
   B.   A licensed nurse, licensed medical doctor, licensed podiatrist,
licensed chiropractor or other healthcare professional licensed by the state,
or someone employed by such an individual and working under his or her
supervision.
   C.   A person who administers massage when the person is in training under
the guidance of an instructor and the instructor is licensed.
   D.   Barbers and cosmetologists who do not give, or hold themselves out to
give, massages as defined herein, other than is customarily given in the course
of their duties for the purpose of beautification. (Ord. XVI.52, 11-3-2003)
3-2B-9: LOCATION OF MASSAGE:
It is unlawful for a licensed massage practitioner to perform a massage except
at the location(s) in the city stated on the license application. A massage
practitioner licensed to perform massage at a location or locations in the city
is entitled to perform on site massage at any business, office, public
gathering, or private residence on an outcall basis in addition to the business
location(s) listed on the license application. (Ord. XVI.52, 11-3-2003)
ARTICLE C. CONVERSATION PARLORS
SECTION:
3-2C-1: Definitions
3-2C-2: License Provisions, Fees
3-2C-3: Licensee Responsibility, Conditions Of License
3-2C-4: Personal Service License
3-2C-5: Violations, Penalty
3-2C-1: DEFINITIONS:
ADEQUATE OR APPROVED: Acceptable to the city health officer or his agents
following his determination as to conformance with public health practices and
standards.
CONVERSATION PARLOR: An establishment advertising, offering or selling the
service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion between
an employee of the establishment and a customer, regardless of whether other
goods or services are also simultaneously advertised, offered or sold,
regardless of whether those other goods or services are also required to be
licensed.
The term "conversation parlor" does not include bona fide legal, medical,
psychiatric, psychological or counseling services by a person appropriately
licensed; or bona fide educational institutions, or panels, seminars or other
similar services offered by such institutions; or churches or synagogues.
SANITARY: Free from the vegetative cells of pathogenic microorganisms. (Ord.
XVI.10, 7-20-1976)
3-2C-2: LICENSE PROVISIONS, FEES:
   A.   Required: No person shall engage in the business of operating a
conversation parlor in the City without a license.
   B.   Application: The initial application for a license shall be made at the
office of the City Clerk by filing the annual license fee and by completing an
application form. The application shall contain the following information:
      1.   A description and location of the premises to be licensed. If the
premises is not constructed and furnished at the time the application is
completed, the detailed plans of the premises and furnishings shall be attached
to the application.
      2.   Names and addresses of the property owner, the business owner, the
lessee, the manager or operator and if a corporation, all the names and
addresses of the officers of such corporation.
      3.   A description of any crime or other offense including the time,
place, date and disposition for which any of the persons named in subsection
3-2C-2B2 above have been arrested or convicted.
      4.   A description of the services offered.
The license application shall thereafter be reviewed by the City Building
Department, Police Department, Fire Department and such other departments as
shall be deemed necessary. Such departments will thereafter submit their
reports and recommendations to the City Council. The license shall be granted
or denied by the City Council following a public hearing.
      5.   Whether the applicant is a natural person, a corporation, a
partnership or other form of organization.
      6.   If the applicant is a natural person:
         a.   The true name, place and date of birth, and street residence
address and phone number of the applicant.
         b.   Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States.
         c.   Whether the applicant has ever used or has been known by a name
other than his true name; and if so, what was such name or names and
information concerning dates and places where used.
         d.   The name of the business if it is to be conducted under a
designation, name or style other than the full individual name of the
applicant.
         e.   The street addresses at which applicant has lived during the
preceding five (5) years.
         f.   The kind, name and location of every business or occupation the
applicant has been engaged in during the preceding five (5) years.
         g.   The names and addresses of applicant's employer(s) and partner
(s), if any, for the preceding five (5) years.
         h.   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any felony,
crime or violation of any ordinance other than traffic ordinances. If so, the
applicant shall furnish information as to the time, place and offense for which
convictions were had.
         i.   The physical description of the applicant.
      7.   If the applicant is a partnership:
         a.   The name of the managing partner(s) and the interest of each
partner in the business.
         b.   A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted with
the application.
      8.   If the applicant is a corporation or other organization:
         a.   The name; and if incorporated, the state of incorporation.
         b.   A true copy of the certification of incorporation, articles of
incorporation or association agreement, and bylaws shall be attached to the
application.
         c.   The name of the manager or proprietor or other agent in charge of
the business to be licensed and all information concerning said person(s) as is
required in subsection
3-2A-2B6 above.
      9.   Whether the applicant is licensed in other communities; and if so,
where.
      10.   The names of those individuals to be licensed and working for the
applicant who may work in the City.
      11.   Whether the applicant has previously been denied a conversation
parlor license.
      12.   The names, residences and business addresses of three (3) residents
of the county in which the applicant resides, of good moral character, not
related to the applicant or financially interested in the premises or business,
who may be referred to as to the applicant's and/or manager's character.
      13.   The licensee shall keep a daily business register and require all
customers to sign said register, giving their complete legal name and current
correct residence address. This register shall be on public display at all
times in the licensed premises and shall be available to any City authority or
other police authority having responsibility for supervision of the licensed
premises.
      14.   All conversation parlors shall appoint a full-time manager. The
manager shall be a resident of the City.
      15.   Such other information as the City Council may require.
   C.   Fee: The annual license fee is one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00).
   D.   Term, Display: A separate license shall be obtained for each place of
business. The licensee shall display the license in a prominent place on the
licensed premises at all times. A license, unless revoked, is for the calendar
year, or part thereof, for which it has been issued.
3-2C-3: LICENSEE RESPONSIBILITY, CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   A.   General Provisions: The licensee is absolutely responsible for the
misconduct, crimes and offenses of his employees, and his license may be
revoked for his own or his employees' misconduct, crimes and offenses committed
on or in connection with the licensed establishment.
   B.   Rules and Regulations:
      1.   Licenses may be granted only in the appropriate zone to be
determined pursuant to the applicable laws and ordinances of the City.
      2.   Licenses shall be granted only to establishments which can meet the
safety and sanitary requirements of the applicable building, housing, health
and safety code regulations of the City and the State.
      3.   It shall be grounds for denial to the license applicant if there is
any fraud or deception involved in the license application.
      4.   It shall be grounds for denial of the application if the applicant
or persons in his employ are not complying with or have a history of violations
of the laws and ordinances that relate to health, safety or moral turpitude.
      5.   A license shall not be granted to a person of bad repute or to a
partnership or corporation who has in its employ or is owned by any persons of
bad repute, such that the health or safety of customers or members of the
public would be endangered.
      6.   Such establishments shall provide adequate refuse receptacles which
shall be emptied as required.
      7.   It shall be grounds for rescinding a license granted to any person,
partnership or corporation under this Article if they fail to comply with any
of the ordinances of the City or Statutes of the State.
      8.   It shall be grounds for rescinding a license granted to any person,
partnership or corporation under this Article if the owner, manager, lessee or
any of the employees are found to be in control or possession of any alcoholic
beverages, or of narcotic drugs and controlled substances on the premises,
possession of which is illegal as defined by State Statutes 1  or City
ordinances.
      9.   It shall be grounds for the rescinding of a license if the owner,
manager, lessee or any of the employees are convicted of any ordinance or State
Statute violations arising within the business establishment to which the
license was granted under this Article.
      10.   It shall be grounds for rescinding any license granted under this
Article if the premises do not comply with the health, safety and building
regulations of the City and State; including any applicable illumination
requirements in the State Building Code or State Fire Code. 2
      11.   An application may be denied or a license may be rescinded if the
operation of such an establishment is found to be a danger to the health,
welfare or safety of the citizens of the City.
      12.   A license may be rescinded upon evidence of a material variance in
the actual plan and design of the premises from the plans submitted with the
application for the license or from the original design of the premises when
initially licensed without prior approval of the City.
      13.   All employees and customers of the establishment shall have at all
times, their breasts, buttocks, genitals and anus covered by a nontransparent
material.
      14.   No bed shall be brought or permitted to remain on the licensed
premises.
      15.   An application may be denied or a license may be rescinded where
the impact of the licensed establishment on adjoining property will result in
any of the following:
         a.   Loud, boisterous and disturbing noise levels.
         b.   Hazardous traffic conditions.
         c.   Offensive, obnoxious and disturbing odors.
         d.   Excessive litter.
         e.   Excessive artificial lighting.
         f.   Substantial decrease in adjoining property values.
   C.   Construction And Maintenance:
      1.   All restrooms used in connection with conversation parlors shall be
provided with mechanical ventilation with two (2) cfm per square foot of floor
area, a minimum of fifteen (15) foot-candles of illumination, a hand washing
sink equipped with hot and cold running water under pressure, sanitary towels
and a soap dispenser.
      2.   Each conversation parlor establishment shall have a janitor's closet
which shall be provided for the storage of cleaning supplies. Such a closet
shall have mechanical ventilation with two (2) cfm per square foot of floor
area and a minimum of ten (10) foot-candles of illumination. Such closet shall
include a mop sink.
      3.   Floors, walls and equipment in rooms, restrooms and in bathrooms
used in connection therewith must be kept in a state of good repair and
sanitary at all times. Linens and other materials shall be stored at least six
inches (6") off the floor. Sanitary towels, washcloths, cleaning agents and
toilet tissue must be made available for each customer.
      4.   All doors on parlor rooms shall be constructed of clear glass and
shall not be locked or be capable of being locked.
   D.   Plans And Specifications For Changes: All persons who hereafter
construct, extensively remodel or convert buildings or facilities for use as a
conversation parlor shall conform and comply in their construction, erection or
alteration with the requirements of this article. Plans and specifications for
such layout, arrangement and plumbing and construction materials of the parlor
room areas, and locations, size and type of equipment and facilities shall be
filed by the owner in the office of the city clerk. A building permit shall not
be issued for any such construction, remodeling or alteration until such permit
shall have the approval of the city council.
   E.   Inspection Requirement: During business hours, all conversation parlors
shall be open to inspection by city health, fire, building and license
inspectors and police officers. Upon demand by any police officer, any person
engaged in providing services in any licensed premises shall identify himself,
giving his true legal name and his correct address.
   F.   Hours Of Operation: No customers or patrons shall be allowed to enter
the licensed premises after one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and before eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. daily. No customers or patrons shall be allowed to remain upon the
licensed premises after one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and before eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. daily. (Ord. XVI.10, 7-20-1976)
 
Notes
1 1. M.S.A. §§152.01 et seq.
2 1. For State Building Code, see M.S.A. §§16.83 et seq.; for State Fire Code,
  see M.S.A. §§73.01 et seq.
3-2C-4: PERSONAL SERVICE LICENSE:
All the information required under subsections
3-2C-2B5, B6, B9, B12 and B15 of this article shall be required of applicants
for a personal service license.
   A.   All persons engaging in such work shall submit, before the granting of
a license, to being fingerprinted and photographed. Fingerprints and
photographs shall be kept on file at the police department.
   B.   Any falsification of information on the license application shall
result in the denial of said license. (Ord. XVI.10, 7-20-1976)
3-2C-5: VIOLATIONS, PENALTY:
Every person who commits or attempts to commit, conspires to commit, or aids or
abets in the commission of, any act constituting a violation of this article,
whether individually or in connection with one or more other persons or as
principal agent, or accessory, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and every
person who falsely, fraudulently, forcibly or wilfully induces, causes,
coerces, requires, permits or directs another to violate any of the provisions
of this article is likewise guilty of a misdemeanor; and upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished as described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
(Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
ARTICLE D. ARCADE PARLORS, BILLIARD HALLS, AND DANCE CLUBS
SECTION:
3-2D-1: Purpose
3-2D-2: Definitions
3-2D-3: Licenses Required
3-2D-4: License Application
3-2D-4-1: Contents Of Initial Application
3-2D-4-2: Renewal Applications
3-2D-4-3: Amendment Application
3-2D-4-4: Execution Of Application
3-2D-4-5: Corporations, Partnerships Or Associations
3-2D-5: License Fees
3-2D-6: Granting Of Licenses
3-2D-7: Persons Ineligible For License
3-2D-8: Places Ineligible For License
3-2D-9: Conditions Of License
3-2D-10: Special Conditions
3-2D-11: Liability Insurance
3-2D-12: Revocation Or Suspension Of License
3-2D-12-1: Grounds For Revocation
3-2D-12-2: Disproportionate Use Of Public Safety Resources
3-2D-12-3: Inactive License
3-2D-12-4: Hearing Notice
3-2D-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare. The city council deems it necessary to provide for the regulation and
licensing of persons who own and manage arcade parlors, billiard halls, or
dance clubs. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
3-2D-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the terms defined in this section shall have the
following meanings ascribed to them:
ARCADE PARLOR 1 : Commercial premises that are open to the public and that have
as their principal use the provision of electric or electronic machines (e.g.,
pinball, video games) that provide amusement, enjoyment, or entertainment and
that may be operated upon the insertion of a coin or token. This term shall not
include jukeboxes, children's mechanical rides (e.g., horses, rocket ships), or
machines that sell merchandise.
BILLIARD HALL 2 : Commercial premises that are open to the public and have five
(5) or more pool tables or billiard tables, or combination thereof, regardless
of size, and whether activated manually or by the insertion of a coin, token,
or other mechanical device.
DANCE CLUB 3 : Commercial premises that are open to the public and a primary
function of which is to offer patrons an opportunity to engage in social
activities such as dancing, or the enjoyment of live or prerecorded music, or
the enjoyment of entertainment provided by dancers or other performers. As an
incidental function, a dance club may sell and serve food and beverages
(excluding alcoholic beverages) or provide other forms of entertainment such as
billiard tables, dartboards, or arcade games to its patrons.
MANAGER: Manager shall include any employee who is in charge and responsible
for the conduct of the business activity at any given time.
OWNER: A natural person, partnership, or corporation (including all partners in
a partnership and all stockholders in a corporation) or other firm or
organization that owns the arcade parlor, billiard hall, or dance club.
PREMISES: Any place where an arcade parlor, billiard hall, or dance club is
operated or maintained, including all hallways, bathrooms, parking areas and
other adjacent portions of the premises that are accessible to the public
during operating hours. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
 
Notes
  1. The terms "arcade parlor", "billiard hall", or "dance club" do not include
  the following: any premises that serve alcoholic beverages as defined by
  state and local laws; theaters where the patrons sit in parallel rows of
  fixed seats; full service restaurants where the only entertainment consists
1 of background music that is incidental to the primary function of serving
  food; outdoor performances; a banquet, party or celebration conducted for
  invited guests that is not open to the public; dances or events sponsored and
  operated by a governmental entity, an educational institution, or nonprofit
  religious, charitable, benevolent or fraternal organization.
  1. The terms "arcade parlor", "billiard hall", or "dance club" do not include
  the following: any premises that serve alcoholic beverages as defined by
  state and local laws; theaters where the patrons sit in parallel rows of
  fixed seats; full service restaurants where the only entertainment consists
2 of background music that is incidental to the primary function of serving
  food; outdoor performances; a banquet, party or celebration conducted for
  invited guests that is not open to the public; dances or events sponsored and
  operated by a governmental entity, an educational institution, or nonprofit
  religious, charitable, benevolent or fraternal organization.
  2. The terms "arcade parlor", "billiard hall", or "dance club" do not include
  the following: any premises that serve alcoholic beverages as defined by
  state and local laws; theaters where the patrons sit in parallel rows of
  fixed seats; full service restaurants where the only entertainment consists
3 of background music that is incidental to the primary function of serving
  food; outdoor performances; a banquet, party or celebration conducted for
  invited guests that is not open to the public; dances or events sponsored and
  operated by a governmental entity, an educational institution, or nonprofit
  religious, charitable, benevolent or fraternal organization.
3-2D-3: LICENSES REQUIRED:
No owner or manager shall operate an arcade parlor, billiard hall, or dance
club within the city of Rosemount without first obtaining a license from the
city as provided in this article. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
3-2D-4: LICENSE APPLICATION:
3-2D-4-1: CONTENTS OF INITIAL APPLICATION:
   A.   General: The application for any type of license to be issued under
this article shall contain information required by this section.
   B.   Nature Of Application: The application shall show whether the applicant
is a natural person, corporation, partnership or other firm or organization.
The applicant shall be the owner of the business.
      1.   Natural Person: If the applicant is a natural person, the following
information shall be required:
         a.   True name, place and date of birth, and street residence address
of the applicant.
         b.   Whether the applicant has ever used or been known by a name other
than his true name and, if so, what was such name or names, and information
concerning dates and places where used.
         c.   The name of the business if it is to be conducted under a
designation, name or style other than the full individual name of the
applicant; in such case a copy of the certification, as required by Minnesota
statutes, chapter 333, certified by the secretary of state, shall be attached
to the application.
         d.   Street addresses at which the applicant and present spouse have
lived during the preceding ten (10) years.
         e.   Kind, name and location of every business or occupation the
applicant or present spouse has been engaged in during the preceding ten (10)
years.
         f.   Names and addresses of the applicant's and spouse's employers and
partners, if any, for the preceding ten (10) years.
         g.   Whether the applicant or spouse, or any other member of the
immediate household has ever been convicted of any crime or violation of any
city ordinance, other than traffic. If so, the applicant shall furnish
information as to the time, place and offense for which convictions were had.
         h.   Whether the applicant or his spouse, or a parent, brother, sister
or child of either of them has ever been engaged as an employee or in operating
an arcade parlor, billiard hall, dance club, saloon, hotel, restaurant, cafe,
tavern or other business of similar nature. If so, the applicant shall furnish
information as to the time, place and length of time of such employment or
operation.
      2.   Partnership: If the applicant is a partnership, the names and
addresses of all partners and all information concerning each partner as is
required of a single applicant in subsection B1 of this section. A managing
partner or partners shall be designated. The interest of each partner in the
business shall be disclosed. If the partnership is required to file a
certificate as to a trade name under the provisions of Minnesota statutes,
chapter 333, a true copy of such certificate certified by the secretary of
state shall be attached to the application.
      3.   Corporation: If the applicant is a corporation or other association,
the following information shall be required:
         a.   Name and, if incorporated, the state of incorporation.
         b.   A true copy of the certificate of incorporation, articles of
incorporation or association agreement and bylaws and, if a foreign
corporation, a certificate of authority, as described in Minnesota statutes.
         c.   The name of the manager or proprietor or other agent in charge of
the premises to be licensed, giving all the information about said person as is
required of a single applicant in subsection B1 of this section.
         d.   A list of all persons who, singly or together with their spouses,
or a parent, brother, sister or child of either of them, own or control an
interest in said corporation or association in excess of five percent (5%) or
who are officers or directors of said corporation or association, together with
their addresses and all information as is required of a single applicant in
subsection B1 of this section.
      4.   Club: If an application is submitted by a club, the following
information shall be submitted in addition to that required by the prior
subsections hereof:
         a.   The purpose for which the club was originally organized and for
which it is now existing.
         b.   The date that the club was first organized and the place of such
organization.
         c.   The number of members.
         d.   The name of the manager, proprietor or other person who shall be
in charge of the licensed premises together with the same information
concerning such person as is required of a single applicant for an on-sale
license as set forth in subsection B1 of this section.
   C.   Description Of Premises:
      1.   Legal Description: The exact legal description of the premises to be
licensed together with a plot plan of the area showing dimensions, location of
buildings, street access, parking facilities and the locations of and distances
to the nearest church buildings and school grounds.
      2.   Street Address: The street address of the premises to be licensed.
An applicant for a license shall submit a floor plan of the facilities. The
plan shall show room dimensions and shall indicate the number of persons
intended to be served in each of said rooms.
   D.   Financial And Interest Criteria:
      1.   Financial Interest: The names and addresses of all persons, other
than the applicant, who have any financial interest in the business, buildings,
premises, fixtures, furniture, stock in trade; the nature of such interest,
amount thereof, terms for payment or other reimbursement. This shall include,
but not be limited to, any lessees, lessors, mortgagees, mortgagors, lenders,
lien holders, trustees, trustors and persons who have cosigned notes or have
otherwise loaned, pledged or extended security for any indebtedness of the
applicant.
      2.   Amount Of Investment: The amount of investment that the applicant
has in the business, building, premises, fixtures and structures, exclusive of
land, on the premises proposed to be licensed.
   E.   References: The names, residences and business addresses of three (3)
persons, residents of the state, of good moral character, not related to the
applicant or financially interested in the premises or business, who may be
referred to as to the applicant's character or, in the case where information
is required of a manager, the manager's character.
   F.   Plans Of Premises: Whenever the application for an arcade parlor,
billiard hall, or dance club license, or for a transfer thereof is for premises
either planned or under construction or undergoing substantial alteration, the
application shall be accompanied by a set of preliminary plans showing the
interior design of the proposed premises to be licensed.
   G.   Business Protocol And Security Plan: A written statement setting forth
all measures to ensure adequate traffic control, crowd protection and security
throughout the entire premises will be maintained, and the protocol to monitor
the age of the patrons admitted.
   H.   Taxes: Whether or not all real estate taxes, assessments, or other
financial claim of the city, state or federal government for the business and
premises to be licensed have been paid, and if not paid, the years for which
delinquent.
   I.   Description Of Proposed Business: A detailed narrative description of
the proposed business for which the license is sought including, but not
limited to: type of clientele, type of entertainment (if any), type of food
menu (if any), and fixtures.
   J.   Other Information Required: Such other information as the city council
shall require. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
3-2D-4-2: RENEWAL APPLICATIONS:
   A.   License Period, Expiration: Each license or renewal license shall be
issued for a maximum period of one year. All licenses expire on December 31 of
each year.
   B.   Time Of Making Application: Application for the renewal of an existing
license shall be made at least sixty (60) days prior to the date of the
expiration of the license, and shall state that everything in the prior
application remains true and correct except as otherwise indicated. If, in the
judgment of the council, good and sufficient cause is shown by any applicant
for his failure to file for a renewal within the time period provided, the
council may, if the other provisions of this article are complied with, grant
the application. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
3-2D-4-3: AMENDMENT APPLICATION:
   A.   Purpose: A licensee may request an amendment to the license during the
calendar year term of the license for any of the following purposes:
      1.   Change in ownership or management of the establishment.
      2.   Request to modify a condition(s) within the permit.
      3.   Appeal the administrative decision regarding special events.
   B.   Application: The following application material shall be provided as an
amendment application:
      1.   Change In Ownership Or Management: A license application shall be
submitted with the information requested in subsections
3-2D-4-1B through E, H, and J of this article.
      2.   Condition Modification Or Appeal Of Administrative Decision: The
licensee shall provide in writing the condition or administrative decision that
is requested to be modified, the modification that is requested, and the
factors that the city council should consider when determining the
modification.
   C.   Fee: The amendment fees for licenses shall be as established from time
to time by resolution of the city council. In the case of the change in
principal ownership or management, an initial investigation fee shall be paid
by the applicant. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
3-2D-4-4: EXECUTION OF APPLICATION:
If the application is by a natural person, it shall be signed and sworn to by
such person; if by a corporation, by an officer thereof; if by a partnership,
by one of the partners; if by an incorporated association, by the operating
officer or managing officer thereof. If the applicant is a partnership, the
application, license and bond or insurance policy shall be made and issued in
the name of all partners. It shall be unlawful to make any false statement in
an application. Applications shall be filed with the city clerk. (Ord. XXI.19,
8-3-2009)
3-2D-4-5: CORPORATIONS, PARTNERSHIPS OR ASSOCIATIONS:
   A.   Licenses issued to corporations shall be valid only so long as there is
no change in the officers or ownership interest of the corporation, unless such
change is approved by the director of community development, in which event
said license shall be continued in force until the end of the then current
license year.
   B.   Licenses issued to associations or partnerships shall be valid only so
long as there is no change in the partnership or association agreement or in
the ownership of said partnership or association, unless such change is
approved by the director of community development, in which event said license
shall continue in force until the end of the then current license year.
   C.   Corporations, partnerships or associations holding licenses shall
submit written notice to the clerk of any such changes described herein on or
before thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of any such change. The
licensee shall notify the clerk when a person not listed in the application
acquires an interest which, together with that of a spouse, parent, brother,
sister or child, exceeds five percent (5%) and shall give all information about
said person as is required of a person pursuant to the provisions of this
article.
   D.   Corporations holding licenses shall submit written notice to the clerk
of any change in operating officers at least thirty (30) days prior to the
effective date of such change. The written notice shall designate the new
operating officer and shall contain all of the information about said person as
is required of a single applicant in section
3-2D-4-1 of this article. The new operating officer shall be subject to the
investigation required by subsection
3-2D-6A of this article.
   E.   The designation of a new operating officer shall not cause the
corporation's license to become invalid before a decision is rendered by the
director of community development, provided proper notice and application are
made pursuant to subsection D of this section. A proposed new operating officer
shall be referred to as the interim operating officer. In the event an interim
operating officer is rejected by the director of community development, the
corporation shall designate another interim operating officer and make the
required application pursuant to section
3-2D-4-1 of this article within fifteen (15) calendar days of the director of
community development's decision. In any event, a corporation shall be limited
to two (2) successive interim operating officers. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
3-2D-5: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Fees: The fees for licenses and permits shall be as established from
time to time by resolution of the city council.
   B.   Payment Of Fees: The license fee for a new license shall be paid in
full before the application for the license is accepted, and at least ten (10)
days before the public hearing on the application. All fees shall be paid into
the general fund of the city. Upon rejection of any application for a license
or upon withdrawal of an application before approval of the issuance by the
council, the license fee shall be refunded, minus the cost of staff time up to
the date of the withdrawal, to the applicant except where rejection is for a
wilful misstatement in the license application in which case all the fees shall
be retained by the city.
   C.   Term, Pro Rata Fee: Each license shall be issued for a period of one
year except that if the application is made during the license year, a license
may be issued for the remainder of the year for a pro rata fee, with any
fraction of a month being counted as one month. Every license shall expire as
provided in subsection
3-2D-4-2A of this article.
   D.   Refunds: No refund of any fee shall be made except as provided in
subsection B of this section.
   E.   Change Of Ownership, Exception: Where a new application is filed as a
result of incorporation by an existing licensee and the ownership control and
interest in the license are unchanged, no additional investigation fee will be
required. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
3-2D-6: GRANTING OF LICENSES:
   A.   Investigation: At the time of making application, the applicant shall,
in writing, authorize the police department to investigate all facts set out in
the application and do a personal background and a criminal record check on the
applicant. The applicant shall further authorize the police department to
release information received from such investigation to the city council.
Should the city council deny the applicant the request for a license, due
partially or solely to the applicant's prior conviction of a crime, the city
council shall notify the applicant in writing of the following information:
      1.   The grounds and reasons for the denial;
      2.   The applicable complaint and grievance procedure as set forth in
Minnesota statutes, section 364.06;
      3.   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for a license; and
      4.   That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered
upon reapplication.
   B.   Granting License: After such investigation and hearing, the council
shall grant or refuse the application in its discretion. The city council shall
not grant the license unless it is satisfied that the applicant and premises
meet all of the requirements of this article and the applicant has agreed to
comply with the conditions of the license. If the city council denies a license
application, the city council shall notify the applicant in writing of the
grounds and reasons for denial. If the license is denied solely or in part due
to the applicant's prior conviction of a crime, the city council shall also
notify the applicant in writing of the following information:
      1.   The applicable complaint and grievance procedure as set forth in
Minnesota statutes, section 364.06;
      2.   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for a license; and
      3.   That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered
upon reapplication.
   C.   Issuance; Transfer; Buildings Under Construction:
      1.   Issuance: Each license shall be issued to the applicant only.
      2.   Transfer: Each license shall be issued only for the premises
described in the application. No license may be transferred to another person
or to another place without the approval of the council and without a new
application having been filed. Any transfer of the license and a transfer of
stock without council approval is a ground for revocation of the license.
      3.   Premises Under Construction: Where a license is granted for premises
where the building is under construction or otherwise not ready for occupancy,
the clerk shall not issue the license until notified by the building inspector
that the building is ready for occupancy. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
3-2D-7: PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Manager Required: No license shall be granted to a corporation that
does not have an operating officer who is eligible pursuant to the provisions
of this article.
   B.   Interest Defined: The term "interest" as used in this section includes
any pecuniary interest in the ownership, operation, management or profits of an
establishment licensed under this article, but does not include: bona fide
loans; bona fide fixed sum rental agreements; bona fide open accounts or other
obligations held with or without security arising out of the ordinary and
regular course of business or selling or leasing merchandise, fixtures or
supplies to such establishment; or an interest of five percent (5%) or less in
any corporation holding a license. A person who receives monies from time to
time directly or indirectly from licensee in the absence of a bona fide
consideration therefor and excluding bona fide gifts or donations, shall be
deemed to have a pecuniary interest in such license. In determining the bona
fide reasonable value of the goods or things received as consideration for the
payment by the licensee and all other facts reasonably tending to prove or
disapprove the existence of any purposeful scheme or arrangement to evade the
prohibitions of this article shall be considered.
   C.   Moral Character: No license shall be granted to a person who is not of
good moral character and repute. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
3-2D-8: PLACES INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:
   A.   License Refused Where Taxes Due: No license shall be granted or renewed
for operation on any premises on which real estate taxes, assessments or other
financial claims of the city or of the state are due, delinquent, or unpaid. If
an action has been commenced pursuant to the provisions of Minnesota statutes,
chapter 278, questioning the amount or validity of taxes, the council may, on
application by the licensee, waive strict compliance with this provision; no
waiver may be granted, however, for taxes, or any portion thereof, that remain
unpaid for a period exceeding one year after becoming due unless such one year
period is extended through no fault of the licensee.
   B.   Distance From School Or Church: No license shall be granted to any
applicant whose place of business is within three hundred feet (300') of any
school or within three hundred feet (300') of any church. In applying this
restriction the distance shall be measured from the main front entrance
following the route of ordinary pedestrian travel.
   C.   Nudity And Sexual Conduct Prohibited: No license shall be held at any
premises where nudity or sexual acts or conduct are permitted to occur.
      1.   For the purposes of this subsection C "nudity" and "sexual conduct"
are defined as follows:
    NUDITY: The showing of the postpubertal human male or female genitals pubic
area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering or the showing of
postpubertal female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any
portion thereof below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or the
covered human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. For the purposes of
this definition, the female breast is considered uncovered if the nipple only
or the nipple and the areola are covered.
   SEXUAL CONDUCT: Acts or simulated acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse,
sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, sadomasochistic abuse, or
any touching of the genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or
female, or the breasts of the female, whether alone or between members of the
same or opposite sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual
stimulation or gratification.
      2.   The following acts or conduct in a premises that has been issued a
license are contrary to the public welfare and, therefore, in order to preserve
order and protect the public welfare, no license issued under this article
shall be held at any premises where such conduct or acts are permitted to
occur:
         a.   The licensee, owner or manager of any licensed establishment
permitting or allowing any live nudity to occur on the licensed premises.
         b.   The licensee, owner or manager of any licensed establishment
permitting or allowing any live sexual conduct to occur in the licensed
establishment.
      3.   The city council may suspend or revoke or refuse to issue a license
for violation of this subsection C upon a finding that the licensee has failed
to comply with this subsection C. No suspension or revocation shall take effect
until the licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing. (Ord.
XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
3-2D-9: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   A.   Conditions And Regulations: Every license is subject to the conditions
in the following subsections and all other provisions of this article and of
other applicable ordinances, state law or regulations:
      1.   Inspections: Any police officer, building inspector or any properly
designated officer or employee of the city shall have the unqualified right to
enter, inspect and search the premises of any licensee hereunder during the
business hours without a warrant.
      2.   Security And Surveillance Plan: The security and surveillance plan,
including security staff and surveillance system, shall be reviewed, modified,
and approved by the city council as necessary to protect the health, safety, or
public welfare.
      3.   Security System Access: The owner or manager of the establishment
shall provide access and copies of their security system data in a timely
manner to assist the city's police department in any investigation of
activities that may have occurred on the premises of the establishment upon
request of the police department.
      4.   Hours Of Operation:
         a.   Arcade Parlors: An arcade parlor shall be operated only between
ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
         b.   Billiard Halls: A billiard hall shall be operated only between
two o'clock (2:00) P.M. and two o'clock (2:00) A.M.
         c.   Dance Clubs: A dance club shall be operated only between six
o'clock (6:00) P.M. and two o'clock (2:00) A.M.
      5.   Occupancy: The occupancy of an arcade parlor, billiard hall, or
dance club shall be limited by the lesser of the two (2) following methods:
         a.   The occupancy of the establishment shall be limited to three (3)
occupants per one off street parking space provided for the building housing
the establishment or such off street parking spaces within three hundred fifty
feet (350') of the entrance of the establishment that the owner has written
permission to use.
         b.   The occupancy of an establishment shall be limited to that
determined by the building code, fire code, and other applicable city codes.
      6.   Age Restrictions:
         a.   Arcade parlors: Persons under twelve (12) years of age shall not
be permitted to enter or remain on the premises unless accompanied by a parent
or legal guardian.
         b.   Billiard halls: Persons under sixteen (16) years of age shall not
be permitted to enter or remain on the premises unless accompanied by a parent
or legal guardian.
         c.   Dance clubs: Persons of the following ages shall not be permitted
to enter or remain on the premises:
            (1)   Under sixteen (16) years of age.
            (2)   Twenty one (21) years of age or older except for bona fide
employees or entertainers hired by the licensee to work at the dance club, city
employees as described in subsection A1 of this section, or the temporary
admittance of parents or legal guardians to retrieve their children.
      7.   Identification Required:
         a.   Arcade parlors: The licensee, or the licensee's employee or
agent, shall require prospective patrons to produce and permit to be examined a
school identification, current driver's license or nonqualification certificate
issued by the state department of public safety before the patrons shall
participate in any activities on the premises. In the case of a foreign
national, a valid passport may be used as an alternative to the foregoing
methods of identification.
         b.   Billiard halls and dance clubs: The licensee, or the licensee's
employee or agent, shall require prospective patrons to produce and permit to
be examined a current driver's license or nonqualification certificate issued
by the state department of public safety before the patrons shall participate
in any activities on the premises. In the case of a foreign national, a valid
passport may be used as an alternative to the foregoing methods of
identification.
      8.   Misrepresenting Age: No person shall misrepresent his or her age for
the purpose of entering an arcade parlor, billiard hall, or dance club. No
person prohibited by subsection A6 of this section shall enter any premises
licensed for an arcade parlor, billiard hall, or dance club.
      9.   Adequate Lighting: It shall be the obligation of the licensee to
provide proper and adequate illumination of all portions of the building
interior that are available for public use. Such illumination shall be not less
than one foot-candle at floor level at all times when the premises are open to
the public or when any member of the public is permitted to enter and remain on
the premises.
      10.   Nonemployees On Premises: The licensee shall not allow nonemployees
or nonowners, except those individuals listed in subsection A1 of this section,
within the building outside of the hours of operation or on the premises
outside of thirty (30) minutes before or after the hours of operation.
      11.   Ownership Of Equipment And Equipment Advertising: No equipment or
fixture in any licensed place shall be owned in whole or in part by any
manufacturer or distiller of alcoholic or tobacco products, nor shall any
equipment or fixture advertise any alcoholic or tobacco product.
      12.   Alcohol And Controlled Substances: No licensee shall knowingly
permit the sale, possession or consumption of alcohol or controlled substances
on the licensed premises in violation of Minnesota statutes, chapters 340A and
152.
      13.   Persons Suspected To Be Under The Influence: It shall be the
obligation of the licensee and/or manager to remove, or have removed, from the
premises any person who is, or appears to be, under the influence of, or
affected by the use of, alcohol or drugs, or whose conduct poses a physical
danger to the safety of others present.
      14.   Prostitution: No licensee shall knowingly permit the licensed
premises or any room in those premises or any adjoining building directly under
the licensee's control to be used by prostitutes.
      15.   Loitering: It shall be the obligation of the licensee to prevent
loitering, and/or the creation of public nuisances or disturbances of the peace
by any patrons of the dance club on the premises or in the immediate vicinity.
"Loitering" shall not include walking between the building and a patron's
vehicle, nor shall it include the act of waiting in line to gain admission to
the establishment.
      16.   Litter, Refuse, And Garbage: It shall be the obligation of the
licensee to clean up all litter, refuse, and garbage resulting from
establishment operations. The cleanup shall occur within four (4) hours after
the end of each day's operation.
      17.   Employee Background Checks: The licensee shall perform background
checks on all employees as required within the Minnesota child protection
background check act, Minnesota statutes, 299C.60 through 299C.64.
   B.   Special Events: Modifications to the conditions of the license for
special events may be considered but not necessarily granted at the discretion
of the director of community development and the police chief. Review of the
special event request will be based upon general adherence to the conditions of
the license, relationship to the principal use of the premises, potential
impact upon the surrounding area, or other information deemed relevant to the
staff. The applicant or owner will apply for a special event license no less
than seven (7) working days before the event. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
3-2D-10: SPECIAL CONDITIONS:
At the time a license renewal is issued, the city may attach special conditions
to the license to protect the welfare of the community. Violation of any of the
conditions shall be grounds for revocation of the license. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-
2009)
3-2D-11: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
All applicants for an arcade parlor, billiard hall, or dance club license to be
issued or renewed must, as a condition to the issuance of the license,
demonstrate proof of financial responsibility with regard to liability to the
city. Proof of financial responsibility may be given by filing one of the
following:
   A.   A certificate that there is in effect for the period of the license an
insurance policy or pool providing the following minimum coverages:
      1.   One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) because of bodily injury
to any one person in any one occurrence and, subject to the limit for one
person, in the amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) because
of bodily injury to two (2) or more persons in any one occurrence, and in the
amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) because of injury to or
destruction of property of others in any one occurrence;
      2.   One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for loss of means of
support of any one person in any one occurrence, and, subject to the limit of
one person, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for loss of means of
support of two (2) or more persons in any one occurrence; or
   B.   A bond or a surety company with the minimum coverages as provided in
subsection A of this section. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
3-2D-12: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
3-2D-12-1: GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION:
The council shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days
or revoke a license for each violation on a finding that the licensee has
committed a violation of any of the following:
   A.   False or misleading statements made on a license application or
renewal, or failure to abide by the commitments, promises or representations
made to the city council.
   B.   Violation of any conditions under which the license was granted.
   C.   Violation of any provision of this article.
   D.   Creation of a nuisance on the premises or in the surrounding area.
   E.   Violation of any state or federal law regulating the sale, possession,
or consumption of intoxicating liquor or controlled substances.
In the event of a revocation of a license, the licensee must reapply for a
license and meet the requirements for a license under this article. No
application for the same or substantially same license shall be made within six
(6) months of the date of denial. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
3-2D-12-2: DISPROPORTIONATE USE OF PUBLIC SAFETY RESOURCES:
The city council may review the license and consider license modifications or
revocation as provided within section
3-2D-12-1 of this article if there is a disproportionate use of public safety
resources including, but not limited to, three (3) or more police calls to the
licensed establishment concerning crimes against person, disturbances,
possession of a dangerous weapon, possession of drug paraphernalia, controlled
substances violations, or alcohol violations within any twelve (12) month
period that result in a complete investigative report. Upon the third
occurrence, the city council will be notified by the police chief of the
substance of the reports. In consultation with the police chief, the city
council will determine whether formal review of the license is warranted. The
applicant will be notified of the disposition of the decision. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-
3-2009)
3-2D-12-3: INACTIVE LICENSE:
The city council may revoke the license of any establishment granted a license
that is not under construction and exhibiting satisfactory progress toward
completion within six (6) months from its issuance, or any establishment that
ceases operation for a period of six (6) months. A hearing shall be held to
determine what progress has been made toward opening or reopening the
establishment and, if satisfactory progress is not demonstrated, the council
may revoke the license. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
3-2D-12-4: HEARING NOTICE:
Revocation or suspension of a license by the council shall be preceded by a
hearing. The city council may appoint a hearing examiner or may conduct a
hearing itself. The hearing notice shall be given at least ten (10) days prior
to the hearing, include notice of the time and place of the hearing, and shall
state the nature of the charges against the licensee. (Ord. XXI.19, 8-3-2009)
CHAPTER 3
RETAIL BUSINESSES
ARTICLE A. CIGARETTES
(Rep. by Ord. XVI.48, 6-4-2002)
CHAPTER 4
LICENSING CERTAIN TRADES
(Rep. by Ord. XVI.36, 11-5-1996)
CHAPTER 5
LICENSING OF PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
SECTION:
3-5-1: Purpose
3-5-2: Definitions
3-5-3: License Required
3-5-4: Exclusions
3-5-5: Application
3-5-6: Investigation And License Issuance
3-5-7: Duration Of License
3-5-8: License Fees
3-5-9: Use Of Streets And Site Requirements
3-5-10: Exhibition Of License And Identification
3-5-11: Prohibited Practices
3-5-12: Revocation Of License
3-5-13: Appeal
3-5-14: Reapplication
3-5-15: Penalty
3-5-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is not intended to hinder, delay or interfere in any way with
legitimate business or organizational activities. The city council finds,
however, that solicitors have used public streets and their direct contact with
residents of the city for the illegitimate solicitation practices of
harassment, nuisance, theft, deceit or menacing, troublesome or unlawful
activities. This chapter is intended to identify and control: a) businesses and
organizations using solicitation as a means of concealing unlawful activities;
and b) businesses and organizations that, though their activities be lawful or
even commendable, use such illegitimate practices in solicitation; and c)
individual natural persons who, though they represent lawful businesses and
organizations, use such illegitimate solicitation practices; and d) the
operation of open sales lots in the city to ensure that they are safely
operated in a manner that will not impede public rights of way or the safety of
pedestrians or vehicles passing or participating in activities at outdoor sales
lots. (Ord. XVI.55, 6-7-2005)
3-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms defined herein shall have the
following meanings:
PEDDLER: Any person or persons who goes from house to house, from place to
place or from street to street, conveying or transporting goods, wares or
merchandise or offering or exposing the same for sale, or making sales and
delivering articles to purchasers.
SALES LOT: An outdoor area, not enclosed within a building that may include
allowed temporary structures used for temporary display of merchandise for sale
which is not the principal use of the property but is in compliance with the
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. Examples of such
use include seasonal display and sale of Christmas trees, gardening or nursery
products, consumer fireworks, or other similar goods.
SOLICITOR: Any person who goes from house to house, from place to place or from
street to street, soliciting or taking or attempting to take orders for sale of
goods, wares or merchandise, including magazines, books, periodicals or
personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for service
to be performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or
exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such order or whether he/she is
collecting advance payments on such orders. Such definition includes any
person, who for himself/herself, or another person, firm or corporation, hires,
leases, uses, or occupies any building, motor vehicle, structure or other place
within the city for the primary purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders
for future delivery.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Any person, individual, copartnership, or corporation,
either as principal or agent, who engages in, does or transacts any temporary
and transient business in this state, either in one locality or in traveling
from place to place in this state, selling goods, wares and merchandise; and
who for the purpose of carrying on such business, hires, leases, occupies or
uses a building, structure, vehicle, trailer, tent or other portable shelter,
or vacant lot for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise.
The term "transient merchant" does not include a seller or exhibitor in a
firearms collector show involving two (2) or more sellers or exhibitors. (Ord.
XVI.55, 6-7-2005)
3-5-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any peddler, solicitor, transient merchant or operator of
any temporary sales lot to engage in any such business within the city without
first having obtained a license or permit from the city clerk and any license
or permit required by Dakota County or the state of Minnesota in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter, the zoning ordinance, county ordinances or
state statutes except those specifically excluded by section
3-5-4 of this chapter.
   A.   The license is nontransferable to either another person or another
location.
   B.   The applicant must be at least eighteen (18) years of age.
   C.   The premises are subject to inspection by city employees during normal
business hours or by emergency personnel as necessary. (Ord. XVI.55, 6-7-2005)
3-5-4: EXCLUSIONS:
Except as provided in subsection G of this section, no person shall be required
to obtain a license in the following instances:
   A.   A solicitor doing business by appointment.
   B.   A solicitor taking orders for the future door to door delivery of
newspapers.
   C.   Salespeople selling goods to retail or wholesale stores or to
professional or industrial establishments.
   D.   The conduct of "garage sales" or "rummage sales".
   E.   No license shall be required for vendors as a preliminary step to the
establishment of a regular route service for the sale and delivery of such
commodities or the providing of such services to regular customers.
   F.   School aged children selling items for fundraisers.
   G.   Any canvassing, soliciting or fundraising for the purpose of charitable
organizations if such an organization is registered with the state department
of commerce pursuant to the provisions of Minnesota statutes, sections 309.515,
309.52, and 309.53 as a charitable organization or exempted pursuant to the
provisions of Minnesota statutes 309.515, provided documentation is filed with
the city clerk giving the following information:
      1.   Name and address of the organization;
      2.   Name, address and physical description of the person seeking to
register on behalf of the organization;
      3.   Names and addresses of all of the officers and no more than four (4)
directors of the organization;
      4.   Period during which canvassing, solicitation or fundraising is to be
carried on;
      5.   Purpose of the cause for which registration is sought; and
      6.   Evidence of registration with the department of commerce or
exemption from registration pursuant to Minnesota statutes 309.515.
Upon receipt of the statements required in this subsection and receipt of
evidence that such organization is a charitable organization, the city clerk
shall issue a license without a license fee. (Ord. XVI.55, 6-7-2005)
3-5-5: APPLICATION:
In addition to such information as the city clerk may require, the application
shall also include:
   A.   The full legal name, business and home address, and phone number of the
applicant and all other names under which the applicant conducts business.
   B.   A physical description of the applicant including, hair color, eye
color, height, weight, date of birth, and distinguishing marks and features.
   C.   The full name, address, phone number, physical descriptive information
and date of birth of all persons associated with the applicant who will be
conducting the applicant's business within the city.
   D.   A written description of the nature of the business, the goods to be
sold and the applicant's method of operation.
   E.   If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials establishing the exact relationship.
   F.   The exact dates the applicant intends to do business in the city.
   G.   The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or order
taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such goods or
products are located at the time said application is filed and the proposed
method of delivery.
   H.   A statement as to whether the applicant or the agent managing the
business has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any
municipal or county ordinance or state statute involving activities licensed
under this chapter, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty
assessed therefor.
   I.   If a vehicle or vehicles will be used, a description of the same
together with the license number of the vehicle or vehicles to be used.
   J.   A statement of the nature, character and quality of the goods, wares or
merchandise to be sold or offered for sale by the applicant, the invoice value
and quality of such goods, wares and merchandise, whether the same are proposed
to be sold from stock in possession or by sample, at auction, by direct sales
or by taking orders for future delivery.
   K.   The driver's license number, state identification card number, or
military identification card number from a currently valid form of these
identifications obtained from the applicant and all persons who will be
conducting business within the city under the license if issued.
   L.   Credentials from the person, for which the applicant proposes to do
business, authorizing the applicant to act as such representative.
   M.   In the case of transient merchants and sales lots the place where the
business is to be carried on and a copy of the lease for such place or a letter
signed by the owner thereof authorizing the use. (Ord. XVI.55, 6-7-2005)
3-5-6: INVESTIGATION AND LICENSE ISSUANCE:
   A.   There will be a fourteen (14) day waiting period between the
application and issuance of the license during which period of time the chief
of police shall make such investigation of the applicant's business moral
character as the chief of police shall deem necessary for the protection of the
public good. The license may be issued by the city clerk when the foregoing
investigation is completed.
   B.   The issuance of the license shall be denied for the following causes:
      1.   Failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of having obtained
any required county or state license or registration;
      2.   Failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the
information requested by the city as a part of the application, or the failure
to sign the application, or the failure to pay the required fee at the time of
application, or the failure to provide the required liability insurance
information;
      3.   The conviction of the applicant within the past five (5) years from
the date of application for any violation of any federal or state statute or
regulation, or any local ordinance, which adversely reflects on the person's
ability to conduct the business for which the license is being sought in an
honest and legal manner. Violations shall include, but not be limited to,
burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, and
any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person;
      4.   The revocation within the past five (5) years of any license issued
to the applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor
or transient merchant;
      5.   The applicant is found to have a bad business reputation. Evidence
of a bad business reputation shall include, but not be limited to, the
existence of more than three (3) complaints against the applicant with the
Better Business Bureau, the attorney general's office, or other similar
business or consumer rights office or agency, within the preceding twelve (12)
months, or six (6) complaints filed against the applicant within the preceding
five (5) years. (Ord. XVI.55, 6-7-2005)
3-5-7: DURATION OF LICENSE:
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire at midnight of
December 31 in the year when issued. (Ord. XVI.55, 6-7-2005)
3-5-8: LICENSE FEES:
Fees shall be set from time to time by city council resolution. (Ord. XVI.55,
6-7-2005)
3-5-9: USE OF STREETS AND SITE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Use Of Streets: No peddler or solicitor shall have any exclusive rights
to any location in the public streets, nor shall any be permitted a stationary
location thereon, nor shall any be permitted to operate in a congested area
where such operation might impede or inconvenience the public use of such
streets. For the purpose of this chapter, the judgment of a police officer,
exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is
congested and the public impeded or inconvenienced.
   B.   Site Requirements:
      1.   Sales lots:
         a.   Adequate off street parking, with a surface in compliance with
subsection
8-2-2I of this code, shall be provided for both the principal and interim use
ensuring that no obstruction or interference occurs with existing traffic
patterns.
         b.   Lighting shall be provided as is necessary for security, safety
and traffic circulation.
         c.   The sales lot must be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from
the property line; or, the parking setback required by the particular zoning
district within which the sales lot is to be located, whichever provides the
greater setback. No portion of the site shall be located within one hundred
feet (100') of any developed residential property.
         d.   Licenses for sales lots on residentially zoned property are not
permitted.
         e.   Signage, exclusive of the posting of the required license, shall
require and comply with temporary sign permit requirements.
         f.   The application shall include a detailed site plan of the
premises and the area proposed for the lot including temporary shelter
structures if any. On site structures must conform to all applicable codes and
ordinances.
         g.   Proof of adequate liability insurance issued by a company
licensed to do business in the state of Minnesota showing that the insurance
will be in effect for the entire time the licensee's business will be conducted
in the city, and providing for prior notification to the city of Rosemount
should the insurance be cancelled, shall be provided to the city.
         h.   The site shall be kept in a neat and orderly manner and the
display of items shall not cover more than ten percent (10%) of the total lot
area of the principal use or approved PUD so as to not interfere with
pedestrian safety, vehicular movement, emergency access and existing business
activities.
         i.   The sales lot site shall be completely surfaced with concrete,
blacktop, or brick pavers to control dust and erosion. The surface shall be
properly maintained to prevent deterioration. (Ord. XVI.55, 6-7-2005)
3-5-10: EXHIBITION OF LICENSE AND IDENTIFICATION:
All licenses issued under this chapter, including those issued to individual
company representatives, shall be carried by the licensee upon their person at
all times while conducting business within the city; or in the case of a
transient merchant, conspicuously posted in such merchant's place of business.
The state driver's license, state identification card, or military
identification card provided at the time of application for licensing shall
also be carried at all times by the licensee while conducting business within
the city. Such license and identification shall be shown at the request of any
citizen, police officer, city inspector or other city employee designated or
charged with enforcing the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. XVI.55, 6-7-
2005)
3-5-11: PROHIBITED PRACTICES:
No person under the provisions of this chapter shall:
   A.   Sell or solicit before the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after
eight o'clock (8:00) P.M., unless a previous appointment has been made.
   B.   Enter or conduct business upon any premises where a sign or plaque is
conspicuously posted stating in effect that no peddlers or solicitors are
allowed. Such signs shall have letters a minimum of one-half inch (1/2") high.
   C.   Occupy for the purpose of advertising and/or conducting business any
area within a sight triangle, at any road intersection.
   D.   Occupy as a transient merchant, solicitor or peddler, any public right
of way for the purpose of advertising and/or conducting business.
   E.   Occupy as a transient merchant, solicitor or peddler public property
for the purpose of advertising and/or conducting business unless approved by
the city council.
   F.   Remain on the property of another when requested to leave, or otherwise
conduct business in a manner a reasonable person would find obscene,
threatening, intimidating or abusive.
Upon violation of these prohibited practices the city may immediately suspend
the license until a hearing can be held. (Ord. XVI.55, 6-7-2005)
3-5-12: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the city
council after notice and hearing for any of the following causes:
   A.   Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statement contained in the
application for license.
   B.   Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statement made in the course of
carrying on business as a solicitor, canvasser, peddler, transient merchant,
itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor.
   C.   Any violation of this chapter.
   D.   Conviction of a crime or misdemeanor.
   E.   Conducting the business of peddler, canvasser, solicitor, transient
merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor, as the case may be, in an
unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of peace or to
constitute a menace to health, safety or general welfare of the public.
   F.   Emergency situations. If, in the discretion of the chief of police,
fire marshal, or building official, imminent harm to the health or safety of
the public may occur because of the actions of a person, or the condition of
the sales site or structure licensed under this chapter, the city may
immediately suspend the license and provide notice of the right to hold a
subsequent public hearing as prescribed in this chapter.
   G.   Suspension or revocation of any license issued for the purpose of
authorizing multiple persons to conduct business on behalf of the licensee
shall serve as a suspension or revocation of each authorized person's authority
to conduct business on behalf of the licensee whose license is suspended or
revoked.
Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall be given by the city clerk
in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time
and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the
licensee at his last known address at least five (5) days prior to the date set
for hearing, or shall be delivered by a police officer in the same manner as a
summons at least three (3) days prior to the date set for hearing.
Exception: Section
3-5-11, "Prohibited Practices", of this chapter, and emergency situation
clause, subsection F of this section, allow for suspension of a license by the
city in certain situations with notice of hearing and revocation to follow.
(Ord. XVI.55, 6-7-2005)
3-5-13: APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police or the city clerk in
the denial of a license as provided in section
3-5-6 of this chapter may appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be
taken by filing with the city council within fourteen (14) days after notice of
action complained of, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for
the appeal. The city council shall set a time and place for a hearing in the
same manner as provided in section
3-5-12 of this chapter for notice of hearing on revocation. (Ord. XVI.55, 6-7-
2005)
3-5-14: REAPPLICATION:
No licensee whose license has been revoked shall make further application until
at least twelve (12) months have elapsed since the last revocation. (Ord.
XVI.55, 6-7-2005)
3-5-15: PENALTY:
Any person(s) who shall violate the terms or provisions of this chapter is
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as
described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. XVI.55, 6-7-2005)
CHAPTER 6
PAWNSHOPS AND PAWNBROKERS
SECTION:
3-6-1: Purpose
3-6-2: Definitions
3-6-3: License Required
3-6-4: Application Content
3-6-5: Application Execution
3-6-6: Application Verification
3-6-7: Application Consideration
3-6-8: Renewal Application
3-6-9: Fees
3-6-10: Persons and Locations Ineligible for a License
3-6-11: General License Restrictions
3-6-12: Restrictions Regarding License Transfer
3-6-13: Suspension or Revocation of License
3-6-14: Prohibited Acts
3-6-1: PURPOSE:
The City Council finds that pawnbrokers potentially provide an opportunity for
the commission of crimes and their concealment because businesses have the
ability to receive and transfer stolen property easily and quickly. The City
Council also finds that consumer protection regulation is warranted in
transactions involving pawnbrokers. The purpose of this Chapter is therefore to
prevent pawnbroking businesses from being used as facilities for commission of
crimes and to assure that such businesses comply with basic consumer protection
standards, thereby protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of
the citizens of the City. (Ord. XV.7, 10-4-94)
3-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms when used in this Chapter shall have the
following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ISSUING AUTHORITY: The City of Rosemount.
MINOR: Any natural person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
PAWNBROKER: A person who loans money in deposit or pledge of personal property
or other valuable thing; who deals in the purchasing of personal property or
other valuable thing on condition of selling that same back again at a
stipulated price; or who loans money secured by chattel mortgage or on personal
property, taking possession of the property or any part thereof so mortgaged.
To the extent that a pawnbroker business includes buying personal property
previously used, rented, or leased, the provisions of this Chapter shall be
applicable. Any bank, savings and loan association, or credit union shall not
be deemed a pawnbroker for purposes of this Chapter.
PERSON: Any one or more natural persons; a partnership, including a limited
partnership; a corporation, including a foreign, domestic, or nonprofit
corporation; a trust; a political subdivision of the State; or any other
business organization. (Ord. XV.7, 10-4-94)
3-6-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall exercise, carry-on, or be engaged in the trade or business of
pawnbroker within the City unless such person is currently licensed under this
Chapter. Persons engaged in the business of pawnbroker on the effective date of
this Chapter must receive a license within sixty (60) days or cease doing
business. (Ord. XV.7, 10-4-94)
3-6-4: APPLICATION CONTENT:
In addition to any information that may be required by the County pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes 471.924, every applicant for a license under this Chapter
shall be made on a form supplied by the City and shall contain the following
information:
   A.   If the applicant is a natural person:
      1.   The name, place, and date of birth, street resident address, and
telephone number of the applicant;
      2.   Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States or a
resident alien;
      3.   Whether the applicant has ever used or has been known by a name
other than the applicant's name, and if so, the name used and information
concerning dates and places where used;
      4.   The name of the business if it is to be conducted under a
designation, name, or style other than the name of the applicant and a
certified copy of the certificate as required by Minnesota Statutes 333.01;
      5.   The street address at which the applicant has lived during the
preceding five (5) years;
      6.   The type, name, and location of every business or occupation in
which the applicant has been engaged during the preceding five (5) years and
the name(s) and address(es) of the applicant's employer(s) and partner(s), if
any, for the preceding five (5) years;
      7.   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, crime, or
violation of any ordinance other than a traffic ordinance. If so, the applicant
shall furnish information as to the time, place, and offense for which
convictions were had;
      8.   The physical description of the applicant;
      9.   If the applicant is married:
         a.   The name, place, and date of birth, and street address of the
applicant's current spouse;
         b.   The type, name, and location of every business or occupation in
which the applicant's current spouse has been engaged during the preceding five
(5) years;
         c.   The names and addresses of the employers or partners of the
applicant's current spouse for the preceding five (5) years;
         d.   Whether the applicant's current spouse has even been convicted of
any felony, crime, or violation of any ordinance other than a traffic
ordinance. If so, the applicant shall furnish information as to the time,
place, and offense for which convictions were had.
   B.   If the applicant is a partnership:
      1.   The name(s) and address(es) of all general and limited partners and
all information concerning each limited partner required in subsection A of
this Section;
      2.   The name(s) of managing partner(s) and the interest of each partner
in the pawnbroker business;
      3.   A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted with the
application. If the partnership is required to file a certificate as to a trade
name pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 333.01, a certified copy of such
certificate shall be attached to the application.
   C.   If the applicant is a corporation or other organization:
      1.   The name of the corporation or business form, and if incorporated,
the state of incorporation;
      2.   A true copy of the certificate of incorporation, articles of
incorporation, or association agreement, and by-laws shall be attached to the
application. If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a certificate of
authority as required by Minnesota Statutes 303.06, shall be attached;
      3.   A list of all persons who control or own an interest in excess of
five percent (5%) in such organization or business form or who are officers of
the corporation or business form and all information concerning said persons
required in subsection A above.
   D.   For all applicants:
      1.   Whether the applicant holds a current pawnbroker license from any
other governmental unit and whether the applicant is licensed under Minnesota
Statutes 471.924.
      2.   Whether the applicant has previously been denied a pawnbroker
license from any other governmental unit;
      3.   The names, street resident addresses, and business addresses of
three (3) residents of Hennepin, Ramsey, Anoka, Carver, Dakota, Washington,
Scott, Goodhue, or Rice County, who are of good moral character and who are not
related to the applicant or not holding any ownership in the premises or
business, who may be referred to as to the applicant's and or manager's
character;
      4.   The location of the business premises;
      5.   The legal description of the premises to be licensed;
      6.   Whether all real estate and personal property taxes that are due and
payable for the premises to be licensed have been paid, and if not paid, the
years and amounts that are unpaid.
      7.   Whether the application is for premises either planned or under
construction of undergoing substantial alteration, the application shall be
accompanied by a set of preliminary plans showing the design of the proposed
premises to be licensed. If the plans or design are in file with the City
Building/Inspections Department, no plans need be submitted with the issuing
authority;
      8.   Such other information as the City Council or issuing authority may
require. (Ord. XV.7, 10-4-94)
3-6-5: APPLICATION EXECUTION:
   A.   All applications for a license under this Chapter shall be signed and
sworn to. If the application is that of a natural person, it shall be signed
and sworn to by such person; if that of a corporation, by an officer thereof;
it that of a partnership, by one of the general partners; and if that of an
unincorporated association, by the manager or managing officer thereof.
   B.   Any falsification on a license application shall result in the denial
or revocation of a license. (Ord. XV.7, 10-4-94)
3-6-6: APPLICATION VERIFICATION:
All applicants shall be referred to the Police Department for verification and
investigation of the facts set forth in the application. The Police Department
shall make a written report and recommendation to the City Council as to
issuance or nonissuance of the license. The City Council may order and conduct
such additional investigation as it deems necessary. (Ord. XV.7, 10-4-94)
3-6-7: APPLICATION CONSIDERATION:
   A.   The City Council shall conduct a hearing on the license application
within a reasonable period following receipt of the Police Department's report
and recommendation regarding the application. At least ten (10) days in advance
of the City Council hearing on an application, the issuing authority shall
cause notice of the hearing to be published in the official newspaper of the
City, setting forth the day, time, and place of the hearing; the name of the
applicant; the premises where the business is to be conducted; and the type of
license which is sought. At the hearing, opportunity shall be given to any
person to be heard for or against the granting of the license. Additional
hearings on the application may be held if the City Council deems additional
hearings necessary. After the hearing or hearings on the application, the City
Council, may, in its discretion, grant or deny the application.
   B.   If an application is granted for a location where a building is under
construction or not ready for occupancy, the license shall not be delivered to
the licensee until a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the licensed
premises. (Ord. XV.7, 10-4-94)
3-6-8: RENEWAL APPLICATION:
   A.   All licenses issued under this Chapter shall be effective for one year
from the date of approval by the City Council. An application for the renewal
of an existing license shall be made prior to the expiration date of the
license and shall be made in such form as the issuing authority requires. If,
in the judgement of the City Council, good and sufficient cause is shown by the
applicant for the applicant's failure to submit a renewal application before
the expiration of the existing license, the City Council may, if the other
provisions of this Section are complied with, grant the renewal application.
   B.   A license under this Section may not be renewed:
      1.   If the City Council determines that the licensee has failed to
comply with the provisions of this Chapter in preceding license years;
      2.   If the licensee or, if the licensee does not manage the
establishment, the manager of the licensed premises is not a resident of Anoka,
Carver, Dakota, Hennepin, Ramsey, Scott, Washington, Goodhue, or Rice Counties
on the date of renewal takes effect;
      3.   If in the case of a partnership, the managing partner or other
person who manages the establishment is not a resident of Anoka, Carver,
Dakota, Hennepin, Ramsey, Scott, Washington, Goodhue, or Rice Counties on the
date the renewal takes effect;
      4.   If in the case of a corporation, or other organization, the manager,
a proprietor, or agent in charge of the establishment is not a resident of
Anoka, Carver, Dakota, Hennepin, Ramsey, Scott, Washington, Goodhue, or Rice
Counties on the date the renewal takes effect;
      5.   The time for establishing residence in the above named Counties may
for good cause be extended by the City Council. (Ord. XV.7, 10-4-94)
3-6-9: FEES:
   A.   Investigation Fee: At the time of each original application for a
license, the applicant shall deposit one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00) with the City for the investigation fee. The investigation fee
shall be three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00). Provided, for investigations
conducted outside the State, the City shall be paid the investigation costs in
excess of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00), but not to exceed ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00). Any fees due in excess of the one thousand five hundred
dollars ($1,500.00) deposit must be paid prior to the license hearing and
before the City Council considers the application. The remainder of the deposit
shall be returned to the applicant.
   B.   License Fee:
      1.   The license fee shall be paid annually, to be determined from the
date of issuance of the license.
      2.   The annual license fee shall be set by City Council resolution. The
application fee shall be credited to the first annual fee, if the application
is approved. (Ord. XV.7, 10-4-94)
3-6-10: PERSONS AND LOCATIONS INELIGIBLE FOR A LICENSE:
   A.   No license under this Chapter shall be issued to an applicant who is a
natural person if such applicant:
      1.   Is a minor at the time the application is filed;
      2.   Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation
licensed as prescribed by Minnesota Statutes 364.03, subdivision 2, and has not
shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to
perform the duties of a pawnbroker as prescribed by Minnesota Statutes 364.03,
subdivision 3;
      3.   Is not of good moral character or repute; or
      4.   Holds an intoxicating liquor license within the City.
   B.   No license under this Chapter shall be issued to an applicant that is a
partnership if such applicant has any general partner or managing partner;
      1.   Who is a minor at the time that application is filed;
      2.   Who has been convicted of any crime directly related to the
occupation licensed as prescribed by Minnesota Statutes 364.03, subdivision 2,
and who has not shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and
present fitness to perform the duties of a pawnbroker as prescribed by
Minnesota Statutes 364.03, subdivision 3;
      3.   Who is not of good moral character or repute; or
      4.   Who holds an intoxicating liquor license within the City.
   C.   No license under this Chapter shall be issued to an applicant that is a
corporation or other organization if such applicant has any manager,
proprietor, or agent in charge of the business to be licensed:
      1.   Who is a minor at the time the application is filed;
      2.   Who has been convicted of any crime directly related to the
occupation licensed as prescribed by Minnesota Statutes 364.03, subdivision 2,
and who has not shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and
present fitness to perform the duties of a pawnbroker as prescribed by
Minnesota Statutes 364.03, subdivision 3;
      3.   Who is not of good moral character or repute; or
      4.   Who holds an intoxicating liquor license within the City. (Ord.
XV.7, 10-4-94)
3-6-11: GENERAL LICENSE RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Recordkeeping: At the time of a receipt, sale, or redemption of an item
of property, the pawnbroker shall immediately record, using the English
language, in an indelible ink, the following information:
      1.   An accurate description of the item of property including, but not
limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number,
brand name, or other identifying mark of such item;
      2.   The date, time and place the item of property was received by the
pawnbroker;
      3.   The amount of money loaned upon or pledged therefor;
      4.   The full name, residence address, residence telephone number, date
of birth, and reasonably accurate description of person from whom the item of
property was received, including; sex, height, race, color of eyes, and color
of hair;
      5.   The identification number from one of the following forms of
identification of the person from whom the item was received;
         a.   A valid Minnesota driver's license;
         b.   A valid Minnesota identification card;
         c.   A valid photo identification issued by the state of residency of
the person from whom the item was received and one other form of
identification;
      6.   The signature of the person pledging or selling the item;
      7.   The pawnbroker will also take a color photograph of frontal view of
this person, cross-referenced to the properties. The Police Department may
approve a video in lieu of color photograph if the video produces the same
quality picture; and
      8.   A color photograph of any precious metals involved in a transaction.
The Police Department may approve a video in lieu of a color photograph if the
video produces the same quality picture.
   B.   Inspection of Records: The pawnbroker shall provide to the Police
Department the information required in subsection A of this Section by leaving
complete and correct copy of records with the Police Department every business
day, before the hour of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon. When possible, records
left with the Police Department should be contained on computer disk for
retrieval of information by the Police Department's computer system. The
information required in subsection A of this Section shall be retained by the
pawnbroker for at least four (4) years. The license must display a sign, in a
conspicuous place in the premises and of a sufficient size, which informs all
patrons that all transactions are reported to the Police Department.
   C.   Police Order to Hold Property: Whenever the Police Department, upon
reasonable suspicion that an item received by the pawnbroker may have been
stolen, notifies the pawnbroker not to sell an item, the item shall not be sold
or removed from the licensed premises until authorized to be released by the
Police Department or a period of thirty (30) days, whichever is the lesser.
Oral notification to hold property shall be confirmed in writing by the Police
Department.
   D.   Receipt: The pawnbroker shall provide a receipt to the seller or
pledger of any item of property received, which shall include:
      1.   The name, address, and telephone number of the pawnbroker business;
      2.   The date on which the item was received by the pawnbroker;
      3.   A description of the item received and amount paid to the pledger or
seller in exchange for the item pawned or sold;
      4.   The signature of the pawnbroker or agent;
      5.   The last regular business day by which the item must be redeemed by
the pledger without risk that the item will be sold and the amount necessary to
redeem the pawned item on that date.
      6.   The annual rate of interest charged on pawned items received;
      7.   The name and address of the seller or pledger.
   E.   Hours of Operation: No pawnbroker shall keep the pawnbroker business
open for the transaction of business on any day of the week before eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. or after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
   F.   Minors: The pawnbroker shall not purchase or receive personal property
of any nature or pledge from any minor.
   G.   Inspection of Items: The pawnbroker shall at all times during the term
of the license, allow the Police Department and other law enforcement
authorities associated with the Police Department to enter the premises where
the pawnbroker business is located during normal business hours except in an
emergency, for the purpose of inspecting such premises and inspecting the
items, ware, and merchandise and records therein for the purpose of locating
items suspected or alleged to have been stolen or otherwise improperly disposed
of.
   H.   License Display: A license issued under this Chapter must be posted in
a conspicuous place in the premises for which it is used. The license issued is
only effective for the compact and contiguous space specified in the approved
license application.
   I.   Maintenance Order: A license under this Chapter shall be responsible
for the conduct of the business being operated and shall maintain conditions of
order.
   J.   Gambling: No license under this Chapter may keep, possess, or operate,
or permit the keeping, possession, or operation on the licensed premises of
dice, slot machines, roulette wheels, punchboards, blackjack tables, or pinball
machines which return coins or slugs, chips, or tokens of any kind, which are
redeemable in merchandise or cash. No gambling equipment authorized under
Minnesota Statutes chapter 349, may be kept or operated and no raffles may be
conducted on the licensed premises and/or adjoining rooms. The purchase of
lottery tickets may take place in the licensed premises as authorized by the
director of the lottery pursuant to Minnesota Statutes chapter 349A.
   K.   Prohibited Goods: No license under this Chapter shall accept any item
of property which contains altered or obliterated serial numbers of "operation
identification" number or any item of property whose serial number has been
removed.
   L.   Proper Identification: A licensee under this Chapter shall not accept
items of property unless the seller or pledger provides one of the following
forms of identification:
      1.   A valid drivers license;
      2.   A Minnesota identification card; or
      3.   A photo identification issued by the state of residency of the
person from whom the item was received;
      4.   Military identification; or
      5.   Passports.
No other forms of identification shall be accepted.
   M.   Redemption Period: Any person pledging, pawning or depositing an
article for security shall have a minimum of thirty (30) days from the date
when the loan or pledge becomes due and payable to redeem the article before
the article becomes forfeitable. The date by which an item of property that has
been pawned must be redeemed by the pledger without risk that the item will be
sold must be a day on which the pawnbroker is open for regular business.
   N.   Payment by Check: When a pawnbroker accepts an item for purchase or as
security for a loan, payment for any article deposited, left, pledged or pawned
shall be made only by a check, draft, or other nonnegotiable instrument or
order of withdrawal which is drawn against funds held by a financial
institution. This policy must be posted in a conspicuous place in the premises.
   O.   Restrictions on Sale: A pawnbroker shall suspend for one year, any
business transaction with any person who has sold and/or forfeited on six (6)
previous occasions articles for which the person received twenty five dollars
($25.00) or more per transaction within a single six (6) month period.
   P.   Premises: All property deposited, left, pledged, pawned, or held for
sale must be stored in an enclosed facility and may not be stored outside of
the premises. The City may, however, permit the licensee to designate one off-
premises locked and secured facility in which the licensee may store only cars,
boats, and other motorized vehicle. The licensee shall permit immediate
inspection of the facility at any time during business hours by the City. All
provisions in this Section regarding recordkeeping and reporting shall apply to
oversized items. All property shall be stored in compliance with zoning and/or
fire regulations and in an orderly manner subject to inspection by the Fire
Department. The premises shall also be equipped with an operational security
alarm. (Ord. XV.7, 10-4-94)
3-6-12: RESTRICTIONS REGARDING LICENSE TRANSFER:
Each license under this Chapter shall be issued to the applicant only and shall
not be transferable to any other person. No license shall loan, sell, give, or
assign a license to another person. (Ord. XV.7, 10-4-94)
3-6-13: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   The City Council may suspend or revoke a license issued under this
Chapter upon a finding of a violation of:
      1.   Any of the provisions of this Chapter;
      2.   Any State statute regulating pawnbrokers; or
      3.   Any State or local law relating to moral character and repute.
   B.   A revocation or suspension by the City Council shall be preceded by
written notice to the licensee and a public hearing. The written notice shall
give at least eight (8) days, notice of the time and place of the hearing and
shall state the nature of the charges against the pawnbroker. The notice may be
served upon the pawnbroker personally or by United States mail addressed to the
most recent address in license application. (Ord. XV.7, 10-4-94)
3-6-14: PROHIBITED ACTS:
No pawnbroker licensed under this Chapter shall:
   A.   Lend money on a pledge at a rate of interest above that allowed by law;
   B.   Knowingly possess stolen goods;
   C.   Sell pledged goods before the time to redeem has expired;
   D.   Refuse to disclose to the City, after having sold pledged goods, the
name of the purchaser or the price for which the item sold; or
   E.   Make a loan on a pledge to a minor. (Ord. XV.7, 10-4-94)
CHAPTER 7
CHARITABLE GAMBLING
SECTION:
3-7-1: Purpose
3-7-2: Definitions
3-7-3: Lawful Gambling
3-7-4: Additional Regulations
3-7-5: Consideration Of Local Organizations
3-7-6: Penalty
3-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control gambling activities and
to prohibit the commercialization of these activities. (Ord. XVI.31, 7-5-1995)
3-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
The terms used herein have the meanings set forth in Minnesota statutes,
sections 349.11 through 349.22, and in the rules adopted pursuant to the
authority contained in the statutes. (Ord. XVI.31, 7-5-1995)
3-7-3: LAWFUL GAMBLING:
There shall be no gambling in the city except in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter and the provisions of Minnesota statutes, sections 349.11
through 349.22, inclusive, and rules adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. XVI.31, 7-
5-1995)
3-7-4: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
In addition to the requirements of Minnesota statutes, sections 349.11 through
349.22, inclusive, and rules adopted pursuant thereto, the following
regulations must be complied with:
   A.   Commencing on January 1, 1996, an organization permitted to conduct
lawful gambling within the city shall expend eighty percent (80%) annually of
its lawful purpose expenditures on lawful purposes conducted or located within
the city's trade area, which shall include only the city of Rosemount and any
city with a boundary contiguous to Rosemount. Each such organization shall
submit an annual report to the city clerk, on forms provided by the city, and
shall provide a copy of the organization's annual audit, schedule C, and such
additional reports, records, and information as the clerk shall deem necessary
to demonstrate compliance with this subsection. Such report and supplementary
information shall be provided at the time of submission of an application for
city approval of the applicant's premises permit.
   B.   No establishment shall allow more than one organization to conduct
lawful gambling at one time on its premises or lease to more than one licensed
organization.
   C.   An applicant for an initial premises permit or a renewal premises
permit shall pay to the city an investigation fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00). (Ord. XVI.31, 7-5-1995)
3-7-5: CONSIDERATION OF LOCAL ORGANIZATIONS:
Owners of establishments at which lawful gambling is conducted shall maintain a
file of qualified organizations which have their place of business in the city
and which have expressed written interest to the owner of the establishment in
operating lawful gambling activities on the premises. Such file shall be
available for inspection by the city clerk or the clerk's designee during
normal business hours. No lease to conduct lawful gambling on the premises
shall be executed, renewed or extended by the owner without first notifying all
such organizations in writing that the lease will expire or has expired and
giving such organization an opportunity to discuss conducting lawful gambling
on the premises. No premises permit will be approved by the council without
adequate proof of compliance with this section. (Ord. XVI.31, 7-5-1995)
3-7-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as described in title 1, chapter
4 of this code. Prior violations of this chapter shall also be grounds, in the
discretion of the council, for refusal to approve a premises permit.
Additionally, violation of this chapter shall be reported to the Minnesota
charitable gambling board and a recommendation shall be made for suspension,
revocation or cancellation of an organization's license. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-
2004)
CHAPTER 8
ADULT USE ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
3-8-1: Findings And Purpose
3-8-2: Definitions
3-8-3: Location
3-8-4: Hours Of Operation
3-8-5: Licensing
3-8-6: License Fee
3-8-7: Investigation Fee
3-8-8: Granting Of License
3-8-9: Persons Ineligible For License
3-8-10: Places Ineligible For License
3-8-11: Conditions Of License
3-8-11-1: Additional Conditions For Adult Cabarets
3-8-12: Penalty
3-8-13: Hindrance
3-8-14: Conflict Of Chapter
3-8-15: Opt Out Of State Law
3-8-16: Severability
3-8-1: FINDINGS AND PURPOSE:
Studies conducted by the American Planning Association, the Minnesota attorney
general's office and the governments of St. Paul, Minneapolis, and Ramsey,
Minnesota; St. Croix County, Wisconsin; Denver and Adams Counties, Colorado;
Chicago, Illinois; Phoenix, Arizona; Los Angeles, California; Rochester -
Olmsted County, Minnesota; Indianapolis, Indiana; Seattle, Washington; and the
Texas City Attorneys' Association have investigated the impacts that adult
establishments have in their communities. These studies have concluded that
adult establishments have negative secondary impacts on surrounding
neighborhoods. Those impacts included increased crime rates, lower property
values, increased transiency, neighborhood blight and potential health risks.
The Rosemount city council is relying on the studies, many of which were
conducted in larger cities, recognizing that the same or similar adverse
impacts could occur in a smaller city. Based on these studies and findings, the
city council concludes:
   A.   Minnesota statutes, section 462.357, allows the city to adopt
regulations to promote the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare.
   B.   The public health, safety, morals and general welfare will be promoted
by the city adopting regulations governing adult establishments.
   C.   Adult establishments have adverse secondary impacts of the type found
in the studies referenced in this section.
   D.   The adverse impacts caused by adult establishments tend to diminish if
adult establishments are governed by location requirements, licensing
requirements and health requirements.
   E.   It is not the intent to prohibit adult establishments from having a
reasonable opportunity to locate in the city.
   F.   A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place
the burden of reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the
adult establishment. A licensing procedure will place an incentive on the
operators to see that the adult establishment is run in a manner consistent
with the health, safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as
the citizens of the city. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances
that the licensee is the actual operator of the adult establishment fully in
possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein.
   G.   The fact that an applicant for an adult use license has been convicted
of a certain crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may
engage in that conduct in contravention of this chapter.
   H.   Smaller cities experience many of the same adverse impacts of adult
establishments present in larger communities. (Ord. 2013-03, 5-21-2013)
3-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms when used in this chapter shall have the
following meanings unless the context indicates otherwise:
ADULT ESTABLISHMENT: Any business that:
   A.   Devotes a substantial or significant portion of its inventory, stock in
trade, or publicly displayed merchandise, or devotes a substantial or
significant portion of its floor area (not including storerooms, stock areas,
bathrooms, basements, or any portion of the business not open to the public)
to, or derives a substantial or significant portion of its gross revenues from
items, merchandise, devices or other materials distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on material depicting, exposing, simulating, describing, or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
   B.   Engages in any "adult use" as defined in this section.
ADULT USE: An adult use is any of the activities and businesses described
below:
Adult Body Painting Studio: An establishment or business which provides the
service of applying paint or other substance, whether transparent or
nontransparent, to the body of a patron when such person is nude.
Adult Bookstore Or Video Store: An establishment or business used for barter,
rental or sale of items consisting of printed matter (including books,
magazines, periodicals or other printed matter), pictures, slides, records,
audiotape, videotape, compact discs, digital video discs, motion picture film,
or other visual representations if a substantial or significant portion of such
business or establishment is devoted to material distinguished and
characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Cabaret: A business or establishment that provides dancing or other live
entertainment to patrons if the dancing and live entertainment is distinguished
and characterized by an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction of
matter that seeks to evoke, arouse or excite the patron's sexual or erotic
feelings or desire.
Adult Companionship Establishment: A business or establishment that provides
the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion
between an employee of the establishment and a customer, if such service is
distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Conversation/Rap Parlor: A business or establishment that provides the
services of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or discussion, if
such service is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Health/Sport Club: A health/sport club that is distinguished and
characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas".
Adult Hotel Or Motel: A hotel or motel where material is presented which is
distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing
or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Massage Parlor: A massage parlor that provides the services of massage,
if such service is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater: A business or establishment with a capacity
for less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting material if such material
is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas".
Adult Modeling Studio: A business or establishment that provides customers
figure models who are so provided with the intent of providing sexual
stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and who engage in
"specified sexual activities" or "display specified anatomical areas" while
being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculpted, photographed,
or otherwise, depicted by such customers.
Adult Motion Picture Arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted or
invited where coin or slug operated or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled or operated still or motion picture machines,
projectors of other image producing device are maintained to show images to
five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on depicting or
describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Motion Picture Theater: A motion picture theater with a capacity of fifty
(50) or more persons used for presenting material distinguished and
characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas".
Adult Novelty Business: A business which has, as a principal activity, the sale
of devices which stimulate human genitals or devices which are designed for
sexual stimulation.
Adult Sauna: A sauna that provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for
the purpose of bathing, relaxation or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a
cleaning, relaxing, or reducing agent, if the service provided by the sauna is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Steam Room/Bathhouse Facility: A building or portion of a building used
for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of
pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a
cleaning agent if the service provided by the steam/bathhouse facility is
distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas".
NUDE OR SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: A. The showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or anus with less than a fully opaque covering;
the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any
part of the nipple; the exposure of any device, costume, or covering that gives
the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum
anal region or pubic hair region; or the exposure of any device worn as a cover
over the nipples and/or areola of the female breast, which device simulates and
gives the realistic appearance of nipples and/or areola; or
   B.   Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: A. Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral
copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical
stimulation or unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a
sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a
sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or
conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio,
necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, asppism, zooerasty; or
   B.   Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation,
arousal or tumescence; or
   C.   Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or
masturbation; or
   D.   Fondling, touching nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or
female breast(s); or
   E.   Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, clad in
undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, and who are engaged in
activities involving the flagellation, fettering, binding or other physical
restraint of any such persons; or
   F.   Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually oriented contact
with an animal by a human being; or
   G.   Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation.
SUBSTANTIAL OR SIGNIFICANT: For purposes of this chapter, the phrase
"substantial or significant" means twenty five percent (25%). (Ord. 2013-03, 5-
21-2013)
3-8-3: LOCATION:
Licenses for adult use establishments may be granted only for operation on
sites where such uses are allowed under sections
11-4-16 and
11-7-5 of this code. (Ord. 2013-03, 5-21-2013)
3-8-4: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No "adult establishment" as defined in this chapter may remain open at any time
between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on
weekdays and Saturdays, and one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00)
A.M. on Sundays. (Ord. 2013-03, 5-21-2013)
3-8-5: LICENSING:
No person shall own or operate an adult establishment without first having
secured a license as provided for in this section. The application for an adult
establishment license shall be submitted on a form provided by the city and
shall include:
   A.   If the applicant is an individual, the name, residence, phone number,
and birth date of the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the name,
residence, phone number, and birth date of each general and limited partner. If
the applicant is a corporation, the names, residences, phone numbers, and birth
dates of all those persons who are officers, directors and stockholders holding
more than five percent (5%) of the issued and outstanding stock of the
corporation.
   B.   The name, address, phone number, and birth date of the operator and
manager of such operation, if different from the owners.
   C.   The address and legal description of the premises where the adult
establishment is to be located.
   D.   A statement detailing any gross misdemeanor or felony conviction
relating to sex offenses, obscenity or the operation of an adult establishment
or adult business by the applicant, operator or manager and whether or not the
applicant, operator or manager has ever applied for or held a license to
operate a similar type of business in other communities. In the case of a
corporation or partnership, a statement detailing any felony convictions of the
owners, partners, officers, directors or stockholders holding more than five
percent (5%) of the issued and outstanding stock of the business, and whether
or not those individuals have ever applied for or held a license to operate a
similar type of business in other communities.
   E.   The activities and types of business to be conducted.
   F.   The hours of operation.
   G.   The provisions made to restrict access by minors.
   H.   A building plan of the premises detailing all internal operations and
activities.
   I.   Whether the applicant has previously been denied a license of this type
by any other government unit.
   J.   Whether all real estate and personal property taxes that are due and
payable for the premises to be licensed have been paid, and if not paid, the
years and amounts that are unpaid. (Ord. 2013-03, 5-21-2013)
3-8-6: LICENSE FEE:
   A.   The annual license fee is set forth by city council resolution.
   B.   Each application for a license shall be submitted to the city clerk and
payment made to the city. Each application for a license shall be accompanied
by payment in full of the required license fee. Upon rejection of any
application for a license, the city shall refund the license fee.
   C.   All licenses shall expire on the last day of December in each year.
Each license shall be issued for a period of one year, except that if a portion
of the license year has elapsed when the application is made, a license may be
issued for the remainder of the year for a prorated fee. In computing such fee,
any unexpired fraction of a month shall be counted as one month.
   D.   No part of the fee paid by any licensee shall be refunded, except that
a prorated portion of the fee shall be refunded in the event of the complete
closure of the business and cessation of business activities for any of the
following reasons and upon application to the city clerk within thirty (30)
days from the happening of the event, provided that such event occurs more than
thirty (30) days before the expiration of the license:
      1.   Destruction or damage of the licensed premises by fire or other
catastrophe.
      2.   The licensee's illness.
      3.   The licensee's death.
      4.   A change in the legal status making it unlawful for licensed
business to continue.
   E.   Each application shall contain a provision on the application
indicating that any withholding of information or the providing of false or
misleading information will be grounds for denial or revocation of a license.
Any changes in the information provided on the application or provided during
the investigation shall be brought to the attention of the city clerk by the
applicant or licensee. If said changes take place during the investigation,
said data shall be provided to the police chief or the city clerk in writing.
(Ord. 2013-03, 5-21-2013)
3-8-7: INVESTIGATION FEE:
At the time of original application for a license, the applicant shall deposit
an investigation fee with the city. The amount of the investigation fee will be
set by the city council. Any fees that become due after the original deposit
must be paid before the city council considers the application. Any unexpended
portion of the deposit shall be returned to the applicant. (Ord. 2013-03, 5-21-
2013)
3-8-8: GRANTING OF LICENSE:
   A.   The city clerk and police chief, or such persons as they shall
designate, shall complete their investigation within thirty (30) days after the
city clerk receives a complete application and all license and investigation
fees.
   B.   If, after such investigation it appears that the applicant and the
place proposed for the business are eligible for a license under the criteria
set forth in this chapter, then the license shall be issued by the city council
within thirty (30) days after the investigation is completed. Otherwise, the
license shall be denied. If the application is for renewal, the applicant may
continue in business until the city council decides to either renew or not
renew the license.
   C.   Each license shall be issued to the applicant only and shall not be
transferable to another holder. Each license shall be issued only for the
premises described in the application. No license may be transferred to another
premises without the approval of the city council. If the licensee is a
partnership or a corporation, a change in the identity of any of the general or
limited partners, officers, directors or shareholders holding more than five
percent (5%) of the issued and outstanding stock of the business shall be
deemed a transfer of the license. All adult establishments, including those in
operation before the effective date of the amendments to this chapter and those
who begin operating after the effective date of the amendments to this chapter,
are required to obtain a license.
   D.   If the license application is denied by the city council, the applicant
may, within fifteen (15) days after denial, commence an action in state or
federal court for the purpose of determining whether the city council acted
properly in denying the application. The adult establishment may continue in
business until the court action is completed. Otherwise, the applicant may not
commence doing business until the judicial action has been finally resolved.
(Ord. 2013-03, 5-21-2013)
3-8-9: PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:
No license shall be issued or held by any person:
   A.   Under the age of twenty one (21).
   B.   Who is overdue or whose spouse is overdue in his or her payment to the
city, county or state of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against them
or imposed upon them.
   C.   Who has been convicted or whose spouse has been convicted of a gross
misdemeanor or felony or of violating any law of this state or local ordinance
relating to: sex, obscenity, or prostitution offenses; adult establishments;
sexual and labor trafficking crimes; controlled substance offenses; or crimes
against the person (including, but not limited to, assault, robbery and
kidnapping).
   D.   Who is not the proprietor of the establishment for which the license is
issued.
   E.   Who has been denied a license by the city or any other Minnesota
municipal corporation to operate an adult establishment, or whose license to
operate an adult establishment has been suspended or revoked within the
preceding twelve (12) months, or who is residing with any such person.
   F.   Who has not paid the license and investigation fees required by this
chapter. (Ord. 2013-03, 5-21-2013)
3-8-10: PLACES INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:
   A.   No license shall be granted for adult establishments on any premises
where the applicant or any of its officers, agents or employees has been
convicted of a violation of this chapter, or where any license hereunder has
been revoked for cause, until one year has elapsed after such conviction or
revocation.
   B.   No license shall be granted for any adult establishment which is not in
full compliance with this code, the city's zoning ordinance, the building code,
the fire code, the city's health regulations, this chapter and all provisions
of state and federal law.
   C.   Establishments holding any type of liquor license are ineligible for a
license. (Ord. 2013-03, 5-21-2013)
3-8-11: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   A.   Every license shall be granted subject to the following conditions and
all other provisions of this chapter, and of any applicable sections of this
code, the city's zoning ordinance, the building code, the fire code, the city's
health regulations and all provisions of state and federal law.
   B.   All licensed premises shall have the license posted in a conspicuous
place at all times.
   C.   No minor shall be permitted on the licensed premises.
   D.   Any designated officer of the city shall have the right to enter and
inspect the premises of a licensee during business hours.
   E.   Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of his or her place
of business and shall maintain conditions of order.
   F.   No adult goods, materials, or services shall be offered, sold,
transferred, conveyed, given, displayed, or bartered to any minor.
   G.   An adult establishment shall not sell or dispense nonintoxicating or
intoxicating liquors nor shall it be located in a building that contains a
business that sells or dispenses nonintoxicating or intoxicating liquors. (Ord.
2013-03, 5-21-2013)
3-8-11-1: ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS FOR ADULT CABARETS:
In addition to all other conditions set forth in this chapter, the following
conditions apply to adult cabarets:
   A.   No owner, operator or manager of an adult cabaret shall permit or allow
any dancer or other live entertainer to perform nude.
   B.   No dancer, live entertainer, patron or any other person may be nude in
an adult cabaret.
   C.   No dancer, live entertainer or performer shall be under eighteen (18)
years old.
   D.   All dancing or live entertainment shall occur on a platform that is
intended for that purpose and that is raised at least two feet (2') from the
level of the floor.
   E.   No dancer or performer shall fondle, touch, or caress any patron and no
patron shall fondle, touch, or caress any dancer or performer.
   F.   No patron shall pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or performer.
   G.   No dancer or performer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any
patron.
   H.   A licensee under this chapter shall not allow any partition between a
subdivision, portion, or part of the licensed premises having any aperture that
is designed or constructed to facilitate sexual intercourse, sodomy, or
fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region or pubic
hair, buttocks, or female breast between persons on either side of the
partition.
   I.   A licensee under this chapter shall not allow or have on the licensed
premises or adjoining areas any booths, stalls, or partitions used for the
viewing of motion pictures or other forms of entertainment, including, but not
limited to, live entertainment that have doors, curtains, or portal partitions,
unless such booths, stalls, or partitions have at least one side open to an
adjacent public room so that the area inside is visible to persons in the
adjacent public room. Such areas shall be lighted in a manner that the persons
in the area used for viewing motion pictures or other forms of entertainment
are visible from the adjacent public rooms. No reclining surfaces inside any
booths, stalls, or partitions used for the viewing of motion pictures or other
forms of entertainment including, but not limited to, live entertainment shall
be permitted. (Ord. 2013-03, 5-21-2013)
3-8-12: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished not more than the maximum
penalty for a misdemeanor as prescribed by law.
   B.   Any violation of this chapter shall be a basis for the suspension or
revocation of any license granted hereunder. The basis for suspending or
revoking a license may include, but is not limited to, the following:
      1.   The licensee has knowingly given false information in the license
application;
      2.   The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed
possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises of the adult
establishment;
      3.   The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed
prostitution on the premises of the adult establishment;
      4.   The licensee knowingly or recklessly operated the business during a
period of time when the license was finally suspended or revoked;
      5.   The licensee has knowingly or recklessly allowed criminal activity
on the premises of the adult establishment;
      6.   The licensee has knowingly or recklessly allowed minors on the
premises of an adult establishment; or
      7.   The licensee violates any other provision of this chapter.
The city clerk shall notify the licensee in writing of the basis for a proposed
revocation or suspension. The licensee shall have ten (10) days after delivery
of the written notice to submit a written request for a hearing on the proposed
suspension or revocation. If the licensee does not request a hearing within ten
(10) days, the proposed suspension or revocation is final. If the licensee
requests a hearing, the city clerk will notify the licensee of the date, time,
and place of the hearing. The council shall hold a hearing for the purpose of
determining whether to revoke or suspend the license, which hearing shall be
within thirty (30) days of the request for a hearing. A decision shall be made
by the city council within thirty (30) days after the close of the hearing.
   C.   A suspension or revocation shall not be effective until fifteen (15)
days after notification of the council's decision to the licensee. If, within
that fifteen (15) days the licensee commences an action in state or federal
court for the purpose of determining whether the city acted properly, the
licensee may continue in business until the conclusion of the action.
   D.   If the licensee does not commence an action in court within the fifteen
(15) day period, the suspension or revocation is effective. A suspension shall
be effective for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. A revocation shall be
effective for a period not to exceed one year. (Ord. 2013-03, 5-21-2013)
3-8-13: HINDRANCE:
Any person hindering the efforts of city officials to investigate possible
violations of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2013-03, 5-
21-2013)
3-8-14: CONFLICT OF CHAPTER:
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a
provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or code in
the city, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion
and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. In any
case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a
provision of any other ordinance or code of the city existing on the effective
date of this chapter which established a lower standard for the promotion and
protection of the health and safety of the property, the provision of this
chapter shall be deemed to prevail. The determination of the applicability of
this chapter in light of the above rules of interpretation shall be made by the
city and its determination shall be final. The provisions of this chapter
supplement, but do not supersede the provision of chapter 2, articles B and C
of this title. (Ord. 2013-03, 5-21-2013)
3-8-15: OPT OUT OF STATE LAW:
Minnesota statutes, section 617.242 does not apply in the city. (Ord. 2013-03,
5-21-2013)
3-8-16: SEVERABILITY:
Every section, paragraph or part of this chapter is declared severable from
every other section, paragraph or part thereof to the extent that if any
section, paragraph or part is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction
it shall not invalidate any other section, paragraph or part thereof. (Ord.
2013-03, 5-21-2013)
CHAPTER 9
TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND TOBACCO RELATED DEVICES
SECTION:
3-9-1: Purpose And Intent
3-9-2: Definitions
3-9-3: License
3-9-4: Fees
3-9-5: Basis For Denial Of License
3-9-6: Prohibited Sales
3-9-7: Tobacco Products Shop
3-9-8: Responsibility
3-9-9: Compliance Checks And Inspections
3-9-10: Other Illegal Acts
3-9-11: Signage And Age Verification
3-9-12: Exceptions And Defenses
3-9-13: Severability
 
3-9-14: Violations And Penalty
3-9-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
Because the city recognizes that many persons under the age of twenty-one (21)
years purchase or otherwise obtain, possess and use tobacco, tobacco products,
tobacco related devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery device, or electronic
delivery devices, and the sales, possession, and use are violations of both
state and federal laws; and because studies, which the city hereby accepts and
adopts, have shown that most smokers begin smoking before they have reached the
age of twenty-one (21) years and that those persons who reach the age of
twenty-one (21) years without having started smoking are significantly less
likely to begin smoking; and because smoking has been shown to be the cause of
several serious health problems which subsequently place a financial burden on
all levels of government; this chapter shall be intended to regulate the sale,
possession and use of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices,
nicotine or lobelia delivery device, or electronic delivery devices for the
purpose of enforcing and furthering existing laws, to protect underage persons
against the serious effects associated with the illegal use of tobacco, tobacco
products, tobacco related devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery device, or
electronic delivery devices, and to further the official public policy of the
state in regard to preventing young people from starting to smoke as stated in
Minnesota statutes section 144.391, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2015-08, 11-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016; amd. Ord. 2025-05, 7-1-2025)
3-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms
shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this
chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
                                      The system the city uses to investigate
                                      and ensure that those authorized to sell
                                      licensed products are following and
                                      complying with the requirements of this
                                      chapter. Compliance checks may involve
                                      the use of underage persons as authorized
                                      by this chapter. Compliance checks shall
                                      also mean the use of underage persons who
COMPLIANCE CHECKS:                    attempt to purchase licensed products for
                                      educational, research and training
                                      purposes as authorized by state and
                                      federal laws. Compliance checks may also
                                      be conducted by other units of government
                                      for the purpose of enforcing appropriate
                                      federal, state or local laws and
                                      regulations relating to licensed
                                      products.
                                      Any product containing or delivering
                                      nicotine, lobelia, or any other
                                      substance, whether natural or synthetic,
                                      intended for human consumption through
                                      inhalation of aerosol or vapor from the
                                      product. Electronic delivery devices
                                      includes but is not limited to devices
                                      manufactured, marketed, or sold as
                                      electronic cigarettes, electronic cigars,
                                      electronic pipe, vape pens, modes, tank
ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE:           systems, or under any other product name
                                      or descriptor. Electronic delivery device
                                      includes any component part of a product,
                                      whether or not marketed or sold
                                      separately. Electronic delivery device
                                      excludes drugs, devices, or combination
                                      products, as those terms are defined in
                                      the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act,
                                      that are authorized for sale by the
                                      United States Food and Drug
                                      Administration.
                                      The practice of selling any tobacco or
                                      tobacco product wrapped individually for
                                      sale. Individually wrapped tobacco and
                                      tobacco products shall include, but not
                                      be limited to, single cigarette packs,
                                      single bags or cans of loose tobacco in
INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED:                any form, and single cans or other
                                      packaging of snuff or chewing tobacco.
                                      Cartons or other packaging containing
                                      more than a single pack or other
                                      container as described in this definition
                                      shall not be considered individually
                                      packaged.
                                      All space between a floor and a ceiling
                                      that is bounded by walls, doorways, or
                                      windows, whether open or closed, covering
                                      more than fifty percent (50%) of the
INDOOR AREA:                          combined surface area of the vertical
                                      planes constituting the perimeter of the
                                      area. A wall includes any retractable
                                      divider, garage door, or other physical
                                      barrier, whether temporary or permanent.
                                      The term that collectively refers to any
LICENSED PRODUCTS:                    tobacco product, tobacco related device,
                                      electronic delivery device, or nicotine
                                      or lobelia delivery product.
                                      The common term used to refer to a
                                      cigarette or any other tobacco product
                                      that has been removed from its packaging
LOOSIES:                              and sold individually. The term "loosies"
                                      does not include individual cigars with a
                                      retail price, before any sales taxes, of
                                      more than two dollars ($2.00) per cigar.
                                      Any form of business operated out of a
                                      truck, van, automobile or other type of
MOVEABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS:           vehicle or transportable shelter and not
                                      a fixed address storefront or other
                                      permanent type of structure authorized
                                      for sales transactions.
                                      Any product containing or delivering
                                      nicotine or lobelia intended for human
                                      consumption, or any part of such a
                                      product, that is not tobacco as defined
                                      in this section, not including any
NICOTINE OR LOBELIA DELIVERY DEVICES: product that has been approved or
                                      otherwise certified for legal sale by the
                                      United States food and drug
                                      administration for tobacco use cessation,
                                      harm reduction, or for other medical
                                      purposes, and is being marketed and sold
                                      solely for that approved purpose.
                                      Any place of business where licensed
                                      products are available for sale to the
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT:                 general public. The phrase shall include,
                                      but not be limited to, grocery stores,
                                      convenience stores, restaurants, and
                                      drugstores.
SALE:                                 Any transfer of goods for money, trade,
                                      barter or other consideration.
                                      Open displays of licensed products in any
                                      manner where any person shall have access
                                      to the licensed products, without the
                                      assistance or intervention of the
                                      licensee or the licensee's employee. The
                                      assistance or intervention shall entail
SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING:           the actual physical exchange of the
                                      licensed product between the customer and
                                      the licensee or employee. Self- service
                                      sales are interpreted as being any sale
                                      where there is not an actual physical
                                      exchange of the product between the clerk
                                      and the customer.
                                      Inhaling or exhaling smoke or vapor from
                                      any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette,
                                      pipe, or any other lighted or heated
                                      tobacco or plant product. Smoking also
SMOKING:                              includes carrying a lighted or heated
                                      cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other
                                      lighted or heated tobacco or plant
                                      product. Smoking also includes carrying
                                      or using an activated electronic delivery
                                      device.
                                      Tobacco and tobacco products includes
                                      cigarettes and any product containing,
                                      made, or derived from tobacco that is
                                      intended for human consumption, whether
                                      chewed, smoked, absorbed, dissolved,
                                      inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by
                                      any other means, or any component, part,
                                      or accessory of a tobacco product;
                                      cigars; cheroots; stogies; perique;
                                      granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready
TOBACCO OR TOBACCO PRODUCTS:          rubbed, and other smoking tobacco; snuff;
                                      snuff flour; cavendish; plug and twist
                                      tobacco; fine cut and other chewing
                                      tobaccos; shorts; refuse scraps,
                                      clippings, cuttings and sweepings of
                                      tobacco; and other kinds and forms of
                                      tobacco. Tobacco excludes any drugs,
                                      devices, or combination products, as
                                      those terms are defined in the Federal
                                      Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, that are
                                      authorized for sale by the United States
                                      Food and Drug Administration.
                                      A retail establishment with an entrance
                                      door opening directly to the outside that
                                      derives more than ninety percent (90%) of
                                      its gross revenue from sale of tobacco
                                      related products or electronic delivery
TOBACCO PRODUCTS SHOP:                devices and in which the sale of other
                                      products is merely incidental. "Tobacco
                                      products shop" does not include a tobacco
                                      department or section of any individual
                                      business establishment with any type of
                                      food, liquor, or restaurant license.
                                      Includes any tobacco product as well as a
                                      pipe, rolling papers, ashtray, or other
                                      device intentionally designed or intended
                                      to be used in a manner which enables the
TOBACCO RELATED DEVICES:              chewing, sniffing inhalation of aerosol
                                      or vapor, or smoking of tobacco or
                                      tobacco products. Tobacco- related
                                      devices include components of tobacco-
                                      related devices which may be marketed or
                                      sold separately.
UNDERAGE PERSON:                      Any natural person who has not yet
                                      reached the age of twenty-one (21) years.
                                      Any mechanical, electric or electronic,
                                      or other type of device which dispenses
                                      tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco
                                      related devices upon the insertion of
VENDING MACHINE:                      money, tokens or other form of payment
                                      directly into the machine by the person
                                      seeking to purchase the tobacco, tobacco
                                      product or tobacco related device. (Ord.
                                      2015-08, 11-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016; amd.
                                      Ord. 2025-05, 7-1-2025)
 
3-9-3: LICENSE:
   A.   License Required: No person or establishment shall sell or offer to
sell any licensed product without first having obtained a license to do so from
the city.
   B.   Application: An application for a license to sell licensed products
shall be made on a form provided by the city. The application shall contain the
full name of the applicant, the applicant's residential and business addresses
and telephone numbers, the name of the business for which the license is
sought, and any additional information the city deems necessary. Upon receipt
of a completed application, the city council shall take action on the license
application at a regularly scheduled city council meeting. If the city clerk
shall determine that an application is incomplete, he or she shall return the
application to the applicant with notice of the information necessary to make
the application complete.
   C.   Investigation: For all new and renewal applicants, a background
investigation may be conducted on any business owner, manager, and other
individual or enterprise listed on the application. For applicants who are
applying for a license for more than one location, only one background
investigation and background investigation fee shall be required.
   D.   Action: The city council may either approve or deny the license, or it
may delay action for a reasonable period of time as necessary to complete any
investigation of the application or the applicant it deems necessary. If the
city council shall approve the license, the city clerk shall issue the license
to the applicant. If the city council denies the license, notice of the denial
shall be given to the applicant along with notice of the applicant's right to
appeal the city council's decision.
   E.   Term: All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire on December
31 of odd numbered years. License fees shall be prorated on a quarterly basis
as provided in this chapter.
   F.   Revocation Or Suspension: Any license issued under this chapter may be
revoked or suspended as provided in this chapter.
   G.   Transfers: All licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid only
on the premises for which the license was issued and only for the person to
whom the license was issued. No transfer of any license to another location or
person shall be valid without the prior approval of the city council.
   H.   Moveable Place Of Business: No license shall be issued to a moveable
place of business, including, but not limited to, motorized vehicles, mobile
sales kiosks, or trailers. Only fixed location businesses shall be eligible to
be licensed under this chapter.
   I.   Display: All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of
the general public on the licensed premises.
   J.   Renewals: The renewal of a license issued under this chapter shall be
handled in the same manner as the original application. The request for a
renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days but no more than sixty (60)
days before the expiration of the current license.
   K.   Issuance As Privilege And Not A Right: The issuance of a license issued
under this chapter shall be considered a privilege and not an absolute right of
the applicant and shall not entitle the holder to an automatic renewal of the
license.
   L.   Smoking: Smoking shall not be permitted and no person shall smoke
within the indoor area of any establishment with a retail tobacco license.
Smoking for the purposes of sampling tobacco or tobacco related products is
prohibited.
   M.   Instructional Program: No person shall be issued a license or renewal
license to sell licensed products unless an applicant or license holder has a
program for instructing all employees regarding the legal requirements
pertaining to licensed products at the business premises for which the license
was issued. The instructional program shall include, but is not limited to,
reviewing the law on the sale of licensed products and requiring employees to
request identification from every customer who is under thirty (30) years of
age. The training shall include information that the sale of licensed products
to underage persons is illegal, explanation of what proof of age is legally
acceptable, and that a sale to an underage person can subject the applicant or
license holder and their employees to criminal and/or civil liability.
   N.   The maximum number of licenses issued by the City at any one time to a
retail establishment qualifying as a tobacco products shop is limited to two
(2). If the maximum number of licenses has already been issued, a licensee that
allows its license to expire or has its license revoked shall not be eligible
for a new license. Persons desiring to apply for a license may be placed on a
waiting list and be eligible to apply on a first-come, first-serve basis once
the number of issued licenses falls below the maximum number allowed.
Notwithstanding the maximum number of allowed licenses, an applicable who
purchases a tobacco product shop holding a current license shall be allowed to
apply for and obtain, if eligible, a new license for the business location
provided it is obtained within the same license year as the current license.
(Ord. 2015-08, 11-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016; amd. Ord. 2025-05, 7-1-2025)
3-9-4: FEES:
No license shall be issued under this chapter until the appropriate license fee
and investigation fee is paid in full. The fees for an investigation and
license under this chapter shall be established in the city's schedule of fees,
as it may be amended from time to time. License fees shall be prorated on a
quarterly basis. The license fee shall be used to process applications and by
the police department for training and enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-
08, 11-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016; amd. Ord. 2025-05, 7-1-2025)
3-9-5: BASIS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   Grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a license under this
chapter include, but are not limited to, the following:
      1.   The applicant is under the age of twenty-one (21) years.
      2.   The applicant has been convicted within the past five (5) years of
any violation of a federal, state, or local law, ordinance provision, or other
regulation relating to any licensed product.
      3.   The applicant has had a license to sell licensed products revoked
within the preceding twelve (12) months of the date of application.
      4.   The applicant fails to provide any information required on the
application, or provides false or misleading information.
      5.   The applicant is prohibited by federal, state, or other local law,
ordinance, or other regulation from holding a license.
   B.   However, except as may otherwise be provided by law, the existence of
any particular ground for denial does not mean that the city must deny the
license.
   C.   If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it may be
revoked upon the discovery that the person was ineligible for the license under
this chapter. (Ord. 2015-08, 11-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016; amd. Ord. 2025-05, 7-1-
2025)
3-9-6: PROHIBITED SALES:
   A.   Violation Of Chapter: It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
person to sell or offer to sell any licensed product:
      1.   To any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years.
      2.   By means of any type of vending machine.
      3.   By means of self-service merchandising, or in open displays which
are accessible to the public without assistance or intervention of the license
or licensee’s employee.
      4.   By means of "loosies" as defined in section
3-9-2 of this chapter.
      5.   Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, belladonna, strychnos,
cocaine, marijuana, or other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic or controlled
substances except nicotine and other substances found naturally in tobacco or
added as part of an otherwise lawful manufacturing process. It is not the
intention of this provision to ban the sale of lawfully manufactured cigarettes
or other tobacco products. The prohibition in this section
3-9-6 does not apply to the sale of products approved for sale and sold
pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 342 by a business with an appropriate
state- issued license.
      6.   By any other means, to any other person, or in any other manner or
form prohibited by federal, state or other local law, ordinance provision, or
other regulation.
   B.   Exception: A license holder who operates a tobacco products shop that
sells only tobacco related products is exempt from the self-service
merchandising provision if the license holder prohibits anyone under twenty-one
(21) years of age from entering the establishment at all times, and the license
holder conspicuously displays a notice prohibiting persons under twenty-one
(21) years of age from entering the establishment. (Ord. 2015-08, 11-2-2015,
eff. 1-1-2016; amd. Ord. 2025-05, 7-1-2025)
3-9-7: TOBACCO PRODUCTS SHOP:
The following requirements shall apply:
   A.   The maximum square footage of the entire licensed premises shall not
exceed two thousand (2,000) square feet.
   B.   Smoking in a tobacco products shop is prohibited.
   C.   A tobacco products shop shall prohibit anyone under twenty-one (21)
years of age from entering the establishment at any time, and shall
conspicuously display a notice prohibiting persons under twenty-one (21) years
of age from entering the establishment. (Ord. 2015-08, 11-2-2015, eff. 1-1-
2016; amd. Ord. 2025-05, 7-1-2025)
3-9-8: RESPONSIBILITY:
All licensees under this chapter shall be responsible for the actions of their
employees in regard to the sale of licensed products on the licensed premises,
and the sale of an item by an employee shall be considered a sale by the
license holder. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the
city from also subjecting the employee to whatever penalties are appropriate
under this chapter, state or federal law, or other applicable law or
regulation. (Ord. 2015-08, 11-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016; amd. Ord. 2025-05, 7-1-
2025)
3-9-9: COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS:
All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by the police department or
other delegated law enforcement officers or agencies during regular business
hours. From time to time, but at least once per year, the city shall conduct
compliance checks by engaging, underage persons over the age of seventeen (17)
years of age but less than twenty-one (21) years, to enter the licensed
premises to attempt to purchase licensed products. Underage persons who are
less than eighteen (18) years may only participate in a compliance check with
the written consent of their parent(s) or guardian(s). Underaged persons used
for the purpose of compliance checks shall be supervised by city designated law
enforcement officers or other designated city personnel. Underaged persons used
for compliance checks shall not be guilty of unlawful possession of licensed
products when those items are obtained as a part of the compliance check. No
underage person used in compliance checks shall attempt to use a false
identification misrepresenting the underage person’s age, and all underage
persons lawfully engaged in a compliance check shall answer all questions about
the underage person’s age asked by the licensee or his or her employee and
shall produce any identification, if any exists, for which he or she is asked.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit compliance checks authorized by state or
federal laws for educational, research, or training purposes, or required for
the enforcement of a particular state or federal law. (Ord. 2015-08, 11-2-2015,
eff. 1-1-2016; amd. Ord. 2025-05, 7-1-2025)
3-9-10: OTHER ILLEGAL ACTS:
Unless otherwise provided, the following acts shall be a violation of this
chapter:
   A.   Illegal Sales: It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person
to sell or otherwise provide any licensed product to any underaged person.
   B.   Illegal Possession: It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
underage person to have in his or her possession any licensed products. This
subsection shall not apply to underage persons lawfully involved in a
compliance check.
   C.   Illegal Use: It shall be a violation of this chapter for any underage
person to smoke, chew, sniff or otherwise use any tobacco, tobacco product,
tobacco related device, nicotine or lobelia delivery device or electronic
delivery device.
   D.   Illegal Procurement: It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
underage person to purchase or attempt to purchase or otherwise obtain any
tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco related device, or nicotine or lobelia
delivery device or electronic delivery device, and it shall be a violation of
this chapter for any person to purchase or otherwise obtain those items on
behalf of an underage person. It shall further be a violation for any person to
coerce or attempt to coerce an underage person to illegally purchase or
otherwise obtain or use any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco related device,
or electronic delivery device. This subsection shall not apply to underage
persons lawfully involved in a compliance check.
   E.   Use Of False Identification: It shall be a violation of this chapter
for any underage person to attempt to disguise his or her true age by the use
of a false form of identification, whether the identification is that of
another person or one on which the age of the person has been modified or
tampered with to represent an age older than the actual age of the person.
(Ord. 2015-08, 11-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016; amd. Ord. 2025-05, 7-1-2025)
3-9-11: SIGNAGE AND AGE VERIFICATION:
   A.   Signage: At each location where license products are sold or offered
for sale, the licensee shall display a sign in plain view to provide public
notice that selling any of these products to any person under the age of
twenty-one (21) is illegal and subject to penalties. The notice shall be placed
in a conspicuous location in the licensed establishment and shall be readily
visible to any person who is purchasing or attempting to purchase these
products. The sign shall provide notice that all persons responsible for
selling these products must verify, by means of photographic identification
containing the bearer’s date of birth, the age of any person under thirty (30)
years of age.
   B.   Age Verification: At each location where licensed products are sold or
offered for sale, the licensee shall verify, by means of government-issued
photographic identification containing the bearer’s date of birth, that the
purchaser or person attempting to make the purchase is at least twenty-one (21)
years of age. Verification is not required if the purchaser or person
attempting to make the purchase is thirty (30) years of age or older. It shall
not constitute a defense to a violation of this subdivision that the person
appeared to be thirty (30) years of age or older. (Ord. 2025-05, 7-1- 2025)
3-9-12: EXCEPTIONS AND DEFENSES:
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the providing of licensed product, or
electronic delivery devices to an underage person as part of a lawfully
recognized religious, spiritual, or cultural ceremony. It shall be an
affirmative defense to the violation of this chapter for a person to have
reasonably relied on proof of age as described by state law. (Ord. 2015-08, 11-
2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016; amd. Ord. 2025-05, 7-1-2025)
3-9-13: SEVERABILITY:
If any section or provision of this chapter is held invalid, such invalidity
shall not affect other sections or provisions which can be given force and
effect without the invalidated section or provision. (Ord. 2015-08, 11-2-2015,
eff. 1-1-2016; amd. Ord. 2025-05, 7-1-2025)
3-9-14: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY:
   A.   Misdemeanor Prosecution: Nothing in this section shall prohibit the
city from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any alleged violation of
this chapter. It is not necessary that criminal charges be brought in order to
support a determination of a license violation nor does the dismissal or
acquittal of such a criminal charge operate as a bar to adverse license actions
under this section.
   B.   Violations:
      1.   Notice: A person violating this chapter may be issued, either
personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the alleged violation and
that informs the alleged violator of his or her right to a hearing on the
matter.
      2.   Hearings:
         a.   Upon issuance of a citation, a person accused of violating this
chapter may request in writing a hearing on the matter. Hearing requests must
be made within ten (10) business days of the issuance of the citation and
delivered to the city clerk or other designated city officer. Failure to
request a hearing within ten (10) business days of the issuance of the citation
will terminate the person's right to a hearing.
         b.   The city clerk or other designated city officer shall set the
time and place for the hearing. Written notice of the hearing time and place
shall be mailed or delivered to the accused violator at least ten (10) business
days prior to the hearing. Such hearing shall be open to the public.
      3.   Hearing Officer: A city official designated by the city council
shall serve as the hearing officer. The hearing officer must be an impartial
employee of the city or an impartial person retained by the city to conduct the
hearing.
      4.   Decision:
         a.   Hearing Officer Decision: A decision shall be issued by the
hearing officer within ten (10) business days. If the hearing officer
determines that a violation of this chapter did occur, that decision, along
with the hearing officer's reasons for finding a violation and the penalty to
be imposed under subsection C of this section, shall be recorded in writing, a
copy of which shall be provided to the city and the accused violator by in
person delivery or mail as soon as practicable. Likewise, if the hearing
officer finds that no violation occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any
penalty, those findings shall be recorded and a copy provided to the city and
the acquitted accused violator by in person delivery or mail as soon as
practicable.
         b.   Costs: If the citation is upheld by the hearing officer, the
city's actual expenses in holding the hearing up to a maximum of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) shall be paid by the person requesting the hearing.
         c.   Decision Final: The decision of the hearing officer is final.
      5.   Appeals: Appeals of any decision made by the hearing officer in
accordance with state law.
      6.   Continued Violation: Each violation, and every day in which a
violation occurs or continues, shall constitute a separate offense.
   C.   Administrative Penalties:
      1.   Licensees: Any licensee found to have violated this chapter, or
whose employee shall have violated this chapter, shall be charged a minimum
administrative fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00) for a first violation of
this chapter; six hundred dollars ($600.00) for a second offense at the same
licensed premises within a thirty six (36) month period; and one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for a third or subsequent offense at the same location
within a thirty six (36) month period and the licensee’s authority to sell
tobacco, tobacco-related devices, electronic delivery devices, or delivery
products at that location must be suspended for not less than seven (7) days
and may be revoked. No suspension, revocation, or other penalty may take effect
until the licensee has received notice, served personally or by mail, of the
alleged violation and an opportunity for a hearing before a person authorized
by the licensing authority to conduct the hearing. A decision that a violation
has occurred must be in writing.
      2.   Other Individuals: Other individuals, other than underage persons
regulated by subsection C3 of this section, found to be in violation of this
chapter shall be charged an administrative fine of fifty dollars ($50.00).
      3.   Underage persons: Underage persons found in unlawful possession of
or who unlawfully purchases or attempts to purchase, licensed product or
electronic delivery devices, shall be subject to an administrative fine, or may
be subject to tobacco related education classes, diversion programs, community
services, or another penalty that the city believes will be appropriate and
effective. The administrative fine or other penalty shall be established by
city council resolution upon the city council's consultation with interested
parties of the courts, educators, parents and children to determine an
appropriate penalty for underage persons in the city. This administrative fine
or other penalty may also be established by the schedule of fees, as it may be
amended from time to time. (Ord. 2015-08, 11-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016; amd. Ord.
2025-05, 7-1-2025)
CHAPTER 10
MOBILE FOOD UNITS
SECTION:
3-10-1: Purpose
3-10-2: Definition
3-10-3: Requirements
3-10-4: Locations
3-10-5: Performance Standards
3-10-6: Inspections; Enforcement
3-10-7: Exemptions
3-10-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is intended to describe the requirements for an establishment
preparing and serving food from a self-contained readily moveable vehicle in
the city and to regulate the conditions from which the establishment operates
within the city for the promotion of business within the city and for the
protection of customers and the general public. All mobile food units must
comply with this chapter in order to operate within the city. The purpose of
the regulations in this chapter is to protect the public health, manage
potential conflicting uses of the public right of way, and minimize unfair
competition with fixed-site prepared food vendors in the community. (Ord. 2021-
04, 5-4-2021)
3-10-2: DEFINITION:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
 
       A.   A self-contained food service operation, located in a readily-movable
MOBILE motorized wheeled or towed vehicle that is readily movable without
FOOD   disassembling, and that is used to store, prepare, display, or serve food
UNIT:  intended for individual portion service; or
       B.   A mobile food unit as defined in Minnesota Statutes, section 157.15,
       subdivision 9. (Ord. 2021-04, 5-4-2021)
 
3-10-3: REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   License: The mobile food unit operator must be licensed by the
Minnesota Department of Health as required under Minnesota State law. The
license must be clearly posted.
   B.   Fire Code: The mobile food unit must meet State Fire Code requirements.
   C.   Insurance: The mobile food unit operator must have the following forms
of insurance by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of
Minnesota:
      1.   Commercial general liability insurance or its equivalent, with a
limit of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each occurrence and
an annual aggregate limit of not less than two million dollars ($2,000,000.00);
      2.   Automobile liability insurance with a limit of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit covering the vehicle
licensed as a mobile food unit, and if applicable, any vehicle used in
conjunction with the mobile food unit;
      3.   If the mobile food unit will be operated on public property,
including public right-of-way, the city shall be named as a certificate holder
and as an additional insured, and must be provided with a certificate of
insurance.
   D.   Permit Applications: An application for a mobile food unit permit shall
be filed with the city clerk.
   E.   No more than four (4) permits will be issued to a residential property
in a calendar year. (Ord. 2021-04, 5-4-2021)
3-10-4: LOCATIONS:
   A.   Allowed Locations: A mobile food unit may only operate in the locations
and under the conditions set forth in this section:
      1.   With the written consent of the property owner, a mobile food unit
may operate in a business park and industrial zoning district if not open for
sales to the general public.
      2.    With the written consent of the property owner, a mobile food unit
may operate in a commercial zoning district subject to other provisions of this
section.
      3.    With the written consent of the property owner, a mobile food unit
may operate in a residential zoning district if on private property for
catering purposes (such as a private graduation party or wedding) and not open
for sales to the general public.
      4.   A mobile food unit may operate in the right-of-way immediately
adjacent to a consenting property owner noted in this section, as long as it
does not create a public safety hazard.
      5.   A mobile food unit may operate at any location if in conjunction
with an event authorized by the city either through a special event permit or
other permit that has been authorized by the city and with permission from the
event sponsor.
      6.   A mobile food unit may operate at a government-owned property if
there is permission of the government entity or agency controlling that
property through a permit, agreement or other approval process.
   B.   Prohibited Locations: A mobile food unit may not operate in the
following locations:
      1.   On any street posted with no parking signs or on any street with a
posted speed limit greater than thirty (30) miles per hour, unless a special
event or other permit has been issued pursuant to section
3-10-4(A)(5).
      2.   At any location that may cause a safety hazard for other vehicles,
pedestrians, or the general public. (Ord. 2021-04, 5-4-2021)
3-10-5: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   A mobile food unit owner/operator is subject to the following
performance standards:
      1.   Mobile food unit sales may only conduct sales between seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
      2.   Waste generated by the mobile food unit must be transported out of
the city and disposed of in accordance with all Federal, State, and local
regulations. Grey water may not be drained into city stormwater drains.
      3.   The owner/operator of the mobile food unit shall be responsible for
the conduct of their employees and agents while operating a mobile food unit.
      4.   A mobile food unit is not required to obtain a sign permit from the
city. However, no additional signage is permitted beyond that which is on the
mobile food unit unless it meets the following requirements:
         a.   One single sandwich board style sign is permitted per mobile food
unit;
         b.   The maximum sign size is eight (8) square feet;
         c.   The sign must be placed on the ground and within ten feet (10')
of the mobile food unit;
         d.   The sign must not be placed in a manner that hinders passage upon
any sidewalk;
         e.   The sign must not be placed within the improved travel surface of
the public right-of-way except with the express written permission of the city;
and
         f.   The sign cannot project from the mobile food unit or be mounted
to the roof of the mobile food unit. (Ord. 2021-04, 5-4-2021)
3-10-6: INSPECTIONS; ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   A mobile food unit operating in the city is subject to inspection by
city officials.
   B.   A failure to meet any of the requirements outlined in this chapter
shall result in an immediate order to correct or cease operations by the
Rosemount Police Department. (Ord. 2021-04, 5-4-2021)
3-10-7: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Community events that have been approved and licensed or permitted by
the city council shall be exempted from the provisions of this chapter provided
that participating mobile food units are covered by a special event permit, or
other applicable license or permit and are otherwise compliant with Minnesota
Department of Health standards and all requirements under section
3-10-3.
   B.   Mobile food units serving ice cream and/or similar frozen snacks are
allowed to operate within the public right-of-way in any residential zoning
districts and do not require a city-issued permit under this chapter. (Ord.
2021-04, 5-4-2021)
CHAPTER 11
CANNABIS AND HEMP BUSINESS REGULATIONS
SECTION:
3-11-1:    Purpose and Findings
3-11-2:    Definitions
3-11-3:    Pre-License Certification Of Cannabis Businesses
3-11-4:    Retail Registration Required
3-11-5:    Cannabis Retailer Registration Limits
3-11-6:    Processing Registrations
3-11-7:    Application for Registration
3-11-8:    Preliminary Compliance Check
3-11-9:    Basis for Denial
3-11-10: Issuance of Registration or Renewal
3-11-11: Registration Nontransferable
3-11-12: Enforcement
3-11-13: Penalties
3-11-14: Cannabis Business Operating Regulations
3-11-15: Lower-Potency Hemp Retailer Operating Regulations
3-11-16: Advertising
3-11-17: Temporary Cannabis Events
3-11-1: PURPOSE AND FINDINGS:
The City of Rosemount makes the following legislative findings: The purpose of
this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, and welfare in the City
by implementing regulations pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 342 related
to cannabis and hemp businesses within the City. The City finds and concludes
that these regulations are appropriate and lawful and are in the public
interest and for the public good. (Ord. 2025-01, 1-7-2025)
3-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
APPLICANT: An entity with a license issued by the Office of Cannabis Management
that is applying for an initial registration or for registration renewal.
THE ACT: The Cannabis Act at Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 342, as it may be
amended from time to time.
CANNABINOID PRODUCT: A cannabis product, a hemp-derived consumer product, or a
lower-potency hemp edible as defined by Minnesota Statutes, section 342.01.
CANNABIS BUSINESS: As defined in Minnesota Statutes, section 342.01.
CANNABIS RETAILER: Every retail cannabis business that is licensed under the
Act and required to register with the City under Minnesota Statutes, § 342.22.
HEMP BUSINESS: As defined in Minnesota Statutes, § 342.01.
LOWER-POTENCY HEMP RETAILER: Every lower-potency hemp edible retail business
that is licensed under the Act and required to register with the City under
Minnesota Statutes, § 342.22.
MEDICAL CANNABIS COMBINATION BUSINESS: A business licensed under Minnesota
Statutes, § 342.01 and authorized to perform the functions in Minnesota
Statutes, § 342.515.
OCM: The Office of Cannabis Management.
POTENTIAL LICENSEE: An applicant that has not received a license from the OCM.
TEMPORARY CANNABIS EVENT: An event held by an individual or an organization
licensed by the State of Minnesota as a Temporary Cannabis Event Organizer, as
described in Minnesota Statutes, §§ 342.39 and 342.40. (Ord. 2025-01, 1-7-2025)
3-11-3: PRE-LICENSE CERTIFICATION OF CANNABIS BUSINESSES:
   A.   Authority to certify: The City Clerk is authorized to certify whether a
proposed Cannabis Business complies with the City's zoning ordinances and if
applicable, with state fire code and building code pursuant to Minnesota
Statutes, section 342.13.
   B.   Pre-certification inspections: Potential licensees are responsible for
making all necessary zoning applications prior to the City receiving the
request for certification from the OCM. If a potential licensee fails to obtain
necessary zoning approvals prior to the City receiving a request for
certification, the City will inform the OCM that the potential licensee does
not meet zoning and land use laws. If, at the time the City receives a request
for zoning certification, there are no further intended alteration to the
building where the business is to be conducted, the City will also certify
compliance with building and fire code regulations, provided that the potential
licensee has obtained inspections prior to the City's receipt of a request for
certification from the OCM. Building and fire code inspections will be valid
for one (1) year from completion. (Ord. 2025-01, 1-7-2025)
3-11-4: RETAIL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Before making retail sales to customers or patients, all Cannabis Retailers and
Lower-Potency Hemp Retailers must register with the City. Making retail sales
to customers or patients without an active registration is prohibited. (Ord.
2025-01, 1-7-2025)
3-11-5: CANNABIS RETAILER REGISTRATION LIMITS:
   A.   Cap on registrations: The City shall limit the number of cannabis
retail businesses to one registration for every twelve thousand five hundred
(12,500) residents within Rosemount.
   B.   The following businesses are not subject to the cap on registration
referenced above:
      1.   Businesses operating under a tribal compact entered into under
Minnesota Statutes, §§ 3.9224 or 3.9228;
      2.   Tribally issued licenses and registrations;
      3.   Lower-Potency Hemp Retailer; and
      4.   Medical cannabis combination businesses. (Ord. 2025-01, 1-7-2025)
3-11-6: PROCESSING REGISTRATIONS:
   A.   First-come, first-served: Applications for registration will be
processed on a first-come, first-served basis based on the City receiving a
complete application and payment of all fees.
   B.   Complete applications: Applications will be considered complete when
all materials in Section
3-11-7  are received by the City and include all required information.
   C.   Effect of pre-licensing certification: The date a certification under
Section
3-11-3  is issued will have no impact on the applicant's registration
processing and is not an indication that the cap on registrations has not been
met. (Ord. 2025-01, 1-7-2025)
3-11-7: APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION:   
   A.   Contents of application: All applicants for initial registration or
renewal registration must submit a registration application form provided by
the City. The form may be amended from time to time by the City Administrator,
but must include or be accompanied by:
      1.   Full name of the property owner;   
      2.   Full name, date of birth, address, email address, and telephone
number of the applicant;
      3.   Address and parcel ID for the property for which the registration is
sought;
      4.   Certification that the applicant complies with the requirements of
this Chapter;
      5.   Fee Required. At the time of initial application, and prior to the
City's consideration of any renewal application, each Cannabis Retailer must
pay, as established in the City's fee schedule, the following fees:
         a.   At the time of initial registration:
            (1)   An initial registration fee. The initial registration fee
will pay for the costs of registration and the cost of the first year of
operation.
            (2)   The renewal fee for the second year of operation.
         b.   At the time of the first annual renewal (prior to the second year
of operation), no fee will be due.
         c.   At the time of the second annual renewal, and each year
thereafter, the renewal fee must be paid prior to the City issuing any renewal
registration.
      6.   A copy of a valid state license or written notice of OCM license
preapproval; and
      7.   Acknowledgement that all property taxes and assessments are current
at the location where the retail establishment is located.
   B.   Fees nonrefundable: Initial registration fees and renewal registration
fees are nonrefundable. (Ord. 2025-01, 1-7-2025)
3-11-8: PRELIMINARY COMPLIANCE CHECK:
Initial Cannabis Retailer or Lower-Potency Hemp Retailer registration shall not
be issued unless, prior to opening for operations following approval of an
application for initial registration, the applicant has passed a preliminary
compliance check conducted by the City to ensure compliance with this chapter
and any other regulations established pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, § 342.13.
(Ord. 2025-01, 1-7-2025)
3-11-9: BASIS FOR DENIAL:
   A.   The City shall deny a registration or renewal for any Cannabis Retailer
or Lower-Potency Hemp Retailer if any of the following conditions are true:
      1.   The applicant has not submitted a complete application.
      2.    The applicant does not comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
      3.   The applicant does not comply with applicable zoning and land use
regulations.
      4.    If applicable, the maximum number of registrations, pursuant to §
3-11-5, have been issued by the City.
      5.   The applicant does not have a valid license or preliminary license
approval from the OCM.
      6.   The applicant is not current on all property taxes and assessments
at the location where the retail establishment is located.
      7.   The property for which the registration is sought is located within
one thousand feet (1,000 ft.) of an elementary, secondary school (K-12 grades),
or post- secondary school. (Ord. 2025-01, 1-7-2025; amd. Ord. 2025-04, 6-17-
2025)
3-11-10: ISSUANCE OF REGISTRATION OR RENEWAL:
The City shall issue the registration or renewal if the applicant meets the
requirements of this chapter, including that none of the reasons for denial in
§
3-11-9  are true. (Ord. 2025-01, 1-7-2025)
3-11-11: REGISTRATION NONTRANSFERABLE:
A registration is not transferable to another person, entity, or location.
(Ord. 2025-01, 1-7-2025)
3-11-12: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Generally: The City Council may impose a fine or suspend a registration
under this chapter on a finding that the registered business has failed to
comply with an applicable statute, regulation, or ordinance, including a
violation of this chapter.
   B.   Notice and Right to Hearing: Prior to imposing a fine or suspending any
registration under this chapter, the City shall provide the registered business
with written notice of the alleged violations and inform the registered
business of its right to a hearing on the alleged violation.
   C.   Delivery of notice: Notice shall be delivered in person or by regular
mail to the address of the registered business and shall inform the registered
business of its right to a hearing. The notice will indicate that a written
response must be submitted within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice, or
the right to a hearing will be waived.
   D.   Council hearing: Provided a timely request for a hearing is submitted
by the registered business, the City Council will hold a hearing before taking
final action to fine or suspend a registration. The City Council shall give due
regard to the frequency and seriousness of the violations, the ease with which
such violations could have been cured or avoided and good faith efforts to
comply and shall issue a decision to fine or suspend the registration only upon
written findings.
   E.   Council action: If a timely request for a hearing is not received, the
matter shall be submitted to the City Council for imposition of the fine or
suspension.
   F.   Emergency: If, in the discretion of the City's Police Chief, or their
designee, a registered business poses an imminent threat to the health or
safety of the public, the City may immediately suspend the registration and
provide notice of the right to hold a subsequent hearing as prescribed in (B)
above.
   G.   Reinstatement: The City may reinstate a registration if it determines
that the violations have been resolved. The City shall reinstate the
registration if the OCM determines the violations have been resolved.
   H.   Report to OCM. All enforcement actions under this chapter will be
reported to the OCM. (Ord. 2025-01, 1-7-2025)
3-11-13: PENALTIES:
   A.   Misdemeanor: Any person who violates this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is subject to a fine and imprisonment as
prescribed by state law. Each day each violation continues or exists,
constitutes a separate offense.
   B.   Administrative penalty: Any person who violates this chapter is subject
to an administrative penalty in an amount set forth in the Fee Schedule. Each
day any violation continues or exists, constitutes a separate offense.
   C.   Action against business license: Violation of this chapter shall be
grounds for enforcement against any business license issued by the City of
Rosemount. (Ord. 2025-01, 1-7-2025)
3-11-14: CANNABIS RETAILER OPERATING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Compliance Checks: The City shall complete, at a minimum, one
compliance check per calendar year of every registered business to assess if
the business meets age verification requirements, as required under Minnesota
Statutes, section 342.22 Subd. 4(b) and this chapter. Any failures under this
chapter are a basis for enforcement action and must be reported to the OCM.
   B.   Hours of Operation: Cannabis businesses are limited to retail sale of
cannabis, cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency hemp edibles, or
hemp-derived consumer products to between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00)
a.m. and ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. Monday through Saturday, and eleven o’clock
(11:00) a.m. and six o’clock (6:00) p.m. on Sunday.
   C.   Display of License and Registration: All licenses and registrations
must be posted and displayed in plain view of the general public on the
premises. (Ord. 2025-01, 1-7-2025)
3-11-15: LOWER-POTENCY HEMP RETAILER OPERATING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Compliance Checks: The City shall complete at minimum one compliance
check per calendar year of every registered business to assess if the business
meets age verification requirements, as required under Minnesota Statutes, §
342.22 Subd. 4(b) and this chapter. Any failures under this chapter are a basis
for enforcement action and must be reported to the OCM.
   B.   Hours of Operation: Lower-Potency Hemp Retailers, other than businesses
holding a license under Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 340A, may only engage in
the retail sale of lower-potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer
products between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. and ten o’clock (10:00)
p.m. Monday through Saturday, and eleven o’clock (11:00) a.m. and six o’clock
(6:00) p.m. on Sunday.
   C.   Display of License and Registration: All licenses and registrations
must be posted and displayed in plain view of the general public on the
premises. (Ord. 2025-01, 1-7-2025)
3-11-16: ADVERTISING:
Advertising: Signage for Cannabis businesses is subject to the City's sign
code, Rosemount City Code Title 11, Chapter 8 with the addition of the
following:Cannabis businesses are permitted to erect up to two fixed signs on
the exterior of the building or property of the business. (Ord. 2025-01, 1-7-
2025)
3-11-17: TEMPORARY CANNABIS EVENTS:
   A.   Special Event Permit. Prior to holding a Temporary Cannabis Event, any
cannabis event organizer with a license from the OCM must obtain a special
event permit from the City Clerk.
   B.   Other Requirements. In addition to the requirements for special events,
all Temporary Cannabis Events must meet the following requirements:
      1.   The event organizer must provide to the City a complete copy of the
cannabis event license application submitted to OCM pursuant to Minnesota
Statutes, § 342.39, subd. 2.
      2.   On-site consumption of cannabinoid products is prohibited.
   C.   Compliance with State law. All Temporary Cannabis Events must follow
all requirements of Minnesota Statutes, chapter 342, as it may be amended from
time to time, and all requirements of the temporary cannabis event organizer
license issued by the OCM. (Ord. 2025-01, 1-7-2025)
TITLE 4
STREETS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS
ARTICLE A. SYSTEM REGULATION AND USE
SECTION:
4-1A-1: Utility Established, Administration
4-1A-2: Billing Regulations
4-1A-3: Use Restrictions
4-1A-4: Private Systems Restricted
4-1A-5: Waste Restrictions
4-1A-6: Violations; Penalty
4-1A-1: UTILITY ESTABLISHED, ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Operation And Administration: The Municipal water and sewer systems
shall be operated as a public utility and convenience from which revenue will
be derived, subject to the provisions of this Article.
The general operation and administration of the water and sewer systems shall
be under the direction and control of the Utilities Commission 1 .
   B.   Liability And Responsibility:
      1.   City Liability Limited: The City shall not be held liable at any
time for any deficiency or failure in the supply of water or to provide sewer
service to the customer whether the same be occasioned by shutting off the
water for repairs or connections or any cause whatever.
      2.   User Liability Established: After the initial connection has been
made, the applicant, owner, occupant or user of such premises shall be liable
for all repairs (including frozen water lines) required to any water line from
the curb stop to the premises or sewer line from the main to the premises. It
shall be the responsibility of the applicant, owner, occupant or user to
maintain the stop box at such height as will ensure that it remains above the
finished grade of the land or property.
   C.   Implied Consent To Regulations: Every person applying for water or
sewer service, every owner of property of which any such application is made,
every person accepting water or sewer service and every owner of property where
such service is accepted subsequent to the passage of this Article shall be
deemed, upon making such application or accepting such service, to consent to
all rules, regulations and rates as established by this Article and as may
hereafter be set forth and adopted by the Council by resolution or ordinance.
   D.   Right Of Entry: The City shall, by any authorized employee or agent,
have the right to enter and be admitted to any lands and property in the City
for the purpose of inspection of materials, plumbing work and fixtures of all
kinds used by or in connection with the water and sewer system. (Ord. XI.19,
11-19-1996)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 2, Chapter 4 of this Code.
4-1A-2: BILLING REGULATIONS:
The Utilities Commission shall have the authority to prescribe by resolution
the date of billing and such further rules and regulations relative to the use
and operation of such system as it may deem necessary from time to time.
   A.   The Utilities Commission may provide a system of water meter reading by
postcard, meter man, or any other method deemed suitable to the purpose by the
Commission. The Commission may also establish billing areas or districts and
provide for the reading of meters and billing charges by calendar quarters or
monthly quarters or such periodic intervals as the Commission shall determine
suitable and necessary from time to time.
   B.   In the event a water or sewer bill, whether incurred prior or
subsequent to the passage of this Article, is unpaid at the end of the calendar
quarter or the billing period under which the billing is sent out, the bill
shall be considered delinquent and the service may be discontinued as
previously provided or the City Council may cause the charges noted in such
billing to become a lien against the property served by certifying to the
county auditor the amount of said delinquent bill in accordance with the
statutes of the state 1 . (Ord. XI.19, 11-19-1996)
 
Notes
1 1. MSA § 514.01 et seq.
4-1A-3: USE RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Leak In Lines To Be Reported: Any owner, occupant or user of a premises
who shall discover a leak in a water service line to the premises shall notify
the city within twenty four (24) hours. Any water wasted due to failure of such
person to comply with this regulation shall be estimated by the city and be
charged for against the owner at such premises at the established rate. (Ord.
XI.19, 11-19-1996)
   B.   Sprinkling And Other Limitations: In order to conserve the city's
potable water supply, each water customer is required to comply with the
following restrictions between May 1 and August 31 in any calendar year:
      1.   Daily Schedule: On odd numbered days of the month, only odd numbered
addresses shall water lawns or landscaping, and on even numbered days, only
even numbered addresses shall water lawns or landscaping.
      2.   Hours: No watering of lawns or landscaping is permitted between the
hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on any day.
      3.   Exceptions:
         a.   The limitations of subsections B1 and B2 of this section do not
apply to the watering of lawns or landscaping for the first thirty (30) days
after establishment or planting of such lawn or landscaping.
         b.   The limitation of subsection B1 of this section does not apply to
the watering of lawns or landscaping of public parks and public property by the
city, provided the city waters no more frequently than every other day. (Ord.
XI.28, 8-21-2007)
   C.   Water For Air Conditioning: All air conditioning systems which are
connected directly or indirectly with the public water system must be equipped
with water conserving and water regulating devices as approved by the utilities
commission. Permits shall be required for the installation of all new air
conditioning systems to the public water system. Said permit shall be on forms
as provided by the city.
   D.   Use Confined To Premises: No person shall permit water from the water
system to be used for any purpose except his own premises unless written
consent is obtained from the public works director. (Ord. XI.19, 11-19-1996)
4-1A-4: PRIVATE SYSTEMS RESTRICTED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to install a private water or sewer
system in the city except in such cases as the public water or sewer system is
not accessible to the premises where such private systems are requested. To
determine whether or not such public water system is accessible to the
premises, the property owner or his agent must first make application for
connection to a public system. Upon determination by the public works director
that it is not feasible to connect the applicant's premises to the public water
or sewer system, the applicant shall be granted a permit to install a private
water or sewer system, upon compliance with the conditions in subsection D of
this section.
   B.   Whenever any premises with an existing private water system is
connected to the municipal water system, there shall be maintained a complete
physical separation between the municipal water supply system and the private
water supply system so that it is impossible to intentionally or
unintentionally allow any water produced by a private system to be introduced
into the city system.
   C.   If the private well is not continued in use at the time a municipal
water connection is made, the following shall be completed:
      1.   The well pump and tank shall be disconnected from all internal house
piping.
      2.   The well casing shall be filled, plugged and cut off according to
the most recent rules and specifications of the Minnesota department of health,
the Dakota County environmental department and the building code.
   D.   All private sewer systems shall be installed in accordance with the
requirements of title 9, chapter 6 of this code. (Ord. XI.19, 11-19-1996)
4-1A-5: WASTE RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Prohibited Wastes: Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful
to discharge any of the following described waters or wastes into the municipal
sanitary sewer system:
      1.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F).
      2.   Any water or waste containing more than one hundred (100) parts per
million by weight of fat, oil or grease.
      3.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other inflammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
      4.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
      5.   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, plastic, wood, paunch manure or any other solid or viscous substance
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with
the proper operation of the sewage system.
      6.   Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process or
which constitutes a hazard to humans or animals or creates any hazard in the
receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
      7.   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character
and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such
materials at the sewer treatment plant.
      8.   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance.
      9.   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the building official, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any inflammable
wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall
not be required for private dwelling units which discharge only normal wastes
therefrom. Such grease and oil interceptors shall be of substantial
construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when
bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight. All grease, oil and sand
interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously
efficient operation at all times.
   B.   Surface Water Discharge Prohibited: No person shall cause to be
discharged into the municipal sewer system, either directly or indirectly, any
roof, storm, surface or ground water of any type or kind, or water discharged
from any air conditioning unit or system.
   C.   Industrial Waste Restricted 1 : It shall be unlawful to discharge into
the municipal sanitary sewer system any industrial wastes unless the prior
approval of the utilities commission is obtained. (Ord. XI.19, 11-19-1996)
 
Notes
1 1. See article C, "Industrial Waste Charge", of this chapter.
4-1A-6: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
   A.   Discontinuance Of Service: Water service may be shut off at any stop
box connection whenever:
      1.   The owner or occupant of the premises, or any person working on any
pipes or requirement thereon has violated or threatens to violate any of the
provisions of this article.
      2.   Any charge for water or sewer service or any other financial
obligations imposed on the present or former owner or occupant of the premises
served is unpaid.
      3.   Fraud or misrepresentation by the owner or occupant of the premises
served in connection with any application for service. (Ord. XI.19, 11-19-1996)
   B.   Penalty: Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished as described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-
2004)
   C.   Additional Penalties; Appeal: In addition to any other penalty or
sanction provided for in this article, the city council may, by resolution, set
penalties for violations of this article. Such penalties shall be billed to the
customer and collected as a part of the water bill. A customer may appeal the
imposition of such a penalty to the public utilities commission by serving a
written notice of appeal on the city administrator or city clerk within ten
(10) days of receipt of notice from the city that it is imposing a penalty.
Such notice shall be in writing and shall state the grounds or basis for
objecting to the imposition of the charge or penalty. No penalty that has been
appealed will be levied or collected until the customer has been given an
opportunity for a hearing before the commission. (Ord. XI.24, 2-3-2004)
ARTICLE B. CONNECTIONS
SECTION:
4-1B-1: Installation And Piping Requirements
4-1B-2: Water Meters
4-1B-3: Tapping Of Mains Prohibited
4-1B-4: Supply From One Service
4-1B-5: Water Stop Box Location
4-1B-6: Water Turn On
4-1B-7: Abandoned Services
4-1B-8: Fire Hydrants
4-1B-9: Water And Sewer Connection Charges
4-1B-10: Connection To Municipal System Required
4-1B-1: INSTALLATION AND PIPING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All connections to the water or sewer systems shall be performed by a
plumber licensed by the state. All water and sewer piping and appurtenances
installed in the city shall meet the requirements of the most recent adopted
provisions of the Minnesota state plumbing code, unless otherwise specified in
this article.
   B.   All applications for water, sewer and storm sewer service installations
shall be made by the owner or agent of the property to be served and shall
state the size and location of service connection required, and the applicant
shall, at the time of making application, pay to the city the amount of fees,
assessments or deposits required. All installations shall meet the requirements
of the most recently adopted provisions of the Minnesota state plumbing code,
the standard utilities specifications of the City Engineers Association of
Minnesota and the city of Rosemount standard specifications.
   C.   The municipal water system shall be fully and continuously protected
from contamination or possible water backflow in accordance with the most
recently adopted provisions of the Minnesota state plumbing code in all private
or public buildings.
   D.   All water service pipes connected to the municipal system shall be a
minimum of one inch (1") inside diameter in accordance with the most recently
adopted specifications of the Minnesota state plumbing code. (Ord. XI.19, 11-
19-1996)
4-1B-2: WATER METERS:
Before any water conveyed through the city water system shall be used or
utilized on the land or premises of any person, there shall first be installed
a water meter that will accurately measure the water consumed on the premises.
   A.   All meters for any use shall be furnished by the city. The city shall
charge the cost of the meter and automatic meter reading equipment to the
applicant on the building permit. This cost shall be set and amended by city
council resolution as is deemed necessary by the council.
   B.   Said meters shall be repaired from time to time as is necessary to
ensure accurate measuring of the flow of water; except that whenever a meter
has been damaged due to negligence on the part of persons other than the
employees of the city, the owner, occupant or user of the premises or such
other persons desiring the use of the water shall reimburse the city for
expense of repairing any such meter. Upon failure to reimburse the city within
a reasonable time and upon demand therefor, the expenses incurred and billed
will be placed on the property taxes during the semiannual delinquent water
bill certification.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, alter, bypass, or
in any manner whatsoever interfere with the proper use and functioning of water
meters within the city.
   D.   All water meters shall be and remain the property of the city.
   E.   Installation of the horn, raising the curb box to finished grade, and
flushing of the lines shall be the responsibility of a plumber duly licensed
and registered according to the Minnesota state plumbing code rules. Plumber
shall set the meter as follows:
      1.   Location: Meter settings shall be located in the utility, laundry or
furnace room and in every case shall be located no more than eight feet (8')
from the nearest floor drain on the same floor level.
      2.   Installation: The setting shall be installed to provide that the
meter be between six inches (6") and twelve inches (12") from a wall and
between eighteen inches (18") and thirty six inches (36") from the finished
floor, and shall be rigidly supported with a permanent support. The water meter
shall be readily accessible with a minimum clear space of two feet (2') in all
other directions. This water meter shall be a sensus ECR and measure in one
thousand (1,000) gallons.
      3.   Valves: Each meter setting shall be provided with an approved valve
on the street side and the house side of the meter. Such valves shall be well
protected from freezing.
      4.   Meter Horns: Meter setting devices (meter horns) shall be used for
installation of one inch (1") or smaller meters.
      5.   Vertical Piping: All vertical piping extending from the water meter
up to the horizontal run shall be no smaller than one inch (1").
      6.   Meter Transceiver Units (MXU): Meter transceiver units shall be
securely installed, by the plumber, on the water pipe or wall at least five
feet (5') above the floor. All wires shall be secured by use of wire ties or
clips.
      7.   Effective Date: This subsection E shall apply to all plumbing or
building permits applied for on or after May 1, 2001, and all replacement or
relocation of water meters.
   F.   If a meter fails to register or accurately measure the water, the
charge for water consumed shall be paid for at the established rate based upon
past average billings as determined by the city. (Ord. XI.22, 4-17-2001)
4-1B-3: TAPPING OF MAINS PROHIBITED:
No person except persons employed by the city shall tap any distributing main
or pipe of the water supply or insert stopcocks or ferrules therein, unless
otherwise authorized by the city. (Ord. XI.19, 11-19-1996)
4-1B-4: SUPPLY FROM ONE SERVICE:
No more than one housing unit or building shall be supplied from one service
connection except by special permission of the utilities commission. (Ord.
XI.19, 11-19-1996)
4-1B-5: WATER STOP BOX LOCATION:
Water curb stop boxes will be installed at a point on the property line most
suitable to the property and shall be left in an accurate vertical position
when backfilling is completed. A minimum eight inch (8") concrete block shall
be placed under each curb stop.
Before any grading or excavation is started, the water shutoff box shall be
located and checked for damage by the contractor. If available, location ties
will be furnished by the public works department at time connection permit is
issued. If the shutoff box cannot be located or is found bent or in a damaged
condition, the public works director is to be called at once. The contractor
assumes all responsibility for damage to the curb box. (Ord. XI.19, 11-19-1996)
4-1B-6: WATER TURN ON:
No person, except an authorized city employee, shall turn on or off any water
supply at a curb stop, gate valve or fire hydrant without permission from the
public works director. (Ord. XI.19, 11-19-1996)
4-1B-7: ABANDONED SERVICES:
All service installations that have been abandoned or have not been used for
three (3) years shall be disconnected at the main by the city and all pipe and
appurtenances removed shall become the property of the city, and any expenses
of the city shall be charged to the property. When new buildings are erected on
the site of old ones, and it is desired to increase or change the old water or
sewer service, no connections with the mains shall be made until all the old
services shall have been removed and the main plugged by the city, and any
expense of the city shall be charged to the property. (Ord. XI.19, 11-19-1996)
4-1B-8: FIRE HYDRANTS:
All fire hydrants shall be inspected periodically by the public works
department whether on private or public property to ensure that they are in
good working order. The owners of privately owned hydrants that require repair
shall be notified immediately and shall repair the hydrants within five (5)
working days. (Ord. XI.19, 11-19-1996)
4-1B-9: WATER AND SEWER CONNECTION CHARGES:
The council may impose, by resolution, just and equitable charges for
connection with sewer and water facilities. Such charges may be fixed by
reference to the portion of the cost of connection that has been paid by
assessment of the premises to be connected, in comparison with other premises,
as well as the cost of making or supervising the connection. (Ord. XI.26, 5-2-
2006)
4-1B-10: CONNECTION TO MUNICIPAL SYSTEM REQUIRED:
   A.   All buildings used for human habitation must connect to the municipal
sewer and water system within ten (10) years from the time the municipal system
is accessible to the property upon which the building is located, or when the
city determines, or the results of a compliance inspection indicate, that the
private system servicing the property has failed whichever is earlier.
   B.   If municipal sanitary sewer and water systems are extended and made
available to a property, but the property owner chooses to continue to be
served by a private septic system as described in subsection
4-1B-10 A, a full and complete septic system compliance inspection must be
performed by a certified septic inspector per the requirements of Section
9-6-6 and per the following:
      1.   Compliance inspections shall be performed:
         a.   Within sixty (60) days of receiving notice from the City that
municipal sewer and water systems are available to the property. The City may,
at its sole discretion, allow additional time to complete the inspection if the
private septic system cannot be inspected due to weather or seasonal access
issues; and
         b.   Every three (3) years after the initial notice that municipal
sewer and water systems are available to the property.
      2.   The inspection report detailing the findings of each inspection must
be provided to the City within fifteen (15) days of the certified septic
inspector making a determination of compliance or noncompliance.
   C.   Properties served by private wells may continue to utilize existing
private wells for property irrigation purposes after connecting to the
municipal water system if the irrigation system water supply lines do not have
cross-connections with the domestic interior water supply plumbing for the
dwelling or structure. Property owners must verify that a cross-connection with
the domestic interior water supply plumbing does not exist as part of the
inspection performed when connecting to the municipal water system. (Ord.
XI.27, 7-11-2006; amd. Ord. 2023-02, 8-2-2023)
ARTICLE C. INDUSTRIAL WASTE CHARGE
SECTION:
4-1C-1: Charge Established
4-1C-2: Strength Charge Formula
4-1C-3: Strength Charge Payment
4-1C-4: Tax Lien For Nonpayment
4-1C-1: CHARGE ESTABLISHED:
   A.   State Law Applied: The Metropolitan Waste Control Commission, a
metropolitan commission organized and existing under the laws of the State of
Minnesota (the "Commission"), in order to receive and retain grants in
compliance with the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 and
regulations thereunder (the "Act"), has determined to impose an industrial user
sewer strength charge upon users of the Metropolitan Disposal System (as
defined in Minnesota Statutes, section 473.121, subsection 24) to recover
operation and maintenance costs of treatment works attributable to the strength
of the discharge of industrial waste, such sewer strength charge being in
addition to the charge based upon the volume of discharge. In order for the
City to pay such costs based upon strength of industrial discharge and
allocated to it each year by the Commission, it is hereby found, determined and
declared to be necessary to establish sewer strength charges and a formula for
the computation thereof for all industrial users receiving waste treatment
services within or served by the City. Furthermore, Minnesota Statutes, section
444.075, subsection 3, empowers the City to make such sewer charge a charge
against the owner, lessee, occupant or all of them and certify unpaid charges
to the County Auditor as a tax lien against the property served.
   B.   Strength Charge Established: For the purpose of paying the costs
allocated to the City each year by the Commission that are based upon the
strength of discharge of all industrial users receiving waste treatment
services within or served by the City, there is hereby approved, adopted and
established, in addition to the sewer charge based upon the volume of
discharge, a sewer charge upon each person receiving waste treatment services
within or served by the City, based upon strength of industrial waste
discharged into the sewer system of the City (the "Strength Charge").
4-1C-2: STRENGTH CHARGE FORMULA:
For the purpose of computation of the strength charge established by subsection
4-1C-1B hereof, there is hereby established, approved and adopted in compliance
with the Act the same strength charge formula designated herein by the
governing body of the Commission on June 15, 1976, such formula being based
upon pollution qualities and difficulty of disposal of the sewage produced
through an evaluation of pollution qualities and quantities in excess of an
annual average base and the proportionate costs of operation and maintenance of
waste treatment services provided by the Commission: (Ord. XI.9, 4-18-78)
   A.   The Metropolitan Waste Control Commission strength charge system as
recommended by the Hearing Officer and determined annually by application of
(a) plant unit process evaluations, (b) current quality control data, and (c)
current budgeted operation and maintenance costs for the treatment facilities.
   B.   The basic strength charge system formula is as follows:
      1.   Strength Charge Formula:
SCF = SR [Rss (SS-SSo) + Rcod (COD-CODo)]
         SSo         CODo
Where:
SCF   =   Strength Charge Factor
SR   =   Strength Phase Ratio (strength costs to system costs for
administrative and O & M of treatment works)
Rss   =   Suspended Solids Cost Ratio
Rcod   =   Chemical Oxygen Demand Cost Ratio
SS   =   Suspended Solids Concentration of Discharge (SS>SSo)
SSo   =   Suspended Solids Concentration of Base
COD   =   Chemical Oxygen Demand Concentration of Discharge (COD>CODo)
CODo   =   Chemical Oxygen Demand Concentration of Base
      2.   Strength Charge:
SC = (SCF)(V)(TW)
Where:
SC   =   Strength Charge
SCF   =   Strength Charge Factor
V   =   Volume of Discharge
TW   =   Treatment Works Unit Cost
(Res. 76-172, 6-15-76)
4-1C-3: STRENGTH CHARGE PAYMENT:
It is hereby approved, adopted and established that the strength charge
established by subsection
4-1C-1B hereof shall be paid by each industrial user receiving waste treatment
services and subject thereto before the twentieth day next succeeding the date
of billing thereof to such user by or on behalf of the City, and such payment
thereof shall be deemed to be delinquent if not so paid to the billing entity
before such date. Furthermore, it is hereby established, approved and adopted
that if such payment is not paid before such date, an industrial user shall pay
interest compounded monthly at the rate of two-thirds of one percent (2/3%) per
month on the unpaid balance due.
4-1C-4: TAX LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT:
As provided by Minnesota Statutes, section 444.075, subsection 3, it is hereby
approved, adopted and established that if payment of the strength charge
established by subsection
4-1C-1B hereof is not paid before the sixtieth day next succeeding the date of
billing thereof to the industrial user by or on behalf of the City, said
delinquent sewer strength charge, plus accrued interest established pursuant to
Section
4-1C-3 hereof, shall be deemed to be a charge against the owner, lessee and
occupant of the property served, and the City or its agent shall certify such
unpaid delinquent balance to the County Auditor with taxes against the property
served for collection as other taxes are collected; provided, however, that
such certification shall not preclude the City or its agents from recovery of
such delinquent sewer strength charge and interest thereon under any other
available remedy. (Ord. XI.9, 4-18-78)
CHAPTER 2
RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
4-2-1: Findings, Purpose, And Intent
4-2-2: Election To Manage The Public Rights-Of-Way
4-2-3: Definitions
4-2-4: Administration
4-2-5: Registration And Right-Of-Way Occupancy
4-2-6: Registration Information
4-2-7: Reporting Obligations
4-2-8: Permit Requirement
4-2-9: Permit Applications
4-2-10: Issuance Of Permit; Conditions
4-2-10-1: Action On Small Wireless Facility Permit Applications
4-2-11: Permit Fees
4-2-12: Patching And Restoration
4-2-13: Joint Applications
4-2-14: Supplementary Applications
4-2-15: Other Obligations
4-2-16: Denial Or Revocation Of Permit
4-2-17: Installation Requirements
4-2-18: Inspection
4-2-19: Work Done Without A Permit
4-2-20: Supplementary Notification
4-2-21: Revocation Of Permits
4-2-22: Mapping Data
4-2-23: Location And Relocation Of Facilities
4-2-24: Preexcavation Facilities Location
4-2-25: Damage To Other Facilities
4-2-26: Vacation
4-2-27: Indemnification And Liability
4-2-28: Abandoned And Unused Facilities
4-2-29: Appeal
4-2-30: Severability
4-2-31: Waiver
4-2-32: Franchise Required
4-2-1: FINDINGS, PURPOSE, AND INTENT:
To provide for the health, safety and welfare of its citizens, and to ensure
the integrity of its streets and the appropriate use of the rights-of-way, the
City strives to keep its rights-of- way in a state of good repair and free from
unnecessary encumbrances.
Accordingly, the City hereby enacts this chapter relating to right-of-way
permits and administration. This chapter imposes reasonable regulation on the
placement and maintenance of facilities and equipment currently within its
rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some future time. It is intended to
complement the regulatory roles of State and Federal agencies. Under this
chapter, persons excavating and obstructing the rights-of-way will bear
financial responsibility for their work. Finally, this chapter provides for
recovery of out of pocket and projected costs from persons using the public
rights-of-way.
This chapter shall be interpreted consistently with 1997 Session Laws, chapter
123, substantially codified in Minnesota Statutes, sections 237.16, 237.162,
237.163, 237.79, 237.81, and 238.086 (the "Act") and 2017 Session Laws, chapter
94 amending the Act and the other laws governing applicable rights of the City
and users of the right-of-way. This chapter shall also be interpreted
consistent with Minnesota Rules 7819.0050 through 7819.9950 where possible. To
the extent any provision of this chapter cannot be interpreted consistently
with the Minnesota Rules, that interpretation most consistent with the Act and
other applicable statutory and case law is intended. This chapter shall not be
interpreted to limit the regulatory and police powers of the City to adopt and
enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare
of the public. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-2: ELECTION TO MANAGE THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
Pursuant to the authority granted to the City under State and Federal
statutory, administrative and common law, the City hereby elects, pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes 237.163, subdivision 2(b), to manage rights-of-way within
its jurisdiction. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions apply in this chapter. References hereafter to
"sections" are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections in this
chapter. Defined terms remain defined terms, whether or not capitalized.
ABANDONED FACILITY: A facility no longer in service or physically disconnected
from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other facility, that is
in use or still carries service. A facility is not abandoned unless declared so
by the right-of-way user.
APPLICANT: Any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a right-of-
way.
CITY: The City of Rosemount, Minnesota. For purposes of section
4-2-27 of this chapter, "City" means its elected officials, officers, employees
and agents.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace a small wireless facility on, under, within, or adjacent to an existing
wireless support structure or utility pole that is owned privately, or by the
City or other governmental unit.
COMMISSION: The State Public Utilities Commission.
CONGESTED RIGHT-OF-WAY: A crowded condition in the subsurface of the public
right-of-way that occurs when the maximum lateral spacing between existing
underground facilities does not allow for construction of new underground
facilities in conformance with Minnesota Statutes, section 216D.04, subdivision
3, over a continuous length in excess of five hundred feet (500') without using
hand digging to expose the existing lateral facilities.
CONSTRUCTION PERFORMANCE BOND: Any of the following forms of security provided
at permittee's option:
   A.   Individual project bond;
   B.   Cash deposit;
   C.   Security of a form listed or approved under Minnesota Statutes, section
15.73, subdivision 3;
   D.   Letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the City;
   E.   Self-bond, in a form acceptable to the City;
   F.   A blanket bond for projects within the City, or other form of
construction bond, for a time specified and in a form acceptable to the City.
   G.   A permittee may submit a single bond covering all projects done by that
company.
DEGRADATION: A decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused by
excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to
reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation
or disturbance did not occur.
DEGRADATION COST: Subject to Minnesota Rules 7819.1100, means the cost to
achieve a level of restoration, as determined by the City at the time the
permit is issued, not to exceed the maximum restoration shown in plates 1 to
13, set forth in Minnesota Rules parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950.
DEGRADATION FEE: The estimated fee established at the time of permitting by the
City to recover costs associated with the decrease in the useful life of the
right-of-way caused by the excavation, and which equals the degradation cost.
DELAY PENALTY: The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays in right-
of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration as established by
permit.
DEPARTMENT: The Department of Public Works of the City.
DEPARTMENT INSPECTOR: Any person authorized by the City to carry out
inspections related to the provisions of this chapter.
DIRECTOR: The Director of the Department of Public Works of the City, or her or
his designee.
EMERGENCY: A condition that: a) poses a danger to life or health or of a
significant loss of property; or b) requires immediate repair or replacement of
facilities in order to restore service to a customer.
EQUIPMENT: Any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain facilities
in any right-of-way.
EXCAVATE: To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or penetrate
any part of a right-of-way.
EXCAVATION PERMIT: The permit that, pursuant to this chapter, must be obtained
before a person may excavate in a right-of-way. An excavation permit allows the
holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit.
EXCAVATION PERMIT FEE: Money paid to the City by an applicant to cover the
costs as provided in section
4-2-11 of this chapter.
FACILITY OR FACILITIES: Any tangible asset in the right-of-way required to
provide utility service.
FIVE YEAR PROJECT PLAN: Shows projects adopted by the City for construction
within the next five (5) years.
HIGH DENSITY CORRIDOR: A designated portion of the public right- of-way within
which telecommunications right-of-way users having multiple and competing
facilities may be required to build and install facilities in a common conduit
system or other common structure.
HOLE: An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length less
than the width of the pavement.
LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE: A local person or persons, or designee of such person or
persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make decisions for
that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this chapter.
MANAGEMENT COSTS: The actual costs the City incurs in managing its rights-of-
way, including such costs, if incurred, as those associated with registering
applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way or small wireless
facility permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration projects;
maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user facilities during right-of-
way work; determining the adequacy of right-of- way restoration; restoring work
inadequately performed after providing notice and the opportunity to correct
the work; and revoking right-of-way or small wireless facility permits.
Management costs do not include payment by a telecommunications right-of-way
user for the use of the right-of-way; unreasonable fees of a third-party
contractor used by the City including fees tied to or based on customer counts,
access lines, or revenues generated by the right-of-way or for the City; the
fees and cost of litigation relating to the interpretation of Minnesota Session
Laws 1997, chapter 123, Minnesota Statutes, section 237.162 or 237.163, or any
ordinance enacted under those sections, or the City fees and costs related to
appeals taken pursuant to section
4-2-29 of this chapter.
OBSTRUCT: To place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to hinder free
and open passage over that or any part of the right- of-way.
OBSTRUCTION PERMIT: The permit that, pursuant to this chapter, must be obtained
before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder to hinder free
and open passage over the specified portion of that right-of-way, for the
duration specified therein.
OBSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE: Money paid to the City by a permittee to cover the
costs as provided in section
4-2-11 of this chapter.
PATCH OR PATCHING: A method of pavement replacement that is temporary in
nature. A patch consists of: a) the compaction of the subbase and aggregate
base, and b) the replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement for a minimum
of two feet (2') beyond the edges of the excavation in all directions. A patch
is considered full restoration only when the pavement is included in the City's
five year project plan.
PAVEMENT: Any type of improved surface that is within the public right-of-way
and that is paved or otherwise constructed with bituminous, concrete,
aggregate, or gravel.
PERMIT: Has the meaning given "right-of-way permit" in Minnesota Statutes,
section 237.162.
PERMITTEE: Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a right-of-way
has been granted by the City under this chapter.
PERSON: An individual or entity subject to the laws and rules of this State,
however organized, whether public or private, whether domestic or foreign,
whether for profit or nonprofit, and whether natural, corporate, or political.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY OR RIGHT-OF-WAY: The area on, below, or above a public
roadway, highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane or public sidewalk in which the
City has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel
purposes and utility easements of the City. A right-of-way does not include the
airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to cellular or other nonwire
telecommunications or broadcast service.
REGISTRANT: Any person who: a) has or seeks to have its equipment or facilities
located in any right-of-way, or b) in any way occupies or uses, or seeks to
occupy or use, the right-of-way or place its facilities or equipment in the
right-of-way.
RESTORATION COST: The amount of money paid to the City by a permittee to
achieve the level of restoration according to plates 1 to 13 of Minnesota
Public Utilities Commission Rules.
RESTORE OR RESTORATION: The process by which an excavated right- of-way and
surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is returned to the same
condition and life expectancy that existed before excavation.
RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT: Either the excavation permit or the obstruction permit, or
both, depending on the context, required by this chapter.
RIGHT-OF-WAY USER: A. A telecommunications right-of-way user as defined by
Minnesota Statutes, section 237.162, subdivision 4; or
   B.   A person owning or controlling a facility in the right-of-way that is
used or intended to be used for providing utility service, and who has a right
under law, franchise, or ordinance to use the public right-of-way.
SERVICE LATERAL: An underground facility that is used to transmit, distribute,
or furnish gas, electricity, communications, or water from a common source to
an end use customer. A service lateral is also an underground facility that is
used in the removal of wastewater from a customer's premises.
SERVICE OR UTILITY SERVICE: Includes: a) those services provided by a public
utility as defined in Minnesota Statutes 216B.02, subdivisions 4 and 6; b)
services of a telecommunications right- of-way user, including transporting of
voice or data information; c) services of a cable communications systems as
defined in Minnesota Statutes, chapter 238; d) natural gas or electric energy
or telecommunications services provided by the City; e) services provided by a
cooperative electric association organized under Minnesota Statutes, chapter
308A; and f) water, and sewer, including service laterals, steam, cooling or
heating services.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications:
   A.   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six (6)
cubic feet in volume or could fit within such an enclosure; and
   B.   All other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless
facility provided such equipment is, in aggregate, no more than twenty eight
(28) cubic feet in volume, not including electric meters, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation boxes, battery backup power systems, grounding
equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable, conduit, vertical
cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and any equipment
concealed from public view within or behind an existing structure or
concealment.
SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION: An application made to excavate or obstruct more of
the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit that had already been
issued.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHT-OF-WAY USER: A person owning or controlling a facility
in the right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a facility in the right-of-
way, that is used or is intended to be used for providing wireless service, or
transporting telecommunication or other voice or data information. For purposes
of this chapter, a cable communication system defined and regulated under
Minnesota Statutes, chapter 238, and telecommunication activities related to
providing natural gas or electric energy services, a public utility as defined
in Minnesota Statutes, section 216B.02, a municipality, a Municipal gas or
power agency organized under Minnesota Statutes, chapters 453 and 453A, or a
cooperative electric association organized under Minnesota Statutes, chapter
308A, are not telecommunications right-of-way users for purposes of this
chapter except to the extent such entity is offering wireless service.
TEMPORARY SURFACE: The compaction of subbase and aggregate base and
replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement only to the edges of the
excavation. It is temporary in nature except when the replacement is of
pavement included in the City's two year plan, in which case it is considered
full restoration.
TRENCH: An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length
equal to or greater than the width of the pavement.
TWO YEAR PROJECT PLAN: Shows projects adopted by the City for construction
within the next two (2) years.
UTILITY POLE: A pole that is used in whole or in part to facilitate
telecommunications or electric service.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables the provision of
wireless services between user equipment and a wireless service network.
Specific examples include equipment associated with wireless service, a radio
transceiver, antenna, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and a small wireless facility, but not including wireless support
structures, wireline backhaul facilities, or cables between utility poles or
wireless support structures, or not otherwise immediately adjacent to and
directly associated with a specific antenna.
WIRELESS SERVICE: Any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum,
including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or by means of a mobile
device, that is provided using wireless facilities. Wireless service does not
include services regulated under title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as
amended, including cable service.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A new or existing structure in a right-of-way
designed to support or capable of supporting small wireless facilities, as
reasonably determined by the City. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-4: ADMINISTRATION:
The City Engineer is the principal City official responsible for the
administration of the rights-of-way, right-of-way permits, and the ordinances
related thereto. The City Engineer may delegate any or all of the duties
hereunder. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-5: REGISTRATION AND RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY:
   A.   Registration: Each person who occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or
use, the right-of-way or place any equipment or facilities in or on the right-
of-way, including persons with installation and maintenance responsibilities by
lease, sublease or assignment, must register with the City. Registration will
consist of providing application information and paying a registration fee.
   B.   Registration Prior To Work: No person may construct, install, repair,
remove, relocate, or perform any other work on, or use any facilities or any
part thereof, in any right-of-way without first being registered with the City.
   C.   Exceptions: Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or amend the
provisions of a City ordinance permitting persons to plant or maintain
boulevard plantings or gardens in the area of the right-of-way between their
property and the street curb. Persons planting or maintaining boulevard
plantings or gardens shall not be deemed to use or occupy the right-of-way, and
shall not be required to obtain any permits or satisfy any other requirements
for planting or maintaining such boulevard plantings or gardens under this
chapter. However, nothing herein relieves a person from complying with the
provisions of the Minnesota Statutes, chapter 216D, Gopher One Call Law or
other provisions of this Code. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-6: REGISTRATION INFORMATION:
   A.   Information Required: The information provided to the City at the time
of registration shall include, but not be limited to:
      1.   Each registrant's name, Gopher One Call registration certificate
number, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile
numbers.
      2.   The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone
and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local representative or
designee shall be available in person or by telephone at all times. Current
information regarding how to contact the local representative in an emergency
shall be provided at the time of registration.
      3.   A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
         a.   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the
registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of
Minnesota, or a form of self-insurance acceptable to the City;
         b.   Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for
personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising
out of the: 1) use and occupancy of the right-of- way by the registrant, its
officers, agents, employees and permittees, and 2) placement and use of
facilities and equipment in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers,
agents, employees and permittees; including, but not limited to, protection
against liability arising from completed operations, damage of underground
facilities and collapse of property;
         c.   Naming the City as an additional insured as to whom the coverages
required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will be
provided as to all such coverages;
         d.   Requiring that the City be notified thirty (30) days in advance
of cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term; and
         e.   Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile liability
coverage, workers' compensation and umbrella coverage established by the City
in amounts sufficient to protect the City and the public and to carry out the
purposes and policies of this chapter.
         f.   The City may require a copy of the actual insurance policies.
         g.   If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate is
required to be filed under Minnesota Statutes as recorded and certified to by
the Secretary of State.
         h.   A copy of the person's order granting a certificate of authority
from the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other authorization or
approval from the applicable State or Federal agency to lawfully operate, where
the person is lawfully required to have such authorization or approval from
said commission or other State or Federal agency.
      4.   An updated and current plat or drawing showing the location of all
existing underground utilities and appurtenances located within State highways,
County roads, City streets, alleys, public grounds and easements.
   B.   Notice Of Changes: The registrant shall keep all of the information
listed above current at all times by providing to the City information as to
changes within fifteen (15) days following the date on which the registrant has
knowledge of any change. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-7: REPORTING OBLIGATIONS:
   A.   Operations: Each registrant shall, at the time of registration and by
March 1 of each year, file a construction and major maintenance plan for
underground facilities with the City. Such plan shall be submitted using a
format designated by the City and shall contain the information determined by
the City to be necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the
frequency of excavations and obstructions of rights-of-way.
The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:
      1.   The locations and the estimated beginning and ending dates of all
projects to be commenced during the next calendar year (in this section, a
"next year project"); and
      2.   To the extent known, the tentative locations and estimated beginning
and ending dates for all projects contemplated for the five (5) years following
the next calendar year (in this section, a "5 year project").
The term "project" in this section shall include both next year projects and
five (5) year projects.
By March 1 of each year, the City will have available for inspection in the
City's office a composite list of all projects of which the City has been
informed of the annual plans. All registrants are responsible for keeping
themselves informed of the current status of this list.
Thereafter, by March 1, each registrant may change any project in its list of
next year projects, and must notify the City and all other registrants of all
such changes in said list. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a registrant may at
any time join in a next year project of another registrant listed by the other
registrant.
   B.   Additional Next Year Projects: Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City
will not deny an application for a right-of-way permit for failure to include a
project in a plan submitted to the City if the registrant has used commercially
reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for the project. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-
21-2017)
4-2-8: PERMIT REQUIREMENT:
   A.   Permit Required: Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person
may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way, or install or place facilities in
the right-of-way, without first having obtained the appropriate right-of-way
permit from the City to do so.
      1.   Excavation Permit: An excavation permit is required by a registrant
to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit and to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by
placing facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration
specified therein.
      2.   Obstruction Permit: An obstruction permit is required by a
registrant to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of right-
of-way by placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the
extent and for the duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not
required if a person already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same
project.
      3.   Small Wireless Facility Permit: A small wireless facility permit is
required by a registrant to erect or install a wireless support structure, to
collocate a small wireless facility, or to otherwise install a small wireless
facility in the specified portion of the right-of-way, to the extent specified
therein, provided that such permit shall remain in effect for the length of
time the facility is in use, unless lawfully revoked.
   B.   Permit Extensions: No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-way
beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless: 1) such person makes a
supplementary application for another right-of-way permit before the expiration
of the initial permit, and 2) a new permit or permit extension is granted.
   C.   Delay Penalty: In accordance with Minnesota Rule 7819.1000, subdivision
3 and notwithstanding subsection B of this section, the City shall establish
and impose a delay penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation,
obstruction, patching, or restoration. The delay penalty shall be established
from time to time by City Council resolution.
   D.   Permit Display: Permits issued under this chapter shall be
conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated
work site and shall be available for inspection by the City. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-
21-2017)
4-2-9: PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
Application for a permit is made to the City. The City requires a digital image
file (pdf, jpg, etc.) and three (3) hard copies of the plan for the permit.
Right-of-way permit applications shall contain, and will be considered complete
only upon compliance with, the requirements of the following provisions:
   A.   Registration with the City pursuant to this chapter.
   B.   Submission of a completed permit application form, including all
required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the
proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed
facilities.
   C.   Payment of money due the City for:
      1.   Permit fees, estimated restoration costs and other management costs;
      2.   Prior obstructions or excavations;
      3.   Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the City because
of applicant's prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way or any
emergency actions taken by the City;
      4.   Franchise fees or other charges, if applicable.
   D.   Payment of disputed amounts due the City by posting security or
depositing in an escrow account an amount equal to at least one hundred ten
percent (110%) of the amount disputed.
   E.   Posting an additional or larger construction performance bond for
additional facilities when applicant requests an excavation permit to install
additional facilities and the City deems the existing construction performance
bond inadequate under applicable standards. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-10: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS:
   A.   Permit Issuance: If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of
this chapter, the City shall issue a permit.
   B.   Conditions: The City may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance
of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to protect the
health, safety and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and
its current use.
   C.   Small Wireless Facility Conditions: In addition to subsection B of this
section, the erection or installation of a wireless support structure, the
collocation of a small wireless facility, or other installation of a small
wireless facility in the right- of-way, shall be subject to the following
conditions:
      1.   A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on the particular
wireless support structure, under those attachment specifications, and at the
height indicated in the applicable permit application.
      2.   No new wireless support structure installed within the right- of-way
shall exceed fifty feet (50') in height without the City's written
authorization, provided that the City may impose a lower height limit in the
applicable permit to protect the public health, safety and welfare or to
protect the right-of-way and its current use, and further provided that a
registrant may replace an existing wireless support structure exceeding fifty
feet (50') in height with a structure of the same height subject to such
conditions or requirements as may be imposed in the applicable permit.
      3.   No wireless facility may extend more than ten feet (10') above its
wireless support structure.
      4.   No wireless facility may be installed on a traffic control signal.
      5.   Where an applicant proposes to install a new wireless support
structure in the right-of-way, said structure may not be located closer than
five hundred feet (500') to an existing wireless support structure or other
facilities in and around the right-of- way. A lesser distance may be approved
by the City upon demonstration of the need for an additional facility due to a
coverage/capacity issue.
      6.   Where an applicant proposes collocation on a decorative wireless
support structure, sign or other structure not intended to support small
wireless facilities, the City may impose reasonable requirements to accommodate
the particular design, appearance or intended purpose of such structure.
      7.   Where an applicant proposes to replace a wireless support structure,
the City may impose reasonable restocking, replacement, or relocation
requirements on the replacement of such structure.
   D.   Small Wireless Facility Agreement: A small wireless facility shall only
be collocated on a small wireless support structure owned or controlled by the
City, or any other City asset in the right-of-way, after the applicant has
executed a standard small wireless facility collocation agreement with the
City. The standard collocation agreement may require payment of the following:
      1.   Up to one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year for rent to
collocate on the City structure;
      2.   Twenty five dollars ($25.00) per year for maintenance associated
with the collocation;
      3.   A monthly fee for electrical service as follows:
         a.   Seventy three dollars ($73.00) per radio node less than or equal
to one hundred (100) maximum watts;
         b.   One hundred eighty two dollars ($182.00) per radio node over one
hundred (100) maximum watts; or
         c.   The actual costs of electricity, if the actual costs exceed the
foregoing.
The standard collocation agreement shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of,
the required small wireless facility permit, provided, however, that the
applicant shall not be additionally required to obtain a license or franchise
in order to collocate. Issuance of a small wireless facility permit does not
supersede, alter or affect any then-existing agreement between the City and
applicant. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-10-1: ACTION ON SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Deadline For Action: The City shall approve or deny a small wireless
facility permit application within ninety (90) days after filing of such
application. The small wireless facility permit, and any associated building
permit application, shall be deemed approved if the City fails to approve or
deny the application within the review periods established in this section.
   B.   Consolidated Applications: An applicant may file a consolidated small
wireless facility permit application addressing the proposed collocation of up
to fifteen (15) small wireless facilities, or a greater number if agreed to by
a local government unit, provided that all small wireless facilities in the
application:
      1.   Are located within a two-mile radius;
      2.   Consist of substantially similar equipment; and
      3.   Are to be placed on similar types of wireless support structures.
In rendering a decision on a consolidated permit application, the City may
approve some small wireless facilities and deny others, but may not use denial
of one or more permits as a basis to deny all small wireless facilities in the
application.
   C.   Tolling Of Deadline: The 90-day deadline for action on a small wireless
facility permit application may be tolled if:
      1.   The City receives applications from one or more applicants seeking
approval of permits for more than thirty (30) small wireless facilities within
a seven-day period. In such case, the City may extend the deadline for all such
applications by thirty (30) days by informing the affected applicants in
writing of such extension.
      2.   The applicant fails to submit all required documents or information
and the City provides written notice of incompleteness to the applicant within
thirty (30) days of receipt of the application. Upon submission of additional
documents or information, the City shall have ten (10) days to notify the
applicant in writing of any still-missing information.
      3.   The City and a small wireless facility applicant agree in writing to
toll the review period. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-11: PERMIT FEES:
   A.   Excavation Permit Fee: The City shall impose an excavation permit fee
in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:
      1.   The City management costs;
      2.   Degradation costs, if applicable.
   B.   Obstruction Permit Fee: The City shall impose an obstruction permit fee
and shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the City management costs.
   C.   Small Wireless Facility Permit Fee: The City shall impose a small
wireless facility permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover:
      1.   Management costs, and;
      2.   City engineering, make-ready, and construction costs associated with
collocation of small wireless facilities.
   D.   Payment Of Permit Fees: No excavation permit or obstruction permit
shall be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit fees. The
City may allow applicant to pay such fees within thirty (30) days of billing.
   E.   Nonrefundable: Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the City
has revoked for a breach as stated in section
4-2-21 of this chapter are not refundable.
   F.   Application To Franchises: Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise,
management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to the
franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise.
   G.   Fee Resolution: Fees will be set from time to time by resolution by
City Council. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-12: PATCHING AND RESTORATION:
   A.   Timing: The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the
patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under
section
4-2-15 of this chapter or if the permittee is granted a new permit or
extension.
   B.   Patch And Restoration: Permittee shall patch its own work. The City may
choose either to have the permittee restore the right- of-way or to restore the
right-of-way itself.
      1.   City Restoration: If the City restores the right-of-way, permittee
shall pay the costs thereof within thirty (30) days of billing. If, following
such restoration, the pavement settles due to permittee's improper backfilling,
the permittee shall pay to the City, within thirty (30) days of billing, all
costs associated with correcting the defective work.
      2.   Permittee Restoration: If the permittee restores the right-of- way
itself, it shall at the time of application for an excavation permit post a
construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota
Rule 7819.3000.
      3.   Degradation Fee In Lieu Of Restoration: In lieu of right-of- way
restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation fee. However,
the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for patching and the degradation
fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these responsibilities.
   C.   Standards: The permittee shall perform excavation, backfilling,
patching and restoration according to the standards and with the materials
specified by the City and shall comply with Minnesota Rule 7819.1100.
   D.   Duty To Correct Defects: The permittee shall correct defects in
patching or restoration performed by permittee or its agents. The permittee
upon notification from the City, shall correct all restoration work to the
extent necessary, using the method required by the City. Said work shall be
completed within five (5) working days of the receipt of the notice from the
City (or such longer period as is specified by the City in the notice), not
including days during which work cannot be done because of circumstances
constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonable or
unreasonable under section
4-2-15 of this chapter.
   E.   Failure To Restore: If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way
in the manner and to the condition required by the City, or fails to
satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the City, the
City at its option may do such work. In that event the permittee shall pay to
the City, within thirty (30) days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-
of-way. If permittee fails to pay as required, the City may exercise its rights
under the construction performance bond. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-13: JOINT APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Joint Application: Registrants may jointly apply for permits to
excavate or obstruct the right-of-way at the same place and time.
   B.   Shared Fees: Registrants who apply for permits for the same obstruction
or excavation, which the City does not perform, may share in the payment of the
obstruction or excavation permit fee. In order to obtain a joint permit,
registrants must agree among themselves as to the portion each will pay and
indicate the same on their applications.
   C.   With City Projects: Registrants who join in a scheduled obstruction or
excavation performed by the City, whether it is a joint application by two (2)
or more registrants or a single application, are not required to pay the
excavation or obstruction and degradation portions of the permit fee, but a
permit is still required. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-14: SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Limitation On Area: A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area of
the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work outside
the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any permittee that
determines that an area greater than that specified in the permit must be
obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater area: 1) make
application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees required
thereby, and 2) be granted a new permit or permit extension.
   B.   Limitation On Dates: A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates
specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the permit
start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the end date.
If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must apply
for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new permit
or an extension of the old permit before working after the end date of the
previous permit. This supplementary application must be submitted before the
permit end date. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-15: OTHER OBLIGATIONS:
   A.   Compliance With Other Laws: Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not
relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses,
and authority and to pay all fees required by the City or other applicable
rule, law or regulation. A permittee shall comply with all requirements of
local, State and Federal laws, including, but not limited to, Minnesota
Statutes, section 216D.01 through .09 (Gopher One Call excavation notice
system) and Minnesota Rules chapter 7560. A permittee shall perform all work in
conformance with all applicable codes and established rules and regulations,
and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to its
permit, regardless of who does the work.
   B.   Prohibited Work: Except in an emergency, and with the approval of the
City, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be done when seasonally
prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work.
   C.   Interference With Right-Of-Way: A permittee shall not so obstruct a
right-of-way that the natural free and clear passage of water through the
gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with. Private vehicles of those
doing work in the right-of-way may not be parked within or next to a permit
area, unless parked in conformance with City parking regulations. The loading
or unloading of trucks must be done solely within the defined permit area
unless specifically authorized by the permit.
   D.   Trenchless Excavation: As a condition of all applicable permits,
permittees employing trenchless excavation methods, including, but not limited
to, horizontal directional drilling, shall follow all requirements set forth in
Minnesota Statutes, chapter 216D and Minnesota Rules chapter 7560, and shall
require potholing or open cutting over existing underground utilities before
excavating, as determined by the Director. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-16: DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   Reasons For Denial: The City may deny a permit for failure to meet the
requirements and conditions of this chapter or if the City determines that the
denial is necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when
necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use.
   B.   Procedural Requirements: The denial or revocation of a permit must be
made in writing and must document the basis for the denial. The City must
notify the applicant or right-of-way user in writing within three (3) business
days of the decision to deny or revoke a permit. If an application is denied,
the right-of-way user may address the reasons for denial identified by the City
and resubmit its application. If the application is resubmitted within thirty
(30) days of receipt of the notice of denial, no additional application fee
shall be imposed. The City must approve or deny the resubmitted application
within thirty (30) days after submission. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-17: INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS:
The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other work
performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with Minnesota Rules
7819.1100 and 7819.5000 and other applicable local requirements, insofar as
they are not inconsistent with the Minnesota Statutes, sections 237.162 and
237.163. Installation of service laterals shall be performed in accordance with
Minnesota Rules chapter 7560 and this Code. Service lateral installation is
further subject to those requirements and conditions set forth by the City in
the applicable permits and/or agreements referenced in subsection
4-2-22B of this chapter. Utility companies must install dual mains in all new
projects.
All traffic control will comply with the latest "Mn/DOT Field Traffic Control
Manual". (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-18: INSPECTION:
   A.   Notice Of Completion: When the work under any permit hereunder is
completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate to the City in
accordance with Minnesota Rule 7819.1300.
   B.   Site Inspection: Permittee shall make the work site available to the
City and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable
times during the execution of and upon completion of the work.
   C.   Authority Of Director:
      1.   At the time of inspection, the Director may order the immediate
cessation of any work that poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety
or well-being of the public.
      2.   The Director may issue an order to the permittee for any work that
does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards,
conditions, or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the
violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten (10) days
after issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the Director
that the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented
within the required time, the Director may revoke the permit pursuant to
section
4-2-21 of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-19: WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT:
   A.   Emergency Situations: Each registrant shall immediately notify the
Director of any event regarding its facilities that it considers to be an
emergency. The registrant must take whatever actions are necessary to respond
to the emergency. Excavators' notification to Gopher State One Call regarding
an emergency situation does not fulfill this requirement. Within two (2)
business days after the occurrence of the emergency, the registrant shall apply
for the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith, and fulfill the
rest of the requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this
chapter for the actions it took in response to the emergency. The permittee
requirements shall not apply if the repair is caused by another permittee's
work in the right-of-way.
If the City becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant's facilities,
the City will attempt to contact the local representative of each registrant
affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event, the City may
take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost
of which shall be borne by the registrant whose facilities occasioned the
emergency.
   B.   Nonemergency Situations: Except in an emergency, any person who,
without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a
right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit and, as a penalty, pay double
the normal fee for said permit, pay double all the other fees required by this
Code, deposit with the City the fees necessary to correct any damage to the
right-of-way, and comply with all of the requirements of this chapter. (Ord.
2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-20: SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION:
If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends
sooner than the date given on the permit, permittee shall notify the City of
the accurate information as soon as this information is known. (Ord. 2017-05,
11-21-2017)
4-2-21: REVOCATION OF PERMITS:
   A.   Substantial Breach: The City reserves its right, as provided herein, to
revoke any right-of-way permit without a fee refund, if there is a substantial
breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule or
regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial breach by
permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
      1.   The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
      2.   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-
of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit
upon the City or its citizens;
      3.   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a
right-of-way permit;
      4.   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner, unless a permit
extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to reasons
beyond the permittee's control; or
      5.   The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not
conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to section
4-2-18 of this chapter.
   B.   Written Notice Of Breach: If the City determines that the permittee has
committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute,
ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit, the City shall make
a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The demand shall
state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit. A
substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the City, at its discretion, to
place additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate and remedy the
breach.
   C.   Response To Notice Of Breach: Within five (5) working days of receiving
notification of the breach, permittee shall provide the City with a plan,
acceptable to the City, that will cure the breach. Permittee's failure to so
contact the City, or permittee's failure to timely submit an acceptable plan,
or permittee's failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be
cause for immediate revocation of the permit.
   D.   Reimbursement Of City Costs: If a permit is revoked, the permittee
shall also reimburse the City for the City's reasonable costs, including
restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorney fees and
other consultant fees incurred in connection with such revocation. (Ord. 2017-
05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-22: MAPPING DATA:
   A.   Information Required: Each registrant and permittee shall provide
mapping information required by the City in accordance with Minnesota Rules
7819.4000 and 7819.4100. Within one calendar year following completion of any
work pursuant to a permit, the permittee shall provide the Director accurate
maps or drawings certifying the "as built" location of all equipment installed,
owned and maintained by the permittee in both digital and hard copy. As built
drawings shall be submitted in the following forms:
      1.   Digital: CAD or GIS (dwg or shp).
      2.   Digital: Image file (pdf, jpg, etc.).
      3.   Hard copy.
Such maps or drawings shall include the horizontal and vertical location of all
facilities and equipment and shall be provided consistent with the City's
electronic mapping system, when practical or as a condition imposed by the
Director. Failure to provide maps or drawings pursuant to this subsection shall
be grounds for revoking the permit holder's registration.
   B.   Service Laterals: All permits issued for the installation or repair of
service laterals, other than minor repairs as defined in Minnesota Rules
7560.0150, subpart 2, shall require the permittee's use of appropriate means of
establishing the horizontal locations of installed service laterals, and the
service lateral vertical locations in those cases where the Director reasonably
requires it. Permittees or their subcontractors shall submit to the Director
evidence satisfactory to the Director of the installed service lateral
locations. Compliance with this subsection and with applicable Gopher State One
Call Law and Minnesota Rules governing service laterals installed after
December 31, 2005, shall be a condition of any City approval necessary for: 1)
payments to contractors working on a public improvement project including those
under Minnesota Statutes, chapter 429, and 2) City approval of performance
under development agreements, or other subdivision or site plan approval under
Minnesota Statutes, chapter 462. The Director shall reasonably determine the
appropriate method of providing such information to the City. Failure to
provide prompt and accurate information on the service laterals installed may
result in the revocation of the permit issued for the work or for future
permits to the offending permittee or its subcontractors.
   C.   As Builts: As builts will be required in hard copy and electronically
if the project permitted deviates two feet (2') or more from the original plans
submitted to the City. Failure to submit an as built will be a certification by
the permittee that the project as constructed does not deviate two feet (2') or
more from the original plan submitted. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-23: LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF FACILITIES:
   A.   Compliance: Placement, location, and relocation of facilities must
comply with the Act, with other applicable law, and with Minnesota Rules
7819.3100, 7819.5000 and 7819.5100, to the extent the rules do not limit
authority otherwise available to cities.
   B.   Corridors: The City may assign a specific area within the right-of-way,
or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of
facility that is or, pursuant to current technology, the City expects will
someday be located within the right-of-way. All excavation, obstruction, or
other permits issued by the City involving the installation or replacement of
facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue.
Any registrant who has facilities in the right-of-way in a position at variance
with the corridors established by the City shall, no later than at the time of
the next reconstruction or excavation of the area where the facilities are
located, move the facilities to the assigned position within the right-of-way,
unless this requirement is waived in writing by the City for good cause shown,
upon consideration of such factors as the remaining economic life of the
facilities, public safety, customer service needs and hardship to the
registrant.
   C.   Nuisance: One year after the passage of this chapter, any unregistered
facilities that are found in the right-of-way and that are required by this
chapter to be registered shall be deemed to be a nuisance. The City may
exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not
limited to, abating the nuisance or taking possession of the facilities and
restoring the right-of-way to a usable condition.
   D.   Limitation Of Space: To protect health, safety, and welfare, or when
necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use, the City shall have
the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional facilities
within the right-of- way. In making such decisions, the City shall strive to
the extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the
right-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public
interest, the public's needs for the particular utility service, the condition
of the right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the
protection of existing facilities in the right-of-way, and future City plans
for public improvements and development projects that have been determined to
be in the public interest. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-24: PREEXCAVATION FACILITIES LOCATION:
In addition to complying with the requirements of Minnesota Statutes 216D.01
through .09 ("One Call excavation notice system") before the start date of any
right-of-way excavation, each registrant who has facilities or equipment in the
area to be excavated shall mark the horizontal and the approximate vertical
placement (or assumed vertical placement if accurate data is not available) of
all said facilities. Any registrant whose facilities are less than twenty
inches (20") below a concrete or asphalt surface shall notify and work closely
with the excavation contractor to establish the exact location of its
facilities and the best procedure for excavation. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-25: DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES:
The provisions of Minnesota Statutes 216D shall apply to all situations
involving damages to facilities during excavation operations. Each registrant
shall be responsible for the cost of repairing or the value of damage to any
facilities in the right- of-way that it or its facilities damage. This
provision includes costs for damages to boulevard amenities, such as trees,
landscaping, irrigation systems and invisible fences, placed by property
owners. It is the registrant's responsibility to provide immediate notice of
such damages to the affected property owners. Each registrant shall be
responsible for the cost of repairing any damage to the facilities of another
registrant caused during the City's response to an emergency occasioned by that
registrant's facilities. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-26: VACATION:
If the City vacates a right-of-way that contains the facilities of a
registrant, the registrant's rights in the vacated right-of- way are governed
by Minnesota Rules 7819.3200. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-27: INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY:
By registering with the City, or by accepting a permit under this chapter, a
registrant or permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the City in accordance
with the provisions of Minnesota Rule 7819.1250. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-28: ABANDONED AND UNUSED FACILITIES:
   A.   Discontinued Operations: A registrant who has determined to discontinue
all or a portion of its operations in the City must provide information
satisfactory to the City that the registrant's obligations for its facilities
in the right-of-way under this chapter have been lawfully assumed by another
registrant.
   B.   Removal: Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-
way shall remove it from that right-of-way if required in conjunction with
other right-of-way repair, excavation, or construction, unless this requirement
is waived by the City. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-29: APPEAL:
A right-of-way user that: a) has been denied registration; b) has been denied a
permit; c) has had a permit revoked; d) believes that the fees imposed are not
in conformity with Minnesota Statutes, section 237.163, subdivision 6; or e)
disputes a determination of the Director regarding subsection
4-2-22B of this chapter may have the denial, revocation, fee imposition, or
decision reviewed, upon written request, by the City Council. The City Council
shall act on a timely written request within forty five (45) days of receipt,
provided the right-of-way user has submitted its appeal with sufficient time to
include the appeal as a regular agenda item. A decision by the City Council
affirming the denial, revocation, or fee imposition will be in writing and
supported by written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision.
(Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-30: SEVERABILITY:
If any portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions thereof. Nothing in this chapter precludes the City from
requiring a franchise agreement with the applicant, as allowed by law, in
addition to requirements set forth herein. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-21-2017)
4-2-31: WAIVER:
The City may waive any or all requirements of sections
4-2-5,
4-2-6,
4-2-7,
4-2-8,
4-2-9,
4-2-10,
4-2-11 and
4-2-22 of this chapter if compliance is not deemed reasonably necessary in the
discretion of the City Administrator or the Administrator's designee, to serve
the purposes of this chapter. The decision of the Administrator not to waive
any such requirements is not subject to appeal to the City Council. Waiver of
the provisions of sections
4-2-5,
4-2-6,
4-2-7 and
4-2-22 of this chapter may be rescinded by the City Administrator at any time
upon written notice to the person subject to the requirement. (Ord. 2017-05,
11-21-2017)
4-2-32: FRANCHISE REQUIRED:
After May 27, 2005, no permits will be issued for installation of gas pipes and
mains to entities that do not hold a current franchise from the City. This
prohibition does not apply to installation of gas transmission mains that are
not designed, intended or used for local service or local distribution, or to
installation of gas pipes and mains to serve areas of the City to which
existing gas franchisees cannot or will not extend service. (Ord. 2017-05, 11-
21-2017)
CHAPTER 3
PARKS, REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-3-1: Purpose And Intent
4-3-2: Definitions
4-3-3: Park Hours
4-3-4: City Park Reservations
4-3-5: Vehicle Use; Parking Regulations
4-3-6: Fire
4-3-7: Litter
4-3-8: Personal Property
4-3-9: Protection Of Property, Structures And Natural Resources
4-3-10: Liquor Restrictions
4-3-11: Animals
4-3-12: Golf
4-3-13: Restrooms
4-3-14: Public Sales
4-3-15: Posters And Advertisements
4-3-16: Glass
4-3-17: Weapons Prohibited
4-3-18: Violations; Penalties
4-3-19: Veterans Memorial
4-3-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the regulated use of and the
protection of life and property in or on city parks. (Ord. XVI.27, 2-1-1994)
4-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings given them:
CITY PARK: Any land owned by the city of Rosemount and designated as a park by
the city council by separate resolution.
LIQUOR: A beverage capable of inducing intoxication, including, but not limited
to, 3.2 beer, wine and wine coolers.
MOTORIZED VEHICLES: Any motor vehicle, whether designed for, used or capable of
use for travel, lodging, sport, amusement or recreation, whether or not
eligible to be licensed for use upon streets or highways, including, but not
limited to, automobiles, buses, trucks, tractor trailers, tractors, motorbikes,
motor scooters, minibikes, trail bikes, motorcycles, go-karts, hovercrafts,
snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles or dune buggies. (Ord. XVI.27, 2-1-1994)
4-3-3: PARK HOURS:
   A.   Closing Hours: Except as otherwise provided, parks shall be closed
between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of
the following day, and no person shall be upon city park property during these
hours.
   B.   Exceptions:
      1.   Persons shall be allowed upon city park property after closing hours
if they have a permit from the parks and recreation department.
      2.   Erickson park shall be closed at eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. rather
than ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
      3.   The city council may by resolution modify the closing hours as it
may deem appropriate.
      4.   City personnel may be in the parks at any time if acting in the
course of their official duties.
      5.   City personnel may assign special hours of use by posting at park
site. (Ord. XVI.27, 2-1-1994)
4-3-4: CITY PARK RESERVATIONS:
No person or group shall have exclusive use of all or any portion of a park
unless they have first reserved the property with the parks and recreation
department and procured a permit. Unless an exclusive use permit is procured,
use of the park property will be on first come, first served basis. (Ord.
XVI.27, 2-1-1994)
4-3-5: VEHICLE USE/PARKING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Use of motorized vehicle, including operation and parking, within city
parks shall be unlawful except upon roads or trails specifically designated for
such use.
   B.   No person shall operate or park a motorized vehicle within city parks
during hours when the park is closed unless authorized by permit issued by the
parks and recreation department.
   C.   No person shall park a motorized vehicle within city parks unless that
person is a patron of the park at that time or unless authorized by permit
issued by the parks and recreation department.
   D.   No person shall park a motorized vehicle on the east side of Brazil
Avenue within Erickson Park, unless authorized by permit issued by the parks
and recreation department. (Ord. XVI.27, 2-1-1994)
4-3-6: FIRE:
   A.   No person shall ignite a fire in any city park except in:
      1.   Barbecue grills provided. Charcoal fires are permitted in barbecue
grills only, no wood fires allowed.
      2.   Designated firepit in Central Park by permit authorized by the city
fire marshal.
   B.   No person igniting or attending a fire shall leave the area before the
fire has been completely extinguished.
   C.   City personnel upon authorization of the city fire marshal are able to
ignite fires with the use of various combustible materials. (Ord. B-241, 9-16-
2014)
4-3-7: LITTER:
No person shall litter any city park or any lake, pond or watercourse within or
draining into a city park with any form of trash or waste material. Such trash
or waste material shall be deposited in the proper receptacles when provided;
where receptacles are not provided, all trash or waste material shall be
carried away from the area by the person responsible for its presence. (Ord.
XVI.27, 2-1-1994)
4-3-8: PERSONAL PROPERTY:
No person shall leave or store personal property within any city park without
written permission from the parks and recreation department. (Ord. XVI.27, 2-1-
1994)
4-3-9: PROTECTION OF PROPERTY, STRUCTURES AND NATURAL RESOURCES:
   A.   Damaging Or Removing Property Prohibited: No person shall wilfully
deface, vandalize or otherwise cause destruction to city park property.
   B.   Flowers, Trees And Shrubs: No person shall wilfully and without
authority cut, pluck or otherwise injure any flowers, shrubs, trees or other
plant material growing in or around any city park. No person shall introduce
any form of vegetation within a park without permission from the parks and
recreation department.
   C.   Birds Or Animals: No person shall wilfully and without authority kill,
trap, hunt, pursue or in any manner disturb or interfere with any species of
wildlife in any city park without permission from the parks and recreation
department. No person shall release any insect, fish or animal in any city park
without permission from the parks and recreation department.
   D.   Restitution: In addition to other penalties, any person violating the
provisions of this section shall make restitution to the parks and recreation
department for the full value of the damage caused, including, but not limited
to, the cost of repairs, replacement and labor. (Ord. XVI.27, 2-1-1994)
4-3-10: LIQUOR RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Possession And Consumption Restricted: The possession and/or
consumption of liquor in any city park shall be prohibited except as provided
in subsection B of this section.
   B.   Use In Parks: "Wine" and "3.2 percent malt liquor", as defined in
Minnesota statutes, section 340A.101, may be possessed or consumed, but only in
the following city parks or areas of city parks:
      1.   All areas of Erickson Park.
      2.   City parks with shelters, by permit only, obtained through the parks
and recreation department, provided that consumption and possession of beer and
wine is limited to areas within fifty feet (50') of a shelter.
      3.   No glass bottles are allowed in the parks.
   C.   Sale Of Liquor In Erickson Park: With the approval of the city council,
a license may be issued for the sale of "3.2 percent malt liquor" as defined in
Minnesota statutes, section 340A.101, only in Erickson Park. If a license is
issued, it must be posted in a conspicuous place in the premises selling the
3.2 percent malt liquor. (Ord. XVI.30, 4-4-1995)
4-3-11: ANIMALS 1 :
   A.   Proper Restraint: A dog or cat is considered to be under restraint on
city park property only when it is controlled with the use of a leash no longer
than ten feet (10') or when it is under voice or signal command in the exercise
areas designated by the city.
   B.   Feces Removal: All persons in control of an animal on city park
property shall have in his/her possession at all times apparatus which can be
used for cleaning up feces and/or a bag for proper disposal of feces. The
person in control of an animal is responsible for picking up his/her animal's
feces and disposing of it properly.
   C.   Proper Control: No person shall permit a dog or other animal to
disturb, harass or interfere with or endanger any visitor or visitor's
property. No person shall tether and leave unattended any dog or animal to a
tree, plant, building or city park equipment.
   D.   Special Events: No animals under human control shall be allowed on the
Carrolls Woods Trails during the parks and recreation sponsored Halloween
Haunted Woods event, except lead dogs for the sight impaired persons. (Ord.
XVI.27, 2-1-1994)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 7, chapter 4 of this code.
4-3-12: GOLF:
No person shall play the game of golf or engage in putting, practice swinging
or the striking of any golf balls in any city park. (Ord. XVI.27, 2-1-1994)
4-3-13: RESTROOMS:
Every person shall cooperate in maintaining restrooms, washrooms and other
sanitation facilities in a neat, orderly and sanitary condition. No person
shall use the restrooms and washrooms designed and designated for members of
the opposite sex, except for children who may be accompanied by an adult when
deemed appropriate. (Ord. XVI.27, 2-1-1994)
4-3-14: PUBLIC SALES:
No person shall expose or offer for sale, rent or hire any article or thing or
conduct any commercial enterprise within a city park unless that person has
obtained a permit from the parks and recreation department. (Ord. XVI.27, 2-1-
1994)
4-3-15: POSTERS AND ADVERTISEMENTS:
   A.   No person shall post, glue, tack or otherwise affix any sign, placard,
advertisement or other inscription whatsoever to public property within any
city park.
   B.   No person shall distribute or disseminate leaflets, pamphlets or other
written or printed material, or use loudspeakers or other amplifying systems,
in any city park without a permit from the parks and recreation department.
(Ord. XVI.27, 2-1-1994)
4-3-16: GLASS:
No person shall bring glass containers of any kind into any city parks,
including, but not be limited to, beverage containers, drinking glasses, etc.
(Ord. XVI.27, 2-1-1994)
4-3-17: WEAPONS PROHIBITED:
The use or possession of "firearms", as defined in title 7, chapter 5 of this
code, within the city parks is prohibited, except the use of archery equipment
in designated archery ranges. (Ord. XVI.27, 2-1-1994)
4-3-18: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as
described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
4-3-19: VETERANS MEMORIAL:
Pursuant to Minnesota statutes, section 416.01, the city council is authorized
to erect, equip, maintain, supervise and control the veterans memorial monument
and the Rosemount veterans memorial walk project in Central Park in recognition
of the services performed by soldiers, sailors, marines and war veterans of the
United States. (Ord. XXI.20, 8-18-2009)
CHAPTER 4
SNOW REMOVAL ON SIDEWALKS
SECTION:
4-4-1: Snow Removal
4-4-1-1: Violation
4-4-2: Notice
4-4-2-1: Service Of Notice
4-4-3: Nuisance
4-4-3-1: Assessment Of Costs
4-4-4: Penalty
4-4-1: SNOW REMOVAL:
Removal of snow and ice from trails and sidewalks in the city shall be the
responsibility of the abutting property owners or occupants. Snow and ice shall
be removed within forty eight (48) hours after the snow or ice has accumulated.
In unusual circumstances and when determined by the council to be in the best
interest of the public, the council may, by resolution, suspend the obligation
of property owners or occupants to remove snow and ice in all, or any part, of
the city. On trails and sidewalks specified in the city's snowplowing policy
and on trails and sidewalks where the city is the abutting property owner, snow
and ice shall be removed in accordance with the city's snowplowing policy.
(Ord. 2011-01, 1-4-2011)
4-4-1-1: VIOLATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit snow from private property upon
any public street or public right of way within the city. (Ord. 4, 12-4-1984)
4-4-2: NOTICE:
If the snow and ice are not removed as required in section
4-4-1 of this chapter, the city may serve upon the owner or occupant a notice
ordering removal of the snow and ice within twenty four (24) hours. (Ord. 4,
12-4-1984)
4-4-2-1: SERVICE OF NOTICE:
Service of notice may be accomplished by personal service upon the owner or
occupant, or by leaving such notice with a person of suitable age and
discretion on the premises. (Ord. 4, 12-4-1984)
4-4-3: NUISANCE:
Snow and ice which is allowed to remain on trails and sidewalks within the city
for a longer period of time than forty eight (48) hours after the same falls,
gathers or accumulates is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and the city may
remove the snow and ice and charge the cost of the removal against the abutting
property. (Ord. XII.16, 1-16-1996; amd. Ord. 2011-01, 1-4-2011)
4-4-3-1: ASSESSMENT OF COSTS:
Following such snow and ice removal, the cost of removal shall be set from time
to time by city council resolution. In accordance with Minnesota statutes,
section 429.101, the city council shall assess the cost against the abutting
property owner. (Ord. XII.16, 1-16-1996)
4-4-4: PENALTY:
Any person who violates section
4-4-1-1 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as
described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
CHAPTER 5
LARGE PUBLIC GATHERINGS ON CITY PARK LAND
SECTION:
4-5-1: Purpose
4-5-2: Definitions
4-5-3: License Requirements
4-5-4: Application For License
4-5-5: License Fees
4-5-6: Conditions Of Approval
4-5-7: Additional Regulations
4-5-8: Penalty
4-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the assembly of large
numbers of persons on city park land and to establish regulations that promote
the health, safety and welfare of large public gatherings organized on city
park land. (Ord. 2013-01, 4-16-2013)
4-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
"Large assembly" means a gathering numbering five hundred (500) or more
persons; or actions by one or more persons the intention of which is to attract
and assemble a gathering of persons in excess of five hundred (500) persons at
a single time on city park land. (Ord. 2013-01, 4-16-2013)
4-5-3: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
No person shall permit, maintain, promote, conduct, advertise, manage, sell,
barter or give tickets to an actual or reasonably anticipated assembly of five
hundred (500) or more people on city park land unless a license to hold the
assembly has been first issued as provided herein. The license may be issued by
the director of parks and recreation or the director's designee for assemblies
of between five hundred (500) and one thousand two hundred (1,200) if the
assembly is a baseball tournament, soccer tournament, softball tournament,
lacrosse tournament or football tournament. The license may be issued only by
the city council in all other cases or if the director declines to issue a
license for the assembly. In addition to the license required herein, the
applicant must possess and submit to the city any other necessary state, county
or city licenses and/or permits necessary to carry on the assembly. (Ord. 2013-
01, 4-16-2013)
4-5-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
The application for a large assembly license shall be made in writing and filed
with the city clerk no less than sixty (60) days in advance of the proposed
date for the large assembly, upon forms provided by the city clerk. The
application shall contain, without limitation, the following information:
   A.   The name, age, residence, social security number and mailing address of
the applicant, if an individual, all partners if a partnership and all officers
of the corporation if the applicant is a corporation.
   B.   A full description of the nature, purpose and extent of the proposed
large assembly.
   C.   The maximum number of persons that the proposed large assembly will
attract at any given time, together with the dates and hours during which the
proposed large assembly will be conducted.
   D.   A full description of plans for sound amplification and sound control
to be utilized by the applicant.
   E.   Plans for food or other concessions that will be provided.
   F.   A detailed plan to ensure waste disposal, sanitary facilities,
inspections of vehicle or equipment, postevent cleanup and other necessary
precautions to prevent pollution to land or ponds.
   G.   All other information required or requested by the city council or the
parks and recreation department. (Ord. 2013-01, 4-16-2013)
4-5-5: LICENSE FEES:
The license fee shall be set from time to time by city council resolution.
   A.   The license fee shall be nonrefundable.
   B.   As a condition of granting a license the city may require the licensee
to make a cash deposit with the city clerk. The cash deposit shall be used to
guarantee payment by the applicant of the city's costs for planning,
sanitation, health, traffic control, law enforcement services and other city
costs that are directly attributable to the large assembly. (Ord. 2013-01, 4-
16-2013)
4-5-6: CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
The city may impose any condition reasonably required to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the general public and the persons assembled. A violation
of any of the conditions shall be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-01,
4-16-2013)
4-5-7: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
The following regulations must be complied with:
   A.   No person granted a license pursuant to this chapter shall gain a
vested right to obtain such licenses in the future.
   B.   By making application, the applicant consents to permitting officers
and agents of the city to enter the event area at all times to investigate the
activities and to determine whether the conditions of the license and all
applicable laws are being complied with.
   C.   A surety bond or other financial guarantee approved as to form by the
city clerk in an amount deemed sufficient by the city to guarantee performance
by the applicant of the conditions may be imposed by the city in granting the
large assembly license.
   D.   A comprehensive general liability insurance policy, naming the city as
an additional insured, covering any and all damages, claims or other
liabilities arising out of the operation of the large assembly whether incurred
by the city or by any other association or person. This condition does not
apply to government agencies.
   E.   No person holding a large assembly license shall permit and no
participant in a large assembly shall remain overnight at the location of a
large assembly, except for a reasonable number of persons required for security
purposes. (Ord. 2013-01, 4-16-2013)
4-5-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as described in title 1, chapter
4 of this code. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
CHAPTER 6
STREET LIGHTING
ARTICLE A. STREET LIGHTING SYSTEM
SECTION:
4-6A-1: Policy And Purpose
4-6A-2: Establishment Of Street Lighting Utility
4-6A-3: Liability
4-6A-4: Application
4-6A-5: Definitions
4-6A-6: Supervision By Public Works Director/City Engineer
4-6A-7: Authority
4-6A-8: Penalty
4-6A-1: POLICY AND PURPOSE:
The City Council has determined that it is in the best interests of the
residents of the City to operate a Street Lighting System in the City to
promote the general health, safety, and welfare of the residents pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes § 412.221, Subdivision 7. In order to pay the costs of the
establishment, construction, repair, replacement, maintenance, enlargement, and
improvement of the Street Lighting System, it is hereby determined by the City
Council that every parcel of property, whether residential, commercial,
institutional, or industrial, benefiting from the safety and convenience of the
Street Lighting System shall pay a street light utility charge. It is further
determined to be the policy of the City that payment for said services shall be
established and collected in a fair, reasonable, and equitable basis. (Ord.
2019-01, 11-19-2019)
4-6A-2: ESTABLISHMENT OF STREET LIGHTING UTILITY:
There is hereby established a street light utility for the purpose of paying
the costs of the establishment, construction, repair, replacement, maintenance,
enlargement, and improvement of the Street Lighting System and to charge for
and collect the costs thereof from the Benefiting Properties pursuant to
authority in Minnesota Statutes § 429.101. (Ord. 2019-01, 11-19-2019)
4-6A-3: LIABILITY:
The City shall not be liable for injury or damage to persons or property caused
by any deficiency or failure in supply of electricity for the Street Lighting
System whether occasioned by shutting off the system for the purpose of making
repairs or connections, weather-related incidents, or from any other cause
whatsoever. (Ord. 2019-01, 11-19-2019)
4-6A-4: APPLICATION:
No statement contained in this Chapter shall be construed to interfere with any
additional requirements that may be imposed by any other entity. In addition,
no statement in this Chapter shall be construed as preventing any special
agreement or arrangement between the City and an individual User. (Ord. 2019-
01, 11-19-2019)
4-6A-5: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise provided here, the definitions in Title 1, Chapter 3 of this
Code apply to the terms in this Chapter.
 
                        Any property as established by a map prepared by the
BENEFITING PROPERTY:    City Engineer depicting property served by the street
                        lighting system, excluding property described in Title
                        4, Chapter 6, Article B, Section 6.
                        All systems, works, instrumentalities, equipment,
                        materials, supplies, lights, poles, wires, cables,
STREET LIGHTING SYSTEM: conduits, and all other parts and appurtenances of the
                        foregoing which are useful or used in connection with
                        the operation and maintenance of the street lights.
USER:                   The owner and occupant of any Benefiting Property.
                        (Ord. 2019-01, 11-19-2019)
 
4-6A-6: SUPERVISION BY PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR/CITY ENGINEER:
The Public Works Director/City Engineer, or designee, shall have control and
general supervision of the Street Lighting System including service connectors
in the City. The Public Works Director/City Engineer shall be responsible for
administering the provisions of this Chapter to the end such that a proper and
efficient Street Lighting System is maintained. (Ord. 2019-01, 11-19-2019)
4-6A-7: AUTHORITY:
   A.   Access: The Public Works Director/City Engineer, or other duly
authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification,
shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of, but not limited
to, inspection, observations, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of
any portion of the City's Street Lighting System in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter.
   B.   Tampering: No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance, or equipment which is part of the Street Lighting System.
   C.   Safety: While performing necessary work on the Street Lighting System
the Public Works Director/City Engineer, or duly authorized employees of the
City, shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises. (Ord. 2019-01,
11-19-2019)
4-6A-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall become liable
to the City for any expense, loss, or damage sustained by the City by reason of
that violation. In addition, any person found to be violating any provisions of
this Chapter shall be served by the City with written notice stating the nature
of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period stated in the notice,
permanently cease all violations. Any person who shall continue any violation
beyond the specified time limit shall be punished as provided in Title 1,
Chapter 4. Each day in which any violation occurs shall be deemed as a separate
offense. (Ord. 2019-01, 11-19-2019)
ARTICLE B. STREET LIGHTING CHARGE SYSTEM AND STREET LIGHT UTILITY FUND
SECTION:
4-6B-1: Fund Established
4-6B-2: Administration
4-6B-3: Rates And Charges
4-6B-4: Billing
4-6B-5: Non Payment
4-6B-6: Exemptions
4-6B-1: FUND ESTABLISHED:
   A.   The City hereby establishes a Street Lighting Charge System to recover
costs associated with the operation, maintenance, and replacement of the Street
Lighting System. The Street Lighting Charge System will be administered in
accordance with Title 4, Chapter 6, Article B, Section 2.
   B.   The City hereby establishes the Street Light Utility Fund as a separate
and dedicated income fund to receive all revenues generated by the Street
Lighting Charge System, and all other income dedicated to the operation,
maintenance, and replacement of the Street Lighting System. The Street Light
Utility Fund will be administered in accordance with the provisions of Title 4,
Chapter 6, Article B, Section 2. (Ord. 2019-01, 11-19-2019)
4-6B-2: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   In accordance with federal and state requirements, the City Finance
Director, or designee, shall maintain records necessary to document compliance
with the Street Lighting Charge System. The City Finance Director shall be
responsible for maintaining a proper system of accounts suitable for
determining the operation, maintenance, and replacement costs of the Street
Lighting System.    
   B.   All revenue collected from Users of the Street Lighting System will be
used to off-set all expenditures incurred for annual operation, maintenance,
and replacement of the Street Lighting System.
   C.   All revenue generated by the Street Lighting Charge System, and all
other income pertinent to the Street Lighting System, shall be deposited in the
Street Light Utility Fund.
   D.   The City Council shall annually determine whether or not sufficient
revenue is being generated for the effective operation, maintenance,
replacement, and management of the Street Lighting System. The City Council
shall also determine whether the User charges are distributed proportionally to
each User in accordance with Title 4, Chapter 6, Article B, Section 3. The City
shall thereafter, but not later than the end of the year, reassess and as
necessary revise the Street Lighting Charge System then in use to ensure the
proportionality of the User charges and to ensure the sufficiency of funds to
maintain the City and performance to which the facilities were constructed.
(Ord. 2019-01, 11-19-2019)
4-6B-3: RATES AND CHARGES:
   A.   Each User shall pay its proportionate share of operation, maintenance,
and replacement costs of the Street Lighting System.
   B.   Street lighting charges shall be determined and fixed according to the
provisions of this Chapter and established in the City's Fee Schedule. The Fee
Schedule may be amended from time to time to include subsequent changes in
street lighting rates and charges.
   C.   Any additional costs caused by intentional, willful, or malicious
damage to the Street Lighting System, shall be borne by the offender, at no
expense to the City.
   D.   Installation Costs: The City may pay such portion of the costs of
installation of the Street Lighting System as the City Council may determine
from general ad valorem tax levies or from other revenues or funds of the City
available for that purpose. In the event the City Council elects not to pay all
of the installation costs, the remaining unpaid portion shall be assessed
against the Benefiting Property owners as a public improvement following a
public hearing and in full accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Statutes
Chapter 429.
   E.   Rates due and payable by Users, if any, located beyond the territorial
boundaries of the City shall be determined by special contract. (Ord. 2019-01,
11-19-2019)
4-6B-4: BILLING:
   A.   Bills for street lighting charges shall be issued on a quarterly basis,
in conjunction with water and sewer billings, to all Benefiting Properties.
Bills are due and payable on or before the 20th day of the month following the
month in which the bill is sent.
   B.   All payments received after the close of business on the 20th day of
the month will be assessed a penalty as defined by ordinance. Any prepayment or
overpayment of charges may be retained by the City and applied on subsequent
charges.
   C.   All bills and notices shall be mailed or delivered to the address of
the Benefiting Property's owner. If a Benefiting Property's owner is not the
occupant of the Benefiting Property, the owner may provide notice to the City
that bills and notices should be sent to the non-owner occupant at the address
where service is provided. (Ord. 2019-01, 11-19-2019)
4-6B-5: NON PAYMENT:
Any street lighting charges unpaid shall be certified when deemed appropriate
by the City and assessed against the Benefiting Property on which the charges
have incurred, and forwarded to the County Auditor for collection with property
taxes. (Ord. 2019-01, 11-19-2019)
4-6B-6: EXEMPTIONS:
All public right of way, City-owned property and vacant land parcels shall be
exempt from street light utility charges. (Ord. 2019-01, 11-19-2019)
TITLE 5
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
SOLID WASTE
SECTION:
5-1-1: Definitions
5-1-2: General Provisions And Municipal Solid Waste Abatement Program
5-1-3: Container Requirements
5-1-4: Open Burning Prohibited
5-1-5: Collector Regulations
5-1-6: Collection Vehicle Regulations
5-1-7: Collection Requirements, Regulations
5-1-8: Animal Carcass Disposal
5-1-9: Penalty
5-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
                                       The kitchen, food preparation,
                                       dishwashing, and storage areas of a
BACK-OF-HOUSE:                         commercial generator or large event
                                       venue with organics that are not
                                       accessed by customers or the public.
                                       Wood that has not been treated, coated,
CLEAN WOOD:                            or glued (plywood, oriented strand
                                       board, etc.), including yard waste.
COMMERCIAL OR COMMERCIAL GENERATOR:    An entity that is not a residential
                                       source generator.
                                       The controlled biological decomposition
                                       and management of selected solid waste
COMPOSTING:                            to produce an innocuous, humus-like
                                       material, which can be used as a soil
                                       conditioner.
                                       Any material that is primarily organic
                                       and can be decomposed through biological
                                       activity. Compostable plastics or lined
COMPOSTABLE MATERIAL:                  papers must meet ASTM D6400 and ASTM
                                       D6868, respectively, as certified by the
                                       Biodegradable Product Institute or other
                                       similar independent certification
                                       bodies.
                                       Waste building materials, packaging and
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS:                   rubble resulting from construction,
                                       remodeling, and repair.
                                       A list of contaminants approved by the
DESIGNATED LIST OF CONTAMINANTS:       Dakota County Board of Commissioners and
                                       published on the Dakota County Website.
                                       A list of organic material types
                                       suitable for commercial composting
DESIGNATED LIST OF ORGANICS:           approved by the Dakota County Board of
                                       Commissioners and published on the
                                       Dakota County website.
                                       A list of recyclable materials types
                                       approved by the Dakota County Board of
                                       Commissioners and published on the
                                       Dakota County website that represents
DESIGNATED LIST OF RECYCLABLES:        the minimum haulers must accept and
                                       generators must recycle. Generators,
                                       facilities and haulers will have six
                                       months to implement any changes after it
                                       is published.
                                       A bag used to co-collect organics with
                                       mixed municipal solid waste for the
                                       purposes of separating the organics for
                                       composting or anaerobic digestion. The
DURABLE COMPOSTABLE BAG:               durable compostable bags must meet ASTM
                                       standards D6400 or D6868 and be
                                       sufficiently durable to contain the
                                       organics through the collection and
                                       separation process.
                                       The required area for storage of waste
                                       containers between the times of
ENCLOSURE:                             scheduled collection. This area must
                                       conform to the requirements of
                                       subsection
                                       5-1-3(A)(3) of this chapter.
                                       Discharge, deposit, injection,
                                       uncontrolled dumping, spilling, leaking,
                                       or placing of any solid waste or any
FINAL DISPOSAL:                        constituent thereof that may enter the
                                       environment or be emitted into the air
                                       or discharged into any waters, including
                                       ground waters.
                                       Discarded material resulting from the
GARBAGE:                               handling, processing, storage,
                                       preparation, serving and consumption of
                                       food.
                                       The act or process of producing solid
GENERATE:                              waste, including the production or
                                       aggregation of waste occurring at an
                                       intermediate disposal facility.
GENERATOR:                             Any person whose actions or process(es)
                                       produce solid waste.
                                       Any person, other than an individual
HAULER:                                resident hauling his or her own
                                       household waste, who collects or
                                       transports any solid waste.
                                       Any refuse, sludge, spent solutions or
                                       other waste material or combinations of
                                       refuse, sludge, spent solutions or other
                                       waste materials in solid, semi-solid,
                                       liquid or contained gaseous form which,
                                       because of its quantity, concentrations,
                                       or chemical, physical or infectious
                                       characteristics may: (a) cause or
                                       significantly contribute to an increase
                                       in mortality or an increase in serious
                                       irreversible or incapacitating
HAZARDOUS WASTE:                       reversible illness; or (b) pose a
                                       substantial present or potential hazard
                                       to human health or the environment when
                                       improperly treated, stored, transported
                                       or disposed of, or otherwise managed.
                                       Categories of hazardous waste materials
                                       include, but are not limited to,
                                       explosives, flammables, oxidizers,
                                       poisons, irritants and corrosives.
                                       Hazardous waste does not include source,
                                       special nuclear, or by-product material
                                       as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of
                                       1954, as amended.
                                       All solid waste generated from an
                                       industrial or manufacturing process, and
                                       solid waste generated from non-
                                       manufacturing activities such as service
                                       and commercial establishments and
INDUSTRIAL WASTE:                      chemical and debris contaminated soil
                                       from spills; property clean up, and
                                       development activities. Industrial waste
                                       does not include office materials,
                                       restaurant and food preparation waste,
                                       discarded machinery, demolition waste,
                                       or household waste.
                                       Solid waste that has the meaning given
                                       to it in Minnesota Statutes, Section
                                       116.76. Infectious waste includes
INFECTIOUS WASTE:                      laboratory waste, blood, regulated body
                                       fluids, sharps, and research animal
                                       wastes that have not been
                                       decontaminated.
                                       A public gathering of at least 300
                                       people that generates at least one ton
                                       of municipal solid waste or contracts
                                       for eight cubic yards or more per
LARGE EVENT VENUE WITH ORGANICS:       location and generates organics in the
                                       back-of-house. Examples include but are
                                       not limited to: concerts, fairs,
                                       festivals, community events, athletic
                                       tournaments, and parades.
                                       The following commercial generator
                                       classifications that generate one ton or
                                       more of municipal solid waste per week
                                       or contract for eight cubic yards or
                                       more per week per location, and
                                       generates organics in the back-of-house:
                                       restaurants; grocery stores; food
                                       wholesalers, distributors and
                                       manufacturers; hotels; hospitals; sports
                                       venues; event centers; caterers; nursing
LARGE COMMERCIAL ORGANICS GENERATOR:   and residential care facilities; office
                                       buildings with dining services; farmers
                                       markets; food shelves and food banks;
                                       schools, colleges, and universities with
                                       dining services; shopping centers;
                                       airports; golf clubs and country clubs;
                                       and public/rental kitchens or shared-use
                                       commercial kitchens; and other
                                       businesses identified by Dakota County
                                       as a large commercial organics
                                       generator.
                                       Garbage, refuse, and other solid waste
                                       from residential, commercial,
                                       industrial, and community activities
                                       that the generator of the waste
                                       aggregates for collection but does not
MIXED MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE, MUNICIPAL include auto hulks, street sweepings,
SOLID WASTE, or TRASH:                 ash, construction debris, mining waste,
                                       sludges, tree and agricultural wastes,
                                       tires, lead-acid batteries, motor or
                                       vehicle fluids and filters, and other
                                       materials collected, processed, and
                                       disposed of as separate waste streams.
MULTI-UNIT RESIDENTIAL BUILDING:       Any building with four or more
                                       residential units.
                                       Any incorporated city or township within
                                       the boundaries of Dakota County,
MUNICIPALITY:                          Minnesota, or a combination thereof that
                                       are included in an agreement for
                                       purposes of solid waste management.
                                       The person(s) responsible for managing
OPERATOR:                              the day-to-day physical handling of
                                       solid waste at a particular site or
                                       facility.
                                       Food waste and the designated list of
ORGANIC MATERIAL or ORGANICS:          organics published on the Dakota County
                                       Website.
                                       Any human being, any municipality or
                                       other governmental or political
                                       subdivision, or other public agency, any
                                       public or private corporation, any
PERSON:                                partnership, firm, association, or other
                                       organization, any receiver, trustee,
                                       assignee, agent, or other legal
                                       representative of any of the foregoing,
                                       or any other legal entity.
                                       When referring to solid waste, means the
                                       treatment of solid waste after
                                       collection and before final disposal,
                                       and includes all activities after the
                                       time the waste is delivered to a
                                       processing facility. Processing
                                       includes, but is not limited to:
PROCESSING:                            storage; reduction; containment;
                                       separation; exchange; resource recovery;
                                       physical, chemical, or biological
                                       modification; and subsequent transfer
                                       from one solid waste facility to
                                       another. The storage of solid waste, in
                                       and of itself, does not constitute the
                                       treatment of waste necessary to meet
                                       this definition.
                                       Materials that are suitable for
                                       separating from solid waste for the
                                       purpose of recycling including, but not
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS OR RECYCLABLES:   limited to, paper, glass, plastics,
                                       metals, automobile oil, and batteries.
                                       Refuse derived fuel or other material
                                       that is destroyed by incineration is not
                                       a recyclable material.
                                       The process of collecting and preparing
                                       recyclable materials and reusing the
                                       materials in their original form or
RECYCLING:                             using them in manufacturing processes
                                       that do not cause the destruction of
                                       recyclable material in a manner that
                                       precludes further use.
REFUSE:                                Something rejected or discarded as
                                       worthless or useless.
RESIDENTIAL or RESIDENTIAL SOURCE:     Any source from a residential building.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING:                  A single family home or a building with
                                       residential units.
                                       A program targeted for collection of
RESIDENTIAL RECYCLING:                 recyclable materials from a residential
                                       building.
                                       Any waste hauler making regularly
RESIDENTIAL HAULER:                    scheduled collections of solid waste or
                                       recyclables from single- and multi-
                                       family residences.
                                       The reclamation for sale, use, or reuse
                                       of materials, substances, energy, or
RESOURCE RECOVERY:                     other products contained within or
                                       derived from waste, including, but not
                                       limited to energy recovery, processing,
                                       and composting facilities.
                                       A system of collecting recyclable
SINGLE SORT RECYCLING:                 materials from the same container
                                       without requiring the materials to be
                                       sorted or separated.
                                       Garbage, refuse, sludge from a water
                                       supply treatment plant or air
                                       containment treatment facility, and
                                       other discarded waste materials and
                                       sludges, in solid, semisolid, liquid, or
                                       contained gaseous form, resulting from
                                       industrial, commercial, mining and
                                       agricultural operations, and from
                                       community activities, but does not
                                       include hazardous waste, animal waste
                                       used as fertilizer, earthen fill,
SOLID WASTE:                           boulders, rock, sewage sludge, solid or
                                       dissolved material in domestic sewage or
                                       other common pollutants in water
                                       resources, such as silt, dissolved or
                                       suspended solids in industrial waste
                                       water effluents or discharges which are
                                       point sources subject to permits under
                                       section 402 of the federal Water
                                       Pollution Control Act, as amended,
                                       dissolved materials in irrigation return
                                       flows, or source, special nuclear, or
                                       by-product material as defined by The
                                       Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended.
SOLID WASTE ABATEMENT OR SOLID WASTE   A program for reducing, reusing, and
ABATEMENT PROGRAM:                     recycling solid waste.
                                       The standardized solid waste abatement
SOLID WASTE ABATEMENT MESSAGING:       education messaging developed by Dakota
                                       County and published on the Dakota
                                       County Website.
                                       The process whereby generators separate,
                                       from mixed municipal solid waste,
SOURCE SEPARATION:                     materials that will be reused, recycled,
                                       used as substitutes for raw material in
                                       a manufacturing process, or converted
                                       into a usable soil amendment.
                                       Materials removed from streets,
                                       sidewalks, parking lots, and roadways
                                       during routine cleaning by a sweeping
STREET SWEEPINGS:                      operation consisting of sand, sealcoat,
                                       tree waste and debris. Street sweepings
                                       do not include any material originating
                                       from an industrial spill or contaminated
                                       area.
                                       Any container designed and used to
WASTE CONTAINER:                       contain or store solid waste and
                                       recyclables.
                                       Garden wastes, leaves, lawn cuttings,
                                       weeds, shrub and tree waste, and
YARD WASTE:                            prunings generated at residential,
                                       commercial, or public properties. (Ord.
                                       XVI.59, 12-2-2008; amd. Ord. 2021-02, 1-
                                       5-2021)
 
5-1-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS AND MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE ABATEMENT PROGRAM:
   A.   Intent: It is the intent of this Section to be consistent and no less
restrictive than the Dakota County Solid Waste Master Plan and the same or
similar provisions provided by Section 3.01 and Sections 16.01 through 16.06 of
the Dakota County Ordinance No. 110 on Solid Waste Management, as may be
amended.
   B.   General Disposal Requirements:
      1.   Collection Required: It shall be unlawful for any property owner,
business owner, manager, resident, or tenant to fail to dispose of solid waste,
recyclables, and yard waste in a sanitary manner at least weekly, with the
following exceptions:
         a.   Residential Recycling: Recyclable materials from residential
sources where each household has its own recycling container for collection
shall be collected by a licensed residential hauler no less frequently than
every-other-week;
         b.   Composting: Compostable materials may be composted if such
composting meets the standards set forth in Chapter 4 of this title and the
Dakota County Ordinance No. 110 on Solid Waste Management; and
         c.   Any other exception provided in this Chapter or the Dakota County
Ordinance No. 110 on Solid Waste Management.
      2.   Compliance with County Ordinance: All property owners, business
owners, managers, residents, and tenants shall otherwise comply with the
generator requirements listed at Section 3.01 of the Dakota County Ordinance
No. 110 on Solid Waste Management.
   C.   Multi-Unit Residential Buildings: Property owners of multi-unit
residential buildings shall comply with the requirements of Section 16.03(A)
(1)-(4) of the Dakota County Ordinance No. 110 on Solid Waste Management, as
may be amended, which are hereby adopted by reference and made part of this
Chapter.
   D.   Trash, Recycling, and Organics Requirements for Large Event Venues:
Event sponsors, owners, and operators of large event venues shall comply with
the trash, recycling, and organics requirements of Section 16.05 of the Dakota
County Ordinance No. 110 on Solid Waste Management, as may be amended, which
are hereby adopted by reference and made part of this Chapter
   E.   Labeling: Property owners and managers shall comply with the labeling
requirements of Section 16.06 of the Dakota County Ordinance No. 110 on Solid
Waste Management, as may be amended, which are hereby adopted by reference and
made part of this Chapter. (Ord. XVI.59, 12-2-2008; amd. Ord. 2021-02, 1-5-
2021)
5-1-3: CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Use Required, Description:
      1.   Tightly Closed Containers: All solid waste and recyclables
accumulating between the times of collection shall be placed in tightly closed
containers specifically designed for such purpose.
         a.   Exceptions:
            (1)   All composting must occur in a container constructed of wood,
wire mesh, concrete block, or a combination thereof, or in a commercially
available compost bin designated for composting organic waste.
            (2)   Yard waste may be composted or placed in bags designed for
such purposes.
      2.   Placement; Enclosure: All waste containers shall be kept in an
enclosure that meets the requirements of subsection A3 of this section, until
the day of scheduled pick up.
         a.   Placement: Waste containers may be placed at the curb for
collection the evening before the scheduled day of collection and must be
removed from the curb area and stored as required on the evening of the day of
collection.
         b.   Exception: This section shall not apply to waste containers set
out by the city for public use. Nor does it apply to the placement of
composting containers on residential properties.
      3.   Enclosure Criteria: Enclosures shall meet the following criteria:
         a.   Screening: All residential structures with more than two (2)
units, and all commercial, industrial, and institutional uses shall provide a
screened enclosure for required waste containers for solid waste, recyclables,
and yard waste. Such enclosures shall completely conceal stored waste
containers from all sides and be designed in such a manner as to contain any
spillage from the containers.
         b.   Single And Double Residential Dwellings: Single and double
residential dwellings shall store waste containers inside of a garage, or in a
side or rear yard behind the front line of the house until they are placed for
collection as provided in this chapter.
         c.   Materials:
            (1)   In all new construction, enclosure materials shall be similar
to the principal building.
            (2)   Existing properties may use such materials as wooden fencing,
or chainlink with eighty five percent (85%) opacity inserts, but such materials
must be maintained to provide a good appearance.
            (3)   All enclosures shall be constructed in a substantially sound
manner of materials that reduce normal deterioration from weathering. The
enclosure's construction shall support snow load and wind load as required by
the state building code, and all materials shall be properly anchored. Further,
all enclosures shall be constructed and maintained in a safe, orderly
condition.
            (4)   Any enclosure which is defaced, deteriorated, improperly
maintained or otherwise altered from its original permitted condition shall be
repaired or replaced upon written notice by the city.
         d.   Size: Enclosures shall provide sufficient space for required
waste containers for solid waste, recyclables, yard waste, and any other waste
container that is intrinsic to the operation of a business on the premises. In
no case shall the enclosure exceed six hundred (600) square feet in area.
         e.   Location:
            (1)   Enclosures shall be located behind the front building line of
the principal building (as extended to the side lot lines).
            (2)   Enclosures may be integrated into a building if approved by
the building official.
            (3)   Enclosures shall be set back ten feet (10') from the lot line
of any abutting residential property.
         f.   Landscaping: Enclosures shall be landscaped in accordance with
city regulations.
         g.   Flooring: Enclosures shall have flooring constructed of concrete
or bituminous material.
         h.   Access: Enclosures shall provide access that will facilitate
efficient storage and removal of waste materials in all seasons.
         i.   Exceptions:
            (1)   This section shall not apply to the construction, size, or
location of composting containers on residential properties which are covered
in chapter 4 of this title.
            (2)   Waste containers, or pens, on construction sites need not be
screened and may be placed on construction sites without an enclosure. However:
               (A) The container or pen must be set back five feet (5') from
any abutting finished residential or commercial property lot line.
               (B) Waste containers and pens on construction sites may not be
placed in violation of the twenty five foot (25') sight triangle at
intersections.
            (3)   Developers, builders, or contractors on site are responsible
for maintaining the waste container or enclosure at a construction site to
prevent trash, refuse, and debris generated by the building project from
spilling, blowing, or in any way escaping from the containers or pens required
to contain it. (Ord. XVI.59, 12-2-2008; amd. Ord. 2021-02, 1-5-2021)
5-1-4: OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED 1 :
No solid waste or yard waste shall be burned without a permit from the
appropriate governmental authority. (Ord. XIV.8, 12-20-1988)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 6, chapter 3 of this code.
5-1-5: COLLECTOR REGULATIONS:
   A.   License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to collect solid
waste without first having secured a license to do so from the city council.
   B.   Application For License: Any person desiring a license to collect solid
waste shall make application for the same to the city clerk upon a form
prescribed by the city. The application shall set forth:
      1.   The name and address of the applicant.
      2.   A list of the equipment which he proposes to use in such collection.
      3.   The place or places to which the solid waste is to be hauled.
      4.   The manner in which said solid waste is to be disposed of.
      5.   The portion of the city in which collections are to be made.
   C.   Insurance Required, Issuance: As part of the license application, the
applicant shall provide proof of insurance with coverage amounts as required by
the city council and under the conditions imposed by the ordinances of the
city. The city clerk shall then issue and deliver the license.
   D.   Fee: A license fee set by the city council shall accompany the
application and upon granting the license, the fee shall be deposited in the
general fund.
   E.   Term: No license issued hereunder shall be for a longer period than one
year and all licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year.
   F.   Yard Waste Disposal: All yard waste shall be disposed of at compost
facilities designated or approved by Dakota County or composted on the property
in compliance with chapter 4 of this title.
   G.   Compliance With County Ordinance: All license applicants must also be
licensed by Dakota County and comply with all applicable provisions in Dakota
County ordinances, including the reporting requirements.
   H.   Limitations On Licensing: The city council, in the interest of
maintaining healthful and sanitary conditions in the city, hereby reserves the
right to specify and assign certain areas to all licensees, and to limit the
number of licenses issued. The council finds that by reducing the number of
collection vehicle trips through a neighborhood, the neighborhood will be more
safe for children and pedestrians, the amount of wear on the street surface
will be reduced, and the total amount of emissions produced by the collection
vehicles will decrease. Only haulers licensed as of the effective date of this
ordinance shall be allowed to renew their license. Only haulers currently
holding a residential collection license as of the effective date of this
ordinance shall be allowed to make residential collection.
   I.   No Vested Right: No hauler licensed under this chapter will gain a
vested right in the license. The city council may, upon a finding of public
necessity, determine to establish another means of solid waste collection.
(Ord. XVI.59, 12-2-2008; amd. Ord. 2021-02, 1-5-2021)
5-1-6: COLLECTION VEHICLE REGULATIONS:
Each licensed collector shall provide a covered tank or conveyance, so
constructed that the contents will not be blown or jostled therefrom, in which
all solid waste, recyclables, and yard waste collected shall be conveyed to the
place designated in the license application.
The tank or conveyance used shall be kept clean and as free from offensive
odors as possible, and shall not be allowed to stand in any street, alley or
public place longer than is necessary to collect solid waste.
The tank or conveyance shall be subject to inspection by city officers or
authorized agents of the city, and the license shall be subject to revocation
in the event that said tank or conveyance is not kept clean or in the event
that the licensee violates any other provision of this chapter. (Ord. XVI.59,
12-2-2008)
5-1-7: COLLECTION REQUIREMENTS, REGULATIONS:
   A.   Frequency Of Collection: Each licensed collector shall make collections
at least weekly or more often if necessary in that portion of the city in which
the collector is licensed to collect solid waste or yard waste.
   B.   Payment For Collection: The expense of solid waste and yard waste
collection shall be paid to the collector by the owner, agent, occupant or
tenant of the premises from which such solid waste and yard waste is collected,
and such fee shall be full compensation for his services in such collection,
provided that if the tenant or occupant of the property shall fail to pay said
expense, the owner shall be liable therefor to the collector.
   C.   Discontinuance Of Service: The collector may decline to make
collections from any premises when the fees provided for herein are not paid
within one month from date such refuse is collected. The collector shall notify
the city clerk of the discontinuance of service to any premises within two (2)
days after service is discontinued.
   D.   Collector Requirements: Each licensed collector shall comply with the
following:
      1.   Recyclable Materials: Make recycling available to all commercial and
residential customers, with at least bi-weekly curbside collection of
recyclable materials made available to all residential customers. Recyclable
materials shall consist of those on the designated list of recyclables.
Collection of recyclable materials from residential customers shall be made at
the same time, at the same location, and with the same frequency as collection
of solid waste from that customer.
      2.   Disposal Of Recyclable Materials: Dispose of recyclable materials at
a licensed recycling facility, an organized recyclable materials drive, or
through another licensed hauler of recyclable materials. No fee may be charged
to a customer for this service.
      3.   Collection Of Waste And Recyclable Materials By Residential Haulers:
Haulers shall conduct collections as follows:
         a.   West of Akron Avenue collection may occur only on Monday or
Tuesday.
         b.   East of Akron Avenue collection may occur on any day of the week.
      4.   Hours Of Collection: Haulers shall conduct collections as follows:
         a.   Monday through Friday, from six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to eight
o'clock (8:00) P.M.
         b.   Saturday, from six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00)
P.M.
         c.   Sunday, from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
      5.   Placement Of Waste Containers And Mandatory Use Of Enclosures:
Haulers shall conduct collection as follows:
         a.   After they have emptied the containers, haulers shall place all
waste containers within the specific enclosures provided for waste containers
as required by sections
5-1-2 and
5-1-3 of this chapter.
         b.   No waste containers may be placed or delivered so as to be in
violation of city ordinance.
         c.   No waste containers may be placed within the driving or parking
lanes of public streets, roads, or highways.
         d.   Haulers will clean up any spillage of waste that occurs while
they are collecting and transferring waste.
         e.   Haulers will close and secure the gates of all waste container
enclosures when finished collecting and transferring waste from any location
with an enclosure. (Ord. XVI.59, 12-2-2008; amd. Ord. 2021-02, 1-5-2021)
5-1-8: ANIMAL CARCASS DISPOSAL:
When any animal belonging to any person residing in this municipality shall
die, such person shall promptly cause the same to be buried at least three feet
(3') underground or cause the same to be disposed of by authorized personnel.
It shall be unlawful to dispose of dead animals with solid waste or yard waste.
If the owner of any dead animal cannot be found, the person upon whose property
it is shall notify the local health officer who will cause it to be removed and
disposed of by authorized personnel. (Ord. XIV.8, 12-20-1988)
5-1-9: PENALTY:
   A.   Misdemeanor: Failure to comply with this chapter is a misdemeanor.
   B.   Suspension Or Revocation Of License: The city council may also suspend
or revoke a hauler's license for violation of this chapter, applicable Dakota
County ordinances, or any other applicable laws or regulations. Prior to
suspending or revoking a license, the council must first hold a hearing, with
five (5) days' advance notice to the licensee. The notice will include the
date, time, and nature of the violations and copies of any documentation or
reports regarding the violation. (Ord. XVI.59, 12-2-2008)
CHAPTER 2
WEED AND VEGETATION CONTROL
SECTION:
5-2-1: Definitions
5-2-2: Nuisance
5-2-3: Exemptions
5-2-4: Enforcement
5-2-5: Hindrance Of City Employees
5-2-6: Remedies Cumulative
5-2-7: Shade Tree Pest And Disease Control And Tree Maintenance
5-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
BOULEVARD: That portion of a street right of way between the curb or curb line
and the property line.
CITY: The city of Rosemount.
CONTROL AREA: An area designated by resolution of the city council in which the
shade tree pest control program shall be enacted and enforced.
CONTROL MEASURES: Actions declared and authorized by resolution of the city
council to control, manage, or effectively eradicate shade tree pests and shade
tree diseases, including necessary timelines for action. These measures may
include spraying, removing, burning, or otherwise effectively treating the
infected tree or wood to prevent the spread of the shade tree pest or disease.
HAZARDOUS TREE: A tree with structural defects likely to cause failure of all
or part of the tree which could strike a target or threaten human health or
property.
LANDSCAPE PLAN: An accurately dimensioned drawing of a property showing the
location of existing and proposed structures, pavement, trees, shrubs, grasses,
flowers, areas of nonliving ground cover, site furniture and furnishings. The
plan shall label symbols shown; provide construction notes, details and
sections as are necessary for a complete installation; and provide calculations
for any required buffering, screening, open space or impervious surface
retirements or limitations. Commercial, industrial, office and multi-family
project plans, where the structure is over five thousand (5,000) gross square
feet, shall be prepared under the supervision of a landscape architect or
designer. The landscape plan shall also include a written description of how
the property owner or manager will prepare the property prior to the new or
refurbished landscape construction; how noxious weeds as defined by the state
of Minnesota will continue to be controlled; what the establishment period will
be; and what maintenance efforts will occur during and after the establishment
period to create and perpetuate the proposed landscape plan. A landscape plan
shall not be required for properties maintained as required by subsection
5-2-2B of this chapter.
MAINTENANCE STRIP: A five foot (5') (minimum) area of an exempt property that
abuts a nonexempted property that must be maintained as required in subsection
5-2-2B of this chapter where feasible so as not to interfere with the
maintenance of the nonexempted property.
NATURAL AREA: Those areas that allow wildlife habitat and/or natural vistas and
shall include those areas which consist of slopes equal to or greater than a
ratio of three to one (3:1), those areas which are adjacent to public open
spaces, parks or drainageways which are retained in a natural condition with
natural vegetation, or open spaces one acre or larger, woods and wetlands.
Areas around principal structures and driveways do not qualify as natural
areas.
NOXIOUS WEEDS: Those plants which are determined, from time to time, to be
noxious weeds pursuant to Minnesota statutes, 18.171, subdivision 5.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES: Include, but are not limited to, houses, garages, and
buildings used for businesses.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: All grounds owned by the city of Rosemount.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, cartway, bicycle lane or public sidewalk in which the city has an
interest, including other dedicated rights of way for travel purposes and
utility easements of the city. A right of way does not include the airwaves
above a right of way with regard to cellular or other nonwire
telecommunications or broadcast service.
SHADE TREE DISEASE: Dutch elm disease caused by Ophiostoma ulmi or oak wilt
caused by Ceratocystis fagacearum or any other disease declared by the city
council or identified and designated as a shade tree disease by the Minnesota
state commissioner of the department of agriculture or commissioner of the
department of natural resources.
SHADE TREE PEST: Any vertebrate or invertebrate animal, plant pathogen, or
plant that is declared by the city council threatening to be harmful,
injurious, or destructive to shade trees or community forests, within the city,
including, but not limited to, elm bark beetles and emerald ash borer beetles,
larvae, or eggs thereof.
TREE INSPECTOR: A person or persons, certified by the Minnesota department of
natural resources, appointed by the city council to administer the city's shade
tree disease and pest control program. (Ord. XIV.10, 6-4-1991; amd. Ord. 2012-
03, 4-3-2012)
5-2-2: NUISANCE:
   A.   Noxious Weeds: Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the
contrary, noxious weeds growing upon any lot or parcel of property, regardless
of height, zoning classification or area on the parcel upon which they are
growing, are hereby declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to the health and
safety of the city.
   B.   All Zoning Districts Except FP, AG, AG-P; Unplatted Properties: All
weeds (other than noxious weeds) or growing grasses upon any lot or parcel of
land in the city but for those in zoning districts FP, AG or AG-P, or upon
unplatted properties, that measure, from ground to tip, in excess of eight
inches (8"), or which have gone or are about to go to seed, are hereby declared
to be a nuisance, unsightly and dangerous to the health and safety of the city.
   C.   Shade Tree Pests: A shade tree pest declared by the city council and
occurring within a control area is a public nuisance.
   D.   Diseased Tree: Any living or standing tree or part thereof infected to
any degree by a shade tree disease; or any logs, branches, stumps, or other
parts of any dead or dying tree, so infected unless such parts have been fully
burned or treated under the direction of the tree inspector is a public
nuisance.
   E.   Hazardous Trees: A hazardous tree is a public nuisance.
   F.   Nuisances Are Unlawful: It is unlawful for any person to permit any
public nuisance as defined in this section to remain on any premises the person
owns or controls within the city. The nuisance may be abated as provided for in
section
5-2-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-03, 4-3-2012)
5-2-3: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Zoning Districts Not Included: Land lying within any zoning districts
not included in subsection
5-2-2B of this chapter are exempt from this chapter except as set forth in
subsection E of this section.
   B.   Landscape Plan: Property owners or their assigned managers who file
with the city, the landscape plan which has been approved by the city to create
and maintain ornamental grasses, wetland, wooded land, upland, prairie or wild
flowers shall be exempted from this chapter. Exemptions shall be granted or
denied administratively. Aggrieved property owners may appeal to the planning
commission within ten (10) days of the administrative denial, and to the city
council within ten (10) days of a denial by the planning commission. Failure to
maintain the parcel in accordance with the landscape plan upon proper notice
shall void the chapter exemption. A maintenance strip shall be maintained where
feasible. A fee established by the city council shall be charged when a
landscape plan is submitted for review.
   C.   Natural Areas: Natural areas shall be exempt from this chapter. A
maintenance strip shall be maintained where feasible.
   D.   Parks: Parks shall be exempt where topography or intended use do not
allow maintenance, provided, however, that maintenance strips shall be required
where feasible.
   E.   Noxious Weeds: Noxious weeds, regardless of height, zoning
classification of lot or parcel on which they are found, shall not be exempt
from this chapter. (Ord. XIV.10, 6-4-1991)
5-2-4: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Notice: Upon discovery of a nuisance as defined in this chapter, the
weed inspector, tree inspector, or designee, shall serve a notice upon the
owner, occupant or agent of the property owner ordering such person to have
such weeds or grass cut, or shade tree pest or shade tree disease removed,
treated, or otherwise eradicated and removed within the time period specified
in the notice. The notice shall specify the steps to be taken to abate the
nuisance and shall also state that in the event of noncompliance, cutting,
removal or eradication will be done by the city, with all costs to be paid by
the owner, together with an administrative fee of ten percent (10%) of the
costs, or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater.
   B.   Assessment: A record showing the cost of work attributable to each
separate lot or parcel shall be delivered to the city clerk. If all costs and
fees are not paid within thirty (30) days of the date of completion of the
work, the amount so charged, including the administrative charge, together with
accrued interest thereon at the maximum lawful rate permitted, against said lot
or parcel of land, together with a description of the premises and the name of
the owner, if known, shall be certified to the county auditor and shall be
collected under Minnesota statutes, section 429.101 in the same manner as taxes
and/or special assessments against said premises. The charge shall be a
perpetual lien on the premises until paid. No interest shall accrue after the
amount due is certified to the county auditor.
   C.   Appeal: Any person receiving a notice under subsection A of this
section may appeal. The appeal must be submitted in writing to the city
administrator within ten (10) calendar days after the date of the notice. The
city administrator will schedule a hearing before the city council and provide
notice to the individual at least ten (10) calendar days before the hearing.
After the hearing, the city council may sustain or modify the abatement notice
or extend the time by which the abatement must be complete. (Ord. 2012-03, 4-3-
2012)
5-2-5: HINDRANCE OF CITY EMPLOYEES:
Any person who shall hinder a city employee or agent in carrying out the
requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as
described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
5-2-6: REMEDIES CUMULATIVE:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to limit or supersede any
other statute, regulation or ordinance, and the remedies of the city set forth
herein shall be cumulative with the remedies of the city contained in any other
applicable statute, regulation or ordinance. (Ord. XIV.10, 6-4-1991)
5-2-7: SHADE TREE PEST AND DISEASE CONTROL AND TREE MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Policy And Purpose: The health of the trees in the city is threatened
by shade tree pests and diseases. The loss or ill health of trees growing upon
public and private property substantially depreciates the value of property
within the city and impairs the safety, good order, general welfare and
convenience of the public. In addition to and in accordance with Minnesota
statutes, sections 89.001, and 89.51 through 89.64, the provisions of this
section are adopted to attempt to control and prevent the spread of shade tree
pests and shade tree disease within a designated control area.
   B.   City Jurisdiction: The city shall have control of all trees, shrubs,
and other plantings located on public property within the city limits, and
shall have the power to plant, care for, maintain, remove, and replace such
trees, shrubs and other plantings.
   C.   Boulevard Trees: Except in those parts of the city where, by agreement,
certain developments or homeowners' associations have accepted this
responsibility, the city of Rosemount shall be responsible for the treatment or
removal of a nuisance, diseased, or hazardous tree from the boulevard.
   D.   Tree Inspector: It is the power and duty of the tree inspector to enter
upon public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of
inspecting and diagnosing and, if necessary, abating shade tree diseases or
shade tree pests. In the case of suspected shade tree diseases or pests, and in
performance of his or her duties, the tree inspector may remove such specimen
or samples as may be necessary or desirable for diagnosis. The tree inspector
shall have the authority to conduct the following:
      1.   Coordinate the activities of the city relating to the control and
prevention of damage by shade tree pests and diseases and employ any control
measures he or she deems appropriate.
      2.   Recommend to the council the details of any program for the
declaration, control and prevention of shade tree pests and diseases and
enforce or cause to be enforced the duties incident to such a program adopted
by the council.
      3.   Inspect, or cause to be inspected, any and all premises within the
city upon which it is suspected a shade tree pest or disease exists and
investigate all reported incidents of shade tree pests and diseases.
      4.   Diagnose shade tree pests and diseases by the presence of commonly
recognized symptoms or by tests as may be recommended by the commissioner of
the Minnesota department of agriculture or department of natural resources; or
other reliable means.
      5.   Take all reasonable precautions to prevent the maintenance of public
nuisances and enforce the provisions relating to abatement in this chapter,
including hiring private contractors to implement such measures.
   E.   Abatement Of Shade Tree Nuisances: In abating a "shade tree pest" or
disease tree nuisance as defined in this chapter, the following procedures
shall be followed in addition to the procedures in section
5-2-4 of this chapter:
      1.   The shade tree pest or diseased tree shall be removed or effectively
treated so as to destroy and prevent as fully as possible the spread of the
pest or disease. Such abatement procedures shall be carried out in accordance
with current technical and expert methods and plans as may be designated by the
commissioner of agriculture, and with the "control measures" as defined in this
chapter, and within the control areas prescribed by the city council.
      2.   If a notice of abatement for a shade tree pest or disease issued
under section
5-2-4 of this chapter and its prescribed control measures are not complied with
within the time provided by the notice or any additional time granted, the tree
inspector or designated person shall have the authority to enter the property
and carry out abatement in accordance with the council's declared control
measures and the notice of abatement.
   F.   Abatement Procedure In The Event Of Imminent Danger; Summary
Enforcement: If the tree inspector determines that the danger of infestation to
other shade trees is imminent and delay in control measures may put public
health, safety, or welfare in immediate danger, the tree inspector may proceed
as follows:
      1.   Determination; Notice: The tree inspector shall determine all trees
to be affected by any appropriate control measures and notify any reasonably
knowable owner and occupant of property or properties on whose land every such
tree is located.
      2.   Contents Of Notice: The notice shall state that a public nuisance
exists or is being maintained on premises in the city and that a delay in
abatement of the nuisance will unreasonably endanger public health, safety or
welfare. The notice shall state the nuisance found, the control measure
required, provide the nuisance must be abated within a specified time, and the
time and place of the city council meeting to consider the question of summary
enforcement. The notice and proposed action shall be reported in writing to the
council.
      3.   Abatement: The city council shall determine whether or not the
condition identified in the notice to the owner or occupant is a nuisance,
whether public health, safety or welfare will be unreasonably endangered by
delay in abatement, and may order that the nuisance be immediately terminated
or abated. If the nuisance is not immediately terminated or abated, the city
council may order abatement of the nuisance. After the expiration of the time
provided on the original mailing, the nuisance may be abated.
      4.   Immediate Abatement: Nothing in this section shall prevent the city,
without notice or other process, from immediately abating any condition which
poses an imminent and serious hazard to human life or safety. (Ord. 2012-03, 4-
3-2012)
CHAPTER 3
SWIMMING POOLS
SECTION:
5-3-1: Swimming Pools
5-3-2: Swimming Pools in Multiple Family Areas
5-3-1: SWIMMING POOLS:
   A.   Pools of five thousand (5,000) gallons or more capacity shall not be
located within ten feet (10') of any side or rear lot line nor within six feet
(6') of any principal structure or frost footing. Pools shall not be located
within any required setback from any public streets.
   B.   Pools shall not be located beneath overhead utility lines nor over
underground utility lines of any type or within ten feet (10') of any such
utility lines.
   C.   Pools shall not be located within any private or public utility,
walkway, drainage or other easement.
   D.   In the case of in-ground pools, due precautions shall be taken during
the construction period to:
      1.    Avoid damage, hazards or inconvenience to adjacent or nearby
property.
      2.    Assure that proper care shall be taken in stockpiling excavated
material to avoid erosion, dust or other infringement onto other adjacent
property.
   E.   To the extent feasible, back-flush water or water from pool drainage
shall drain on the owner's property or into approved public drainage ways. Such
water shall not drain onto adjacent or nearby private land.
   F.   The Filter unit, pump, cleaning unit and any other noise making
mechanical equipment shall be located at least thirty feet (30') from any
adjacent or nearby residential structure and not closer than ten feet (10') to
any lot line. In all cases, noise from such shall not be detectable at any
property line and if detectable, shall be enclosed in an improved sound
resistant enclosure.
   G.   Lighting for the pool shall be directed into or onto the pool and not
onto adjacent property.
   H.   A safety fence set back a distance of at least four feet (4') from the
edge of the water surface or pool side of a nonclimbable type of at least four
feet (4') in height shall completely enclose the pool from ground level up to
the minimum four foot (4') height. Any gate or door in the fence shall be
equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device for keeping the gate or
door securely closed at all times when not in actual use.
   I.   Water in the pool shall be maintained in a suitable manner to avoid
health hazards of any type. Water shall be subject to periodic inspection by
the Community Health Officer.
   J.   All wiring, lighting, installation of heating unit, grading,
installation of pipes and all other installations and construction shall
require appropriate permits and shall be subject to inspection by public
inspectors.
   K.   Climbable facilities of any kind which could be utilized in any way
shall be kept set back a minimum of five feet (5') from the outside edge of all
safety fences or pool-side walls surrounding swimming pools.
   L.   Any proposed deviation from these standards and requirements shall
require a variance in accordance with the normal zoning procedures.
   M.   Safety fencing during construction of in-ground pools shall be provided
during all phases of construction.
   N.   Required safety fencing shall be completely installed within three (3)
weeks following installation of the pool and prior to pool being filled or
prior to final occupancy inspection.
   O.   Nuisances, such as undue noise, lighting onto adjacent property, health
and safety hazards, damage to nearby vegetation and the like are hereby
prohibited.
   P.   Filling of pools via fire hydrants and other public means shall require
prior approval by the Public Works Superintendent.
   Q.   Drainage of pools onto public streets or other public drainage ways
shall require prior approval by the Public Works Superintendent.
5-3-2: SWIMMING POOLS IN MULTIPLE FAMILY AREAS:
Pools in multiple family areas that is zoned for residential structures
containing three (3) or more dwelling units shall be subject to the following
restrictions:
   A.   No part of the water surface of the swimming pool shall be less than
fifty feet (50') from any lot line.
   B.   No pump, filter, heating units or other apparatus used in connection
with or to service a swimming pool shall be located less than fifty feet (50')
from any lot line.
   C.   All deck areas, adjacent patios or other similar areas used in
conjunction with the swimming pool shall be located not closer than thirty feet
(30') to any adjacent single family lot line.
   D.   Adequate screening, including both fencing and landscape treatment
shall be placed between said areas and adjacent single family lot line. (Ord.
V.I, 5-1-84)
CHAPTER 4
COMPOSTING
SECTION:
5-4-1: Composting
5-4-2: Definitions
5-4-3: Location
5-4-4: Prohibited Materials
5-4-5: Composting Container
5-4-6: Composting Container Size
5-4-7: Maintenance
5-4-8: Nuisance
5-4-1: COMPOSTING:
Composting shall be allowed only in residential and agricultural zoned
districts. All composting shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. XIV.20, 2-20-2001)
5-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
 
                                       The controlled biological decomposition
                                       and management of selected solid waste
COMPOSTING:                            to produce an innocuous, humus-like
                                       material, which can be used as a soil
                                       conditioner.
                                       Vegetable, fruit and other organic waste
                                       resulting from the handling,
FOOD WASTE:                            preparation, cooking and consumption of
                                       food, except for meat, bones, whole eggs
                                       and dairy products.
                                       Garbage, refuse, and other solid waste
                                       from residential, commercial,
                                       industrial, and community activities
                                       that the generator of the waste
                                       aggregates for collection but does not
MIXED MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE:           include auto hulks, street sweepings,
                                       ash, construction debris, mining waste,
                                       sludges, tree and agricultural wastes,
                                       tires, lead-acid batteries, motor or
                                       vehicle fluids and filters, and other
                                       materials collected, processed, and
                                       disposed of as separate waste streams.
ORGANIC WASTE, ORGANIC MATERIAL, OR    Food waste and the designated list of
ORGANICS:                              organics published on the Dakota County
                                       Website.
                                       The process whereby generators separate,
                                       from mixed municipal solid waste,
SOURCE SEPARATED OR SOURCE SEPARATION: materials that will be reused, recycled,
                                       used as substitutes for raw material in
                                       a manufacturing process, or converted
                                       into a usable soil amendment.
                                       Garden wastes, leaves, lawn cuttings,
                                       weeds, shrub and tree waste, and
YARD WASTE:                            prunings generated at residential,
                                       commercial, or public properties. (Ord.
                                       XIV.20, 2-20-2001; amd. Ord. 2021-02, 1-
                                       5-2021)
 
5-4-3: LOCATION:
   A.   The compost container must be in the rear yard at least ten feet (10')
from all property lines and no closer than twenty feet (20') to any residential
dwellings, except the dwelling on the property at which the compost container
is located.
   B.   No compost container may be placed within twenty five feet (25') of any
body of water or area designated as flood plain or shoreland. No compost
container may be placed within wetland buffer areas as defined in the most
recent version of the Rosemount comprehensive wetland management plan.
   C.   Composting containers shall be located and designed so that seepage
from the compost will not run off into public or private streets, storm sewers,
drainage ditches, water retention basins, streams or lakes. (Ord. XIV.20, 2-20-
2001)
5-4-4: PROHIBITED MATERIALS:
   A.   The following materials shall not be placed in a composting container:
meat, bones, whole eggs, dairy products, unshredded branches or logs, weeds
heavily loaded with seeds, plastic, synthetic fiber, human or pet wastes,
diseased plants and any other mixed municipal solid waste.
   B.   No herbicides or pesticides shall be added to a composting container.
(Ord. XIV.20, 2-20-2001)
5-4-5: COMPOSTING CONTAINER:
All composting must occur in a container constructed of wood, wire mesh,
concrete block, or a combination thereof, or in a commercially available
compost bin designated for composting organic waste. (Ord. XIV.20, 2-20-2001)
5-4-6: COMPOSTING CONTAINER SIZE:
   A.   Composting containers shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) cubic
feet in volume for those lots of ten thousand five hundred (10,500) square feet
or less.
   B.   For those lots of more than ten thousand five hundred (10,500) square
feet, composting containers shall not exceed two hundred fifty (250) cubic feet
in volume.
   C.   The maximum height of the composting container shall be five feet (5').
(Ord. XIV.20, 2-20-2001)
5-4-7: MAINTENANCE:
The compost shall be periodically turned and watered to incorporate air and
properly mix wet and dry material and to promote a rapid degradation of the
composting material. (Ord. XIV.20, 2-20-2001)
5-4-8: NUISANCE:
A compost container must not be established or maintained in such a manner as
to create an odor or other nuisance and any composting shall be suspended or
terminated if at any time the city determines a nuisance exists or that
conditions exist constituting a fire hazard or health hazard, or if there is a
threat to surface or ground water from runoff or leaching. (Ord. XIV.20, 2-20-
2001)
TITLE 6
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
CHAPTER 1
FIRE CODE
SECTION:
6-1-1: Minnesota State Fire Code Adopted
6-1-2: Enforcement And Administration Of Code
6-1-3: Definitions
6-1-4: New Materials, Processes, Occupancies
6-1-5: Storage Limits For Hazardous Substances
6-1-6: Penalties
6-1-1: MINNESOTA STATE FIRE CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted by the city council for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or
explosion, that certain code known as the current edition of the Minnesota
state fire code, as adopted pursuant to Minnesota statutes, section 299F.011
and modified by Minnesota rules, chapter 7511, save and except such portions as
are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended by this chapter, of which code not
less than three (3) copies have been and are now filed in the office of the
clerk and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out
at length herein, and from the date on which this chapter shall take effect,
the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city.
(Ord. 2011-05, 6-21-2011)
6-1-2: ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF CODE:
   A.   Enforcement By Fire Officials:
      1.   The fire chief of the Rosemount fire department, or a representative
authorized by the fire chief, shall enforce the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   The chief of the Rosemount fire department may detail such members
of the fire department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary.
The chief of the fire department may recommend the employment of technical
inspectors who, when such authorization is made, shall be selected through an
examination to determine their fitness for the position. The examination shall
be open to members and nonmembers of the fire department, and appointments made
after examination shall be for an indefinite term with removal only for cause.
   B.   Appeals: Whenever the fire chief shall disapprove an application or
refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions
of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have
been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the
decision of the fire chief to the city council within thirty (30) days from the
date of the decision appealed.
   C.   Power And Duty To Enforce: The fire chief, police chief or a
representative authorized by the fire chief shall have the power and duty to
enforce this chapter through appropriate administrative and legal remedies,
including, but not limited to, issuance of citation. (Ord. 2011-05, 6-21-2011)
6-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION (AHJ): Wherever the term "AHJ" is used in the
Minnesota state fire code, it shall be held to mean the Rosemount fire chief,
or a representative authorized by the fire chief.
CORPORATION COUNSEL: Wherever the term "corporation counsel" is used in the
Minnesota state fire code, it shall be held to mean the attorney for the city
of Rosemount.
JURISDICTION: Wherever the word "jurisdiction" is used in the Minnesota state
fire code, it shall be held to mean the city of Rosemount. (Ord. 2011-05, 6-21-
2011)
6-1-4: NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES, OCCUPANCIES:
The mayor, the fire chief and the fire marshal shall act as a committee to
determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be
heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies, which shall require
permits, in addition to those now enumerated in said code. The Fire Marshal
shall post such list in a conspicuous place in the Fire Marshal's Office, and
distribute copies thereof to interested persons. (Ord. 2011-05, 6-21-2011)
6-1-5: STORAGE LIMITS FOR HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES:
   A.   Combustible Liquids In Aboveground Tanks:
      1.   The limits referred to in the State Fire Code in which storage of
flammable or combustible liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited,
are hereby established as follows: area west of Akron Avenue within the City,
except those parcels zoned GI- General Industrial.
      2.   The limits referred to in the State Fire Code, in which new bulk
plants for flammable or combustible liquids are prohibited, are hereby
established as follows: area west of Akron Avenue within the City.
      3.   Storage tanks must be installed by a dealer or supplier with
demonstrated competency under permit issued by the building official. (Ord.
2018-01, 2-20-2018)
   B.   Liquefied Petroleum Gases, Bulk Storage:
      1.   Bulk storage limited to five hundred (500) gallon water capacity
maximum in R-1 zoning districts except as may be approved by the Fire Chief or
a representative authorized by the Fire Chief. One thousand (1,000) gallon
water capacity maximum in RR zoning and nonresidential installations, except as
may be approved by the Fire Chief or a representative authorized by the Fire
Chief.
      2.   Separation from house, structures, property and other LP storage
installations as per the State Fire Code. Staggered alignment of storage tanks
of any capacity in residential applications shall be required by this Code.
      3.   Storage tanks must be installed by a dealer or supplier with
demonstrated competency under permit issued by the building official.
      4.   Tanks must be installed level and true on substantial concrete pad
or footing with positive form of weed and grass control.
      5.   Tanks and equipment including, but not limited to: tank, piping,
valves and regulators should be inspected on a regular basis by a dealer or
supplier with demonstrated competency. Copy of inspection report should be
available to the Fire Chief or designated representative upon request.
      6.   All installations in existence at the time of this adoption shall be
allowed to remain until such time that equipment must be changed by
obsolescence or by owner's choice.
   C.   Explosives And Blasting Agents: The limits referred to in the State
Fire Code, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited,
are hereby established as follows: area west of Akron Avenue within the City,
except University of Minnesota property. (Ord. 2011-05, 6-21-2011)
6-1-6: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Code hereby
adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply
with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed
statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any
certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been
taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified
by the Fire Chief, or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time
fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and
noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as described
in title 1, chapter 4 of this Code. The imposition of one penalty for any
violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. All such
persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects
within a reasonable time. When not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that
prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord.
XII.21, 6-15-2004)
   B.   The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (Ord. XVIII.3, 1-16-1979)
CHAPTER 2
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
6-2-1: Organization
6-2-2: Relief Association
6-2-3: Interference With Department; Penalty
6-2-1: ORGANIZATION:
The Fire Department created by Ordinance X.1 on August 16, 1973, shall consist
of such number of officers and firefighters as the City Council deems necessary
to meet the needs of the City. (Ord. X.5, 6-17-1997)
6-2-2: RELIEF ASSOCIATION:
The officers and firefighters may organize and incorporate a relief association
in accordance with the laws of the State. (Ord. X.5, 6-17-1997)
6-2-3: INTERFERENCE WITH DEPARTMENT; PENALTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to give or make, or cause to be given or
made, an alarm of fire without probable cause, or to neglect or refuse to obey
any reasonable order of the chief at a fire, or to interfere with the
Department in the discharge of its duties; and any person guilty of violating
any provision of this Chapter is guilty as provided by State law. (Ord. X.5, 6-
17-1997)
CHAPTER 3
OPEN BURNING 1
SECTION:
6-3-1: Open Burning Prohibited
6-3-2: Permit Issuing Authority
6-3-3: Permit Holder Responsibility
6-3-4: Recreational Fires
6-3-5: Fires Or Barbecues On Balconies Or Patios
6-3-6: Air Pollution Control
6-3-7: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  5-1-4 of this code.
6-3-1: OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful, a violation of this chapter and a misdemeanor for any
person to start or allow to burn any open fire on any property within the city
without a permit, except for supervised recreational fires contained within
approved fire rings. (Ord. 2011-08, 6-21-2011)
6-3-2: PERMIT ISSUING AUTHORITY:
   A.   The fire chief, or a representative authorized by the fire chief is
hereby authorized to issue permits under this chapter, and may establish
reasonable permit conditions for open burning consistent with the rules adopted
herein. The signature of one authorized official is necessary for a permit to
be issued.
   B.   The open burning permits are subject to revocation at the discretion of
DNR forest officer, the fire chief, or a representative authorized by the fire
chief. Reasons for revocation include, but are not limited to, a fire hazard
existing or developing during the course of the burn, any of the conditions of
the permit being violated during the course of the burn, pollution or nuisance
conditions developing during the course of the burn, or a fire smoldering with
no flame present. (Ord. 2011-08, 6-21-2011)
6-3-3: PERMIT HOLDER RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   Every open burn event shall be constantly attended by the permit
holder. The open burning site shall have available appropriate communication
and fire suppression equipment, as set out in the fire safety plan.
   B.   The open burn fire shall be completely extinguished before the permit
holder leaves the site. No fire may be allowed to smolder with no person
present.
   C.   The permit holder shall have a valid permit, as required by this
chapter, available for inspection on the open burn site by the fire department,
police department, MPCA representative or DNR forest officer.
   D.   No recreational fire or open burn will be permitted when the city or
DNR has officially declared a burning ban due to potential hazardous fire
conditions, or when the MPCA has declared an air quality alert.
   E.   All fires shall be extinguished at the direction of the fire
department, police department, or DNR fire warden.
   F.   The permit holder shall comply with and implement all permanent
conditions of the burn event safety plan as established. The permit holder
shall be responsible for all costs incurred as a result of the burn, including,
but not limited to, fire suppression and administrative fees.
   G.   No prohibited materials as defined in Minnesota statutes shall be
combusted in an open fire. (Ord. 2011-08, 6-21-2011)
6-3-4: RECREATIONAL FIRES:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish the guidelines for
recreational fires.
   B.   Definitions:
    PERMANENT FIRE RING: Must be constructed of concrete, steel or other
approved noncombustible materials. The ring must extend at least six inches
(6") below the ground and extend at least six inches (6") above the ground. The
area around a permanent fire ring must be cleared of all grass and vegetation
for at least five feet (5').
   PERMITTED MATERIALS: The only materials permitted in a recreational fire are
wood from trees, small branches, or charcoal.
   PROHIBITED MATERIALS: Include leaves, brush, oil, rubber, plastic, tires,
chemically treated materials such as railroad ties, treated lumber,
construction debris, composite shingles, tar paper, insulation composition
board, waste materials, hazardous waste or garbage.
   RECREATIONAL FIRE: An outdoor fire burning permitted materials where the
fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator, outdoor fireplace,
barbecue grill or barbecue pit and has a total fuel area of three feet (3') or
less in diameter and two feet (2') or less in height for pleasure, religious,
ceremonial, cooking, warmth or similar purposes.
   STRUCTURES: Include a house, garage, shed, deck or fence.
   C.   Requirements:
      1.   Adult Supervision Required: All recreational fires shall be
supervised by an adult who is in the immediate vicinity of the recreational
fire until it is extinguished.
      2.   Extinguisher Or Similar Device Required: A fire extinguisher with a
minimum 4A rating, dirt or sand and a shovel or a garden hose shall be readily
available at all times until the fire is extinguished.
      3.   Wind Restriction: No fire shall be allowed if the winds are greater
than fifteen (15) miles per hour.
      4.   Smoke Complaints: Complaints about smoke from a fire shall be cause
for immediate extinguishment of the fire.
      5.   Extinguishment Authority: All fires shall be extinguished at the
direction of the fire department, police department, or DNR fire warden.
      6.   Prohibited Materials: No prohibited materials as defined in
Minnesota statutes shall be combusted in a recreational fire.
      7.   Recreational Fire Site: Recreational fires, including fires in
freestanding, manufactured fire pits, shall not be conducted within twenty five
feet (25') of a structure or combustible material. Conditions that could cause
a fire to spread within twenty five feet (25') of a structure shall be
eliminated prior to ignition.
      8.   Wood Length Limit: No wood combusted in a recreational fire shall
exceed three feet (3') in length. (Ord. 2011-08, 6-21-2011)
6-3-5: FIRES OR BARBECUES ON BALCONIES OR PATIOS:
   A.   Open Flame Prohibited: In any structure in which there are two (2) or
more dwelling units on more than one level, no person shall kindle, maintain or
cause any fire or open flame on any balcony, above ground level, or on any
ground floor patio within fifteen feet (15') of the structure. This provision
does not apply to structures in which each of the separate dwelling units has
its own private means of ingress and egress.
   B.   Fuel Storage Prohibited: No person shall store or use any fuel,
barbecue, torch or similar heating or lighting chemical or device in the
locations designated in subsection A of this section.
Exception: Listed electric or gas fired barbecue grills that are permanently
mounted and wired or plumbed to the building's gas supply or electrical system
and that maintain a minimum clearance of eighteen inches (18") on all sides,
unless listed for lesser clearances, may be installed on balconies and patios
when approved by the Rosemount fire chief or a representative authorized by the
fire chief. (Ord. 2011-08, 6-21-2011; amd. Ord. B-298, 2-15-2022)
6-3-6: AIR POLLUTION CONTROL:
The air pollution control rules, promulgated by the Minnesota pollution control
agency, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter as if
fully set forth herein; three (3) copies are on file with the city clerk. Any
violation of said rules is a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-08, 6-21-
2011)
6-3-7: PENALTY:
Any person who shall fail to comply with any order given under the terms of
this chapter, or who shall in any way violate any of the provisions or
requirements of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as described in title 1, chapter 4 of
this code. (Ord. 2011-08, 6-21-2011)
CHAPTER 4
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
6-4-1: Purpose
6-4-2: Adoption Of State Law
6-4-3: Definition
6-4-4: License Provisions
6-4-5: Prohibitions On Use
6-4-1: PURPOSE:
Due to the inherent risks of fire and injury to persons and property associated
with the sale, possession and use of fireworks, the city council has determined
that it is necessary and in the interest of public health, safety and welfare
to establish reasonable regulations concerning fireworks. (Ord. X.6, 7-6-2004)
6-4-2: ADOPTION OF STATE LAW:
It is unlawful to sell, use or possess fireworks in violation of Minnesota
state statutes 624.20 through 624.25, inclusive, which are adopted by
reference. (Ord. X.6, 7-6-2004)
6-4-3: DEFINITION:
For purposes of this chapter, "consumer fireworks" are defined as:
   A.   Sparklers of not more than one hundred grams (100 g) of mixture per
item,
   B.   Other sparkling items that are nonexplosive and nonaerial and contain
seventy five grams (75 g) or less of chemical mixture per tube or a total of
five hundred grams (500 g) or less for multiple tubes,
   C.   Paper caps containing twenty five hundredths grain of explosive or
other toy caps containing twenty hundredths grain of explosives,
   D.   Snakes, and glow works, smoke devices, or trick noisemakers which
include paper streamers, party poppers, string poppers, snappers, and drop
pops, each consisting of not more than twenty five hundredths grain of
explosive mixture. (Ord. 2011-06, 6-21-2011)
6-4-4: LICENSE PROVISIONS:
   A.   Sale Of Fireworks: It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer for
sale, expose for sale, or sell at retail or wholesale any consumer fireworks in
the city of Rosemount without a license.
   B.   License Application: The applicant shall completely fill out and submit
an application form for a consumer fireworks license prepared by the Rosemount
fire department, fire prevention bureau. Information to be submitted as part of
the license application includes, but is not necessarily limited to, the
following information: name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
address of location where the fireworks will be sold; estimated quantity of the
fireworks that will be stored on the premises; description of the premises and
facility from which the fireworks are proposed to be sold; approval of the
property owner, if different from the applicant. Prior to the issuance of a
license, the premises must be inspected and approved by the city fire code
official.
   C.   Conditions Of License: A license to sell consumer fireworks shall be
issued subject to the following conditions:
      1.   The license is nontransferable, either to a different person or
location.
      2.   The license must be publicly displayed on the licensed premises.
      3.   The premises are subject to inspection by city fire and police
officers during normal business hours.
      4.   The premises for which a license will be issued must be located in a
zoning district permitting retail sales.
      5.   Consumer fireworks shall only be stored in or sold from buildings or
retail stands that comply with National Fire Protection Association standard
1124 (2003 edition) as required under Minnesota statutes, section 624.20(d)(2).
      6.   Storage of consumer fireworks on the premises must be in compliance
with the Minnesota state fire code.
      7.   Consumer fireworks shall not be sold to persons under the age of
eighteen (18).
      8.   The display of consumer fireworks in exit access aisles, corridors,
covered malls or within five feet (5') of exits and exterior exit doors is
prohibited. (Ord. 2011-06, 6-21-2011)
6-4-5: PROHIBITIONS ON USE:
   A.   Consumer fireworks shall not be used on public property.
   B.   Consumer fireworks shall not be used indoors. (Ord. X.6, 7-6-2004)
TITLE 7
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
OFFENSES
SECTION:
7-1-1: Disorderly Conduct
7-1-2: Loitering
7-1-3: Obscene Materials; Sale And Possession
7-1-4: Obscene Materials; Sales To Minors
7-1-5: Noisy Parties Or Gatherings
7-1-6: Electronic Sound System/Audio Equipment
7-1-1: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
The doing of any of the following acts without authority of law in a public or
private place, by any person knowing, or having reasonable grounds to know,
that it will, or will tend to, alarm, anger or disturb others or provoke an
assault or breach of the peace, is hereby declared to be disorderly conduct:
   A.   Engaging in brawling or fighting.
   B.   Disturbing an assembly or meeting not unlawful in its character, or the
peace and quiet of any family or neighborhood.
   C.   Engaging in offensive or abusive language or in boisterous and noisy
conduct tending to reasonably arouse alarm, anger and resentment in others.
   D.   Wilfully and lewdly exposing his person or the private parts thereof,
or procuring another to so expose himself, or any open and gross lewdness or
lascivious behavior or any act of public indecency.
   E.   Appearing upon private property without the consent of the owner or
occupant in an intoxicated condition.
   F.   Lurking, lying in wait or concealing oneself in any building, yard,
premises or street within the limits of the city with intent to do any
mischief, or to pilfer or to commit any crime or misdemeanor.
   G.   Making, aiding or assisting in making any riot, disturbance, or
improper diversion, or collecting in bodies or crowds in the city for unlawful
purposes or to the annoyance or disturbance of the citizens or travelers.
   H.   Wilfully attempting, offering or threatening with force or violence to
do bodily harm to another without lawful authority, or wilfully applying force
to the person of another without lawful authority and with intent to do bodily
harm.
   I.   Resisting any police officer or any member of the police department, or
any person duly empowered with police authority, while in the discharge of his
duty or giving false information to any police officer, or in any way
interfering with or hindering him in the discharge of his duties or in any way
impersonating or attempting to impersonate a police officer.
   J.   Congregating with three (3) or more together or near each other in any
public street or any footwalk or sidewalk in the city so as to obstruct the
free passage of foot passengers or motor vehicles and, so standing, refuses to
move on immediately upon the request so to do made by any police officer.
   K.   Frequents or loiters about any place soliciting any person for the
purpose of committing any crime against nature or other lewdness.
   L.   Interferes with or obstructs the fire department while engaged in
fighting a fire 1 .
   M.   Stands or loiters in or upon a driveway of any building, or sits upon
the steps, window sills or railings of any building in such a manner as to
obstruct ingress and egress to and from such building or to the annoyance of
the owner or occupant thereof, or the business in case of a public building.
(Ord. XV.1, 9-28-1972; amd. 1983 Code)
   N.   Participating in any party or assembly of two (2) or more people from
which noise emanates of a sufficient volume or of such nature to disturb the
peace, quiet or repose of another person or persons.
Disorderly conduct is hereby prohibited and anyone doing any of the above acts
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction thereof be punished
as described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  6-2-3 of this code.
7-1-2: LOITERING:
   A.   Definitions: The following definitions shall apply to this section:
    LAWFUL BUSINESS: A reason for being present upon a school property which is
not otherwise prohibited by statute, by ordinance, or by any regulation adopted
pursuant to statute or ordinance.
   SCHOOL: Any elementary school, junior high school, four (4) year high
school, senior high school, adult school, vocational school or any branch
thereof or community college.
   B.   Disruptive Presence At Schools: It shall be unlawful for any person to
come into any school building or upon any school ground, street, sidewalk or
public way adjacent thereto, without lawful business thereon, and whose
presence or acts interfere with the peaceful conduct of the activities of such
school or disrupt the school or its pupils or school activities, and who
remains there or who reenters or comes upon such place within forty eight (48)
hours after being asked to leave by the chief administrative official of the
school, or his designee in the absence of the chief administrative official.
   C.   Loitering About Schools Or Public Places: It shall be unlawful for any
person to loiter about any school or public place. (Ord. XII.7, 5-20-1975)
   D.   Penalty: Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof may be punished as
described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
7-1-3: OBSCENE MATERIALS; SALE AND POSSESSION:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section:
    DISTRIBUTE: To transfer possession, whether with or without consideration.
   KNOWINGLY: Being aware of the character of the matter or live conduct.
   MATTER: Any book, magazine, newspaper or other printed or written material
or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture or other pictorial
representation or any statue or other figure, or any recording, transcription
or mechanical, chemical or electrical reproduction or any other articles,
equipment, machines or materials.
   OBSCENE: That which to the average person applying contemporary community
standards appeals to the prurient interest and taken as a whole lacks serious
literary, artistic, political or scientific value and is:
      1.   A patently offensive representation or description of ultimate
sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, or
      2.   A patently offensive representation or description of masturbation,
excretory functions and lewd exhibition of the genitals.
   PERSON: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or other
legal entity. (Ord. XV.2, 7-20-1976)
   B.   Violation; Penalty: Every person who knowingly sends or causes to be
sent, or brings or causes to be brought, into this city for sale or
distribution, or in this city prepares, publishes, prints, exhibits,
distributes or offers to distribute, or has in his possession with intent to
distribute or to exhibit or offer to distribute, any obscene matter, is guilty
of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as described in
title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Such violation shall be grounds for revocation
or suspension of any and all licenses held at such premises. (Ord. XII.21, 6-
15-2004)
7-1-4: OBSCENE MATERIALS; SALES TO MINORS:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section the terms defined in this
subsection shall have the meanings given them as follows:
    HARMFUL TO MINORS: That quality of any description or representation, in
whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sadomasochistic
abuse, when it:
      1.   Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid interest
of minors, and
      2.   Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community
as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for minors, and
      3.   Is utterly without redeeming social importance for minors.
   KNOWINGLY: Having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or
ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry or both:
      1.   The character and content of any material which is reasonably
susceptible of examination by the defendant, and
      2.   The age of the minor, provided, however, that an honest mistake
shall constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant made a
reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such minor.
   MINOR: Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
   NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or
buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the
top of the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state.
   SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE: Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad in
undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered,
bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed.
   SEXUAL CONDUCT: Acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual intercourse or
physical contact with a person's unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or
if such a person be a female, her breast.
   SEXUAL EXCITEMENT: The condition of human male or female genitals when in a
state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   B.   Sales Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person knowingly to sell or
loan for monetary consideration to a minor:
      1.   Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film or
similar visual representation or image of a person or portion of the human body
which depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which is
harmful to minors, or
      2.   Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter however reproduced, or
sound recording which contains any matter enumerated in subsection B1 of this
section, or which contains explicit and detailed verbal descriptions or
narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic
abuse which, taken as a whole, is harmful to minors.
   C.   Exhibits Prohibited:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person knowingly to exhibit for a monetary
consideration to a minor or knowingly to sell to a minor an admission ticket or
pass or knowingly to admit a minor for a monetary consideration to premises
whereon there is exhibited a motion picture, show or other presentation which,
in whole or in part, depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse
and which is harmful to minors.
      2.   It is unlawful for any person knowingly to openly exhibit, show,
display, demonstrate or otherwise allow to be exposed to public view in any
public commercial establishment where minors are allowed or permitted to enter
for the purpose of doing business in such commercial establishment for profit:
         a.   Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film
or similar visual representation or image of a person or portion of the human
body which depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which is
harmful to minors, or
         b.   Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter however reproduced,
or sound recording which contains any matter enumerated in subsection C2a of
this section, or which contains explicit and detailed verbal descriptions or
narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic
abuse which, taken as a whole, is harmful to minors, unless said matters
enumerated in subsection C2a of this section and this subsection C2b shall be
kept in an "adults only" area, the contents of which are protected from the
view or person of a minor.
   D.   Exemptions: The following are exempt from criminal or other action
hereunder:
      1.   Recognized and established schools, churches, museums, medical
clinics and physicians, hospitals, public libraries, governmental agencies or
quasi-governmental sponsored organizations, and persons acting in their
capacity as employees or agents of such organizations. For the purpose of this
subsection, "recognized and established" shall mean an organization or agency
having a full time faculty and diversified curriculum in the case of a school;
a church affiliated with a national or regional denomination, a licensed
physician or psychiatrist or clinic or licensed physicians or psychiatrists;
and in all other exempt organizations shall refer only to income tax funds or
which receive at least one-third (1/3) of their support from publicly donated
funds.
      2.   Individuals in a parental relationship with the minor.
      3.   Motion pictures machine operators, stagehands or other theater
employees such as cashiers, doormen, ushers and concession employees, if such a
person or persons have no financial interest in the entertainment presented
other than the salary or wage, or in any theater or place where such employee
has no financial interest when his services are obtained solely for salary or
wage; provided, that such employee is under the direct supervision of a theater
manager who is a resident of this state and who is not exempt from action.
(Ord. XV.3, 7-20-1976)
   E.   Penalty: Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and may be punished as described in title 1, chapter 4 of this
code. Such violation shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of any and
all licenses held at such premises. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
7-1-5: NOISY PARTIES OR GATHERINGS:
   A.   Unlawful Noises Or Disturbances: No person shall participate in any
party or other gathering of people giving rise to noise which disturbs the
peace, quiet or repose of the occupants of adjoining or other property. This
shall not apply to city authorized events.
   B.   Duty To Disperse: When a police officer determines that a gathering is
creating such noise disturbance, the officer shall order all persons present,
other than the owner or tenant of the premises where the disturbance is
occurring, to disburse immediately. Any person who refuses to disburse from
such a gathering after being ordered by a police officer to do so, is guilty of
a misdemeanor. Every owner or tenant of such premises who has knowledge of the
disturbance shall cooperate with police officers and shall make every
reasonable effort to see that the disturbance is immediately abated.
   C.   Owner Or Tenant Liability: Every owner, tenant or agent of the premises
where a party or gathering in violation of this section occurs, and who is
present at such party or gathering, or who is not present, but knows such party
or gathering is occurring, is deemed a participant and is guilty of a violation
of this section.
   D.   Evidence: It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this
section if the sound of the party or gathering is audible to a human ear at a
distance of fifty feet (50') from the premises from which the gathering,
conduct or disturbance is occurring. (Ord. XV.6, 9-21-1993)
   E.   Penalty: Every person who violates this section when they perform an
act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure
is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall
be punished as described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code, except as
otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
7-1-6: ELECTRONIC SOUND SYSTEM/AUDIO EQUIPMENT:
   A.   No person shall use or operate any electronic sound system or audio
equipment including, but not limited to, any compact disc player, AM-FM radio,
citizen band radio, paging system, or any other device designed to produce or
reproduce audio sound in such an unreasonably loud manner that it disturbs the
peace, quiet, and comfort of others or interferes with the right of another to
use peacefully his/her property or public property without disturbance.
   B.   It shall be presumed that a violation of this section has occurred when
any electronic sound system or audio equipment is operated in a manner in which
it is plainly audible at a distance of fifty feet (50') or more from the
property line or from the vehicle operating the audio equipment.
   C.   When sound violating this section is produced by an electronic sound
system or audio equipment that is located in or on a vehicle, the vehicle's
owner is guilty of the violation, provided that if the vehicle's owner is not
present, the person in charge of the vehicle at the time of the violation is
guilty of the violation.
   D.   This section shall not apply to sound produced by the following:
      1.   Amplifying equipment used:
         a.   In connection with activities for which a permit has been granted
by the city, subject to the terms of the permit; or
         b.   In connection with any special community event or special
activity sponsored or organized by a school, church, or the city, provided the
amplifying equipment is not used later than ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M.;
      2.   Antitheft devices;
      3.   Church bells, chimes or carillons, school bells, or emergency civil
defense warning signals; and
      4.   Authorized emergency vehicles or other vehicles required by law to
be equipped with sound devices. (Ord. 2015-7, 8-18-2015)
CHAPTER 2
MINORS' CURFEW
SECTION:
7-2-1: Curfew Imposed
7-2-1: CURFEW IMPOSED:
Dakota County Ordinance 122, Juvenile Curfew Ordinance is adopted by reference.
(Ord. XV.8, 9-5-1995)
CHAPTER 3
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
SECTION:
7-3-1: Purpose
7-3-2: Definitions
7-3-3: Prohibited Paraphernalia
7-3-4: Evidence of Paraphernalia
7-3-5: Penalties
7-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purposes of this Chapter are as follows:
   A.   To protect and promote the public health, safety and general welfare by
prohibiting the possession, manufacturing, delivery and advertisement of drug
paraphernalia within the City.
   B.   To deter the use of controlled substances by controlling certain
paraphernalia associated with their use and manufacture.
   C.   To reduce the availability of drug paraphernalia in order to prevent
their availability from inducing, promoting, suggesting or increasing the
public acceptability of controlled substances.
7-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
The term "drug paraphernalia" means all equipment, products and materials of
any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or
otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation
of Minnesota Statutes, section 152. It includes, but is not limited to:
   A.   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which
is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived.
   B.   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled
substances.
   C.   Isomeric devices used, intended for use or designed for use in
increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance.
   D.   Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled
substances.
   E.   Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances.
   F.   Diluents and adulterants such as quinine, hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for use in
cutting controlled substances.
   G.   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use
in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning and refining,
marijuana.
   H.   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended
for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances.
   I.   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for
use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances.
   J.   Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use
in storing or concealing controlled substances.
   K.   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use
or designed for use in parenternally injecting controlled substances into the
human body.
   L.   Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil
into the human body, such as:
      1.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with
or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls.
      2.   Water pipes.
      3.   Carburetion tubes and devices.
      4.   Smoking and carburetion masks.
      5.   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as
a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the
hand.
      6.   Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials.
      7.   Chamber pipes.
      8.   Carburetor pipes.
      9.   Electric pipes.
      10.   Air driven pipes.
      11.   Chillums.
      12.   Bongs.
      13.   Ice pipes or chillers. (Ord. XVI.16, 8-5-1980)
7-3-3: PROHIBITED PARAPHERNALIA:
   A.   Prohibited Use: It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess
with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow,
harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test,
analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of
Minnesota statutes, section 152.
   B.   Prohibited Delivery: It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess
with intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver, drug
paraphernalia, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should
know, that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce
into the human body a controlled substance in violation of Minnesota statutes,
section 152.
   C.   Prohibited Advertising: It is unlawful for any person to place in any
newspaper, magazine, handbill or other publication any advertisement, knowing,
or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of
the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects
designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia. (Ord. XVI.16, 8-5-1980)
7-3-4: EVIDENCE OF PARAPHERNALIA:
In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other
authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors,
the following:
   A.   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning
its use.
   B.   Prior convictions, if any, of any owner, or of anyone in control of the
object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substance.
   C.   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation
of this chapter.
   D.   The proximity of the object to controlled substances.
   E.   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object.
   F.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or anyone
in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he knows, or should
reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of this
chapter; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as
to a direct violation of this chapter shall not prevent a finding that the
object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
   G.   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its
use.
   H.   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict
its use.
   I.   National and local advertising concerning its use.
   J.   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
   K.   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate
supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed
distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
   L.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object
(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise.
   M.   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community.
   N.   Expert testimony concerning its use. (Ord. XVI.16, 8-5-1980)
7-3-5: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates section
7-3-3 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished as
described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
CHAPTER 4
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE A. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
7-4A-1: Definitions
7-4A-2: Officers Appointed To Enforce Chapter
7-4A-3: Interference With Officers
7-4A-4: Animal Shelter Provided
7-4A-5: Rabies, Bites, Impounding And Disposal Of Animals
7-4A-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
ANIMAL: Any nonhuman mammal, reptile, amphibian, fish, bird (including all fowl
and poultry) or other member commonly accepted as a part of the animal kingdom.
Allowed Animals: Those animals commonly accepted as domesticated household
pets. Unless otherwise defined, such animals shall include dogs, cats, spayed
or neutered ferrets, caged birds, gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, domesticated
rabbits, fish, nonpoisonous, nonvenomous and nonconstricting reptiles or
amphibians, and trained service animals that are assisting disabled persons.
Farm Animal: Cattle, horses, ponies, mules, sheep, goats, swine (including
potbellied pigs and other miniature varieties), ducks, geese, turkeys,
chickens, and other animals of husbandry.
Wild Animals: A nonhuman terrestrial mammal or bat that is wild by nature; any
poisonous, venomous, constricting or inherently dangerous member of the reptile
or amphibian families; any crossbreed between a wild and domestic animal.
AT LARGE: Any animal that is off the property of its owner and not "under
restraint" as herein required.
COMMERCIAL KENNEL: A place where more than five (5) dogs, cats, or ferrets over
six (6) months of age are kept, and where the business of selling, boarding,
breeding, showing, treating or grooming such animals is conducted.
COOP: Any structure used for the keeping of fowl.
DANGEROUS: Able or likely to inflict injury or harm.
DANGEROUS DOG: Any dog that:
   A.   Has without provocation, inflicted substantial bodily harm on a human
being while on public or private property.
   B.   Has killed a domestic animal without provocation while off the owner's
property; or
   C.   Having been found to be potentially dangerous and after the owner has
notice that the dog is potentially dangerous, the dog aggressively bites,
attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals.
GREAT BODILY HARM: Bodily injury which creates a high probability of death, or
which causes serious permanent disfigurement, or which otherwise causes a
permanent or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member
or organ or other serious bodily harm.
HORSE: Any breed of horse, pony, mule, ass or similar animal.
LOFT: Any and all quarters in which pigeons are housed.
OWNER: Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning, keeping,
harboring, or in custody or control of animals within or being transported
within the city.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG: Any dog that:
   A.   When unprovoked, inflicts bites on a human or domestic animal on public
or private property;
   B.   When unprovoked, chases or approaches a person, including a person on a
bicycle, upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public or private property, other
than the dog owner's property, in an apparent attitude of attack; or
   C.   Has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack unprovoked,
causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of humans or domestic
animals.
PROPER ENCLOSURE: An enclosure for an animal that securely confines the animal
indoors; or, in an enclosure that has flooring that prevents digging, sides
that prevent chewing or exit through them, and a covering that prevents escape
and provides protection from the elements. This enclosure must be locked. A
porch, patio, house, garage or other structure that cannot be locked or has
walls, windows or doors that are not substantial enough to prevent the escape
of the animal shall not be considered a proper enclosure. A door or window
secured with only a screen is not a secure enclosure.
SERVICE ANIMAL: Animals that are individually trained to perform tasks for
people with disabilities, such as: guiding people who are blind, alerting
people who are deaf, pulling wheelchairs, alerting and protecting a person who
is having a seizure, or performing other special tasks.
SUBSTANTIAL BODILY HARM: Bodily injury that involves a temporary but
substantial disfigurement, or that causes a temporary but substantial loss or
impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ, or that causes a
fracture of any bodily member.
UNDER RESTRAINT: Controlled by a leash; under voice or signal command of a
competent person, providing that the animal will obey such voice or signal
commands; within the limits of the owner's property; or confined within a
vehicle being driven or parked in the street. An animal must be controlled with
the use of a leash no longer than six feet (6') while on any public property,
including, but not limited to, a street, sidewalk, trail, or park. This leash
requirement does not apply while the animal is in an exercise area designated
by the city. Retractable leashes may be used but must be kept to a length of
six feet (6') or less when in the vicinity of any other person or animal.
Registered potentially dangerous and dangerous dogs must be restrained as
required by other sections of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4A-2: OFFICERS APPOINTED TO ENFORCE CHAPTER:
The city council may appoint community service officers, animal control
officers, humane agents or other officers to assist the police officers of the
city in the enforcement of this chapter, and no person shall interfere with the
exercise of such powers. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4A-3: INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICERS:
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any unauthorized person to break
open a shelter or attempt to take from any officer any animal taken up in
compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4A-4: ANIMAL SHELTER PROVIDED:
The city council may provide for a city owned animal shelter or may designate
as an animal shelter a suitable kennel whether within or outside the limits of
the city. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4A-5: RABIES, BITES, IMPOUNDING AND DISPOSAL OF ANIMALS:
   A.   Reports Of Rabies: Any person having knowledge of an animal that is a
rabies suspect or of an animal or human who may have been bitten by a rabies
suspect must report it to the city police department. All rabies reports and
incidents will be handled in accordance with the Minnesota board of animal
health rules and regulations.
   B.   Reports Of Bites: Any person having knowledge of an animal bite to a
human must report it to the city police department.
   C.   Impoundment:
      1.   Violation: In the event of a violation of this chapter, any
designated officer may capture and impound an animal in the city designated
shelter.
      2.   Notice: Immediately upon the impounding of any animal wearing a
current registration, the city will attempt to notify the owner of the
impoundment and the conditions of regaining custody of the animal. Verbal
notices will be confirmed in writing.
      3.   Right Of Entry: To enforce this chapter, designated officers may
enter upon private premises where it appears or where there is reasonable cause
to believe that an animal is not registered or is not being kept, confined or
restrained as required herein, or in pursuit of an animal running at large. Any
owner shall produce for the officer's inspection, the animal's registration or
receipt upon request.
      4.   Length Of Impoundment: Any animal that is impounded in the city
animal shelter shall be kept in the city shelter for at least five (5) business
days unless sooner reclaimed by its owner. If such animal is known to be or is
suspected of being rabid or has bitten a person, it shall be kept quarantined
for a period as recommended by the Minnesota board of animal health.
   D.   Reclamation Or Disposal Of Impounded Animals:
      1.   Fines And Fees: Fines shall be determined by council resolution and
reviewed annually. An administrative fee shall be charged and collected by the
city animal shelter, or cooperating pet adoption agency, to recover costs
incurred by the shelter in caring for and maintaining the animal.
      2.   Registration: If the animal requires a city registration, such
registration must also be obtained before the animal is released.
      3.   Abandonment/Adoption: If at the end of the impounding period the
animal is not reclaimed by the owner, the animal shall be deemed abandoned and
may be placed for adoption if appropriate. The shelter or cooperating pet
adoption agency shall ensure that anyone purchasing unclaimed animals shall
have the animal spayed or neutered prior to release, or as soon as conditions
of health or age of the animal permit. Failure on the part of the adopting
owner to comply with this section shall be a violation of this chapter.
      4.   Disposal:
         a.   If an animal is not adopted, then it may be euthanized in a
humane manner. Final determination on the adoptability of animals shall rest
with the police department, in consultation with the city animal shelter or
cooperating pet adoption agency.
         b.   If the owner requests disposal of the animal, the owner shall pay
for the cost of disposal, including any boarding or other fees incurred prior
to disposal. A request to dispose of an animal must be made in writing to the
police department, along with proof of ownership or an affidavit of ownership.
Payment of the cost for disposal will be made to the police department by the
owner upon filing of the request for disposal with the police department and
receiving approval.
         c.   Any animal that has a history of or shows a propensity to attack
humans or other animals; or, has a documented history of attacks and bites on
humans or other animals; or, is suspected to have a disease that can be
transmitted to humans or other animals will not be placed for adoption but will
be humanely euthanized.
   E.   Killing Of Animals That Cannot Be Impounded: Any animal that is
diseased, dangerous, rabid or exposed to rabies and cannot be captured or
impounded after a reasonable effort or impounded without serious risk to the
person attempting to capture or impound the animal, may be immediately killed
by or under the direction of a police officer. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
ARTICLE B. REGISTRATION AND CARE OF ANIMALS
SECTION:
7-4B-1: Animal Registration
7-4B-2: Registration Provisions For Commercial Kennels
7-4B-3: Restraint Of Animals
7-4B-4: Animal Tag And Collar Requirements
7-4B-5: Animal Care And Maintenance
7-4B-6: Dangerous Animal Confinement
7-4B-7: Nuisances Prohibited
7-4B-8: Disposal Of Animal Feces
7-4B-9: Keeping Of Animals
7-4B-10: Horse Regulations
7-4B-11: Maintenance Of Fowl And Birds
7-4B-12: Premises Requirements
7-4B-1: ANIMAL REGISTRATION:
   A.   Requirements:
      1.   No person in the city shall own or keep a dog or ferret over six (6)
months of age, within the city, unless a current city registration for such dog
or ferret has been obtained as herein provided.
         a.   All ferrets over the age of six (6) months kept within the city
must be sterilized.
      2.   No person in the city shall own or keep a potentially dangerous or
dangerous dog within the city, unless a current city registration for such dog
has been obtained as provided in article C of this chapter.
   B.   Ownership Limits:
      1.   Household Limit: No person shall own or keep more than a combined
total of five (5) cats, dogs or ferrets over the age of six (6) months within
any household in the city of Rosemount unless authorized elsewhere in this
chapter.
         a.   For the purposes of this section, the term "household" refers to
a single-family residence or a single unit of a town home, condominium,
apartment or comparable structure that is rented, leased or used as a single
unit.
         b.   This section shall not be construed to limit the ability of
apartment managers, landlords, town home and condominium associations or other
representatives of property owners to impose greater restrictions.
      2.   Exception: For premises that are ten (10) acres or more and zoned
agricultural the resident may own or keep up to ten (10) cats over the age of
six (6) months as long as they have been spayed or neutered and documentation
of that fact is provided.
   C.   Application: Application for city registration shall be made to the
police department. It shall include such descriptive information as is
necessary to provide a reasonable identification of the dog or ferret and
owner.
   D.   Term Of Validity: City registrations shall be valid for the period the
certificate of rabies vaccination certifies, and shall expire on the date the
rabies vaccination certificate expires. Nonspayed and unneutered dogs are only
eligible for a year long registration.
   E.   Fees:
      1.   City Registration: The city registration fee shall be set by council
resolution and reviewed annually. The following provisions shall also apply:
         a.   Fee Discount: Spayed or neutered dogs and ferrets shall qualify
for a discount of half (1/2) of the normal fee.
         b.   Multiyear Registration: Spayed or neutered dogs and ferrets shall
qualify for a multiyear registration. This multiyear registration shall expire
on the date the rabies certification expires.
         c.   Nonspayed Or Unneutered Dogs And Ferrets: The registration fee
shall not be discounted for nonspayed or unneutered dogs and ferrets.
         d.   Service Animals And Police Canines: Service animals and police
canines must be registered but the normal fee will be waived.
         e.   Senior Citizen Discount: Senior citizens shall be offered a fifty
percent (50%) discount of the registration fee. For purposes of this discount a
"senior citizen" will be considered anyone aged fifty five (55) years or older.
      2.   Potentially Dangerous And Dangerous Dog Registration: The city
potentially dangerous and dangerous dog registration fee shall be set by
council and reviewed annually.
   F.   Vaccinations: In order to register a dog or ferret, an owner must
provide proof of up to date vaccinations and a certificate from a currently
state licensed veterinarian showing the effective dates of the vaccinations.
   G.   Duplicate Tags: In the event that any registration tag issued for any
animal is lost, the owner must obtain a duplicate tag from the city on the
payment of an amount as set by council resolution.
   H.   New Resident Exemptions: Any dog or ferret owner, upon first becoming a
resident of the city, shall be allowed thirty (30) days' time within which to
obtain the animal's registration. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4B-2: REGISTRATION PROVISIONS FOR COMMERCIAL KENNELS:
   A.   Registration Requirements: No person shall operate a commercial kennel,
without first obtaining the required city registration and paying all fees as
required in this chapter.
   B.   Applications: A commercial kennel application must be made to the
police department and shall include:
      1.   The name and address of the owner and the operator of a commercial
kennel,
      2.   The address where the kennel is to be located,
      3.   A site plan for review,
      4.   Any required secure enclosure details,
      5.   The number of dogs, cats, or ferrets proposed to be kept.
   C.   Issuance Or Suspension Of Registration:
      1.   The police department will issue the registration if all
requirements are met.
      2.   If the application is missing any required documentation, or any
necessary staff approvals or recommendations are missing or incomplete the
application will be suspended until all required or missing items are supplied.
(Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4B-3: RESTRAINT OF ANIMALS:
No animal may be at large. All owners or persons in custody or control of an
animal shall keep the animal "under restraint" at all times. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-
1-2011)
7-4B-4: ANIMAL TAG AND COLLAR REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Upon complying with the registration provisions of this chapter, the
city shall issue to the owner a permanent tag, stamped with a number that will
uniquely identify the animal and owner for which it was issued.
   B.   Every dog and ferret owner is required to keep a valid tag securely
fastened to the registered animal's chain, collar or harness, which must be
worn by the animal at all times. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4B-5: ANIMAL CARE AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   No owner shall fail to provide:
      1.   Any animal with sufficient food, potable water, or proper diet
appropriate for its species,
      2.   Proper shelter and protection from the weather appropriate for its
species,
      3.   Veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering and maintain the
normal health of the animal, and
      4.   Humane care and treatment.
   B.   No person shall:
      1.   Abandon any animal anywhere within the city, or at the animal
shelter designated by the city. Any owner of, or person in custody or control
of, an animal who fails to retrieve an animal from the pound after notification
from animal control shall be deemed to have abandoned such animal and to have
violated this section.
      2.   Beat, treat cruelly, torment or otherwise abuse any animal.
      3.   Cause or permit any dog, cat, cock, or any animal fights.
      4.   Use any weighted collars, over two (2) pounds; any pronged collars
that may cause injury or discomfort to the animal's neck (other than common
electronic training collars); or any treadmill or other training device to
develop any animal's stamina or musculature for any animal fighting.
      5.   Leave any animal unattended in a standing or parked motor vehicle in
a manner that endangers the animal's health or safety. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4B-6: DANGEROUS ANIMAL CONFINEMENT:
Dangerous animals must be confined in a proper enclosure. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-
2011)
7-4B-7: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
   A.   No person shall keep or harbor any animal in any unsanitary place or
condition, or in a manner that results in noisome odors or that annoys others
by barking, crying, howling, fighting or other similar noises.
   B.   No person shall feed animals in such a manner that attracts animals,
causes property damage, allows for excessive amounts of feed to accumulate, or
poses a public health threat. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4B-8: DISPOSAL OF ANIMAL FECES:
   A.   All persons in control of an animal on any park property, public
property or right of way shall have in possession at all times apparatus that
can be used for cleaning up feces, or a bag for proper disposal of feces. The
person in control of an animal is responsible for picking up the animal's feces
and disposing of it properly. Failure to properly collect and dispose of animal
feces is a violation of this chapter.
   B.   A property owner is required to clean all feces from his or her
property as often as necessary to prevent contamination to animals or humans
and to avoid nuisance from odors and breeding of insects, but in no case less
than weekly.
   C.   Any stable, barn or yard area in which horses, cattle or any farm
animals are kept shall be kept clean. Manure shall be removed with sufficient
frequency to avoid nuisance from odors, breeding of insects, public nuisance,
or a public health nuisance, and in no case less than weekly.
   D.   Manure on public streets, roadways, or public right of way shall be
removed by the owner, rider or driver of a horse and disposed of properly on
the person's property, or in a public waste receptacle if the manure is
packaged in a sealed plastic bag or similar container. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4B-9: KEEPING OF ANIMALS:
The keeping of animals is regulated in the following manner:
   A.   Farm Animals: Farm animals are permitted on all property zoned by the
city as agricultural and on property owned by the University Of Minnesota while
used for agricultural or research purposes. Farm animals may not be confined in
a pen, feedlot or building within one hundred feet (100') of any residential
dwelling not owned or leased by the farmer except as otherwise allowed in this
chapter.
   B.   Allowed Animals: Allowed animals, and pigeons and fowl, may be kept in
any zoning districts in accordance with all applicable ordinances and laws
concerning care, maintenance, registration, and restraint. In commercial
districts, allowed animals, including pigeons and fowl, must be kept within the
principal structure.
   C.   Wild Animals: Wild animals are prohibited from being kept in all parts
of the city, except as otherwise allowed in this chapter. A wild animal may be
transported through the city if the transit period is thirty (30) minutes or
less in duration and the wild animal is kept securely restrained in a proper
enclosure or cage appropriate for the species during the transit period.
   D.   Commercial Kennels: Commercial kennels are allowed only in areas zoned
agricultural or commercial, except C-1 and DT.
   E.   Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      1.   Institutions accredited by the American Zoo And Aquarium Association
(AZA) or the American Sanctuary Association (ASA) that are permitted uses
within the city.
      2.   Registered nonprofit humane societies.
      3.   Animal control or law enforcement officers acting under the
authority of city, county, state or federal regulation, rule, ordinance or
statute.
      4.   Licensed veterinary hospitals or clinics.
      5.   State licensed wildlife rehabilitators.
      6.   Licensed or accredited research or medical institutions.
      7.   Licensed or accredited educational institutions.
      8.   Service animals, as defined in this chapter if application of this
section would violate state or federal laws relating to persons with
disabilities.
   F.   Private Zoos, Game Farms, Hunt Clubs Or Animal Exhibitions: No private
zoos, game farms, hunt clubs or animal exhibitions are allowed within any city
zoning district.
   G.   Commercial Purpose: Animals may only be kept for commercial purposes if
authorized in the zoning district where the animals are located.
   H.   Pet Shops And Commercial Kennels: Pet shops and kennels must be
operated in accordance with any applicable state regulations in addition to the
regulations provided by this chapter. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4B-10: HORSE REGULATIONS:
   A.   The keeping of horses is a permitted use in the agricultural and rural
residential zoning districts, provided:
      1.   The lot size is at least two and one-half (2.5) acres.
      2.   The number of horses does not exceed one horse per one acre.
   B.   Exceptions:
      1.   Miniature Horses: The number of miniature horses allowed per acre is
three (3).
      2.   Commercial Stables: Horses kept in commercial stables may exceed the
limits. However, all regulations regarding the welfare, care, and keeping of
horses, manure management and any other applicable ordinance, statute, or
regulation shall be met.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or drive a horse after the
hour of sunset and before the hour of sunrise along or crossing any public
right of way without appropriate lighting or reflective material.
   D.   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive or otherwise take a
horse into any public park or other public property, except within the right of
way of public streets.
   E.   Every person riding a horse or driving a horsedrawn vehicle shall be
subject to the applicable provisions of this code and Minnesota state statutes
regulating motor vehicle traffic. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4B-11: MAINTENANCE OF FOWL AND BIRDS:
   A.   Fowl Not To Be At Large: No person owning or keeping chickens, ducks,
geese, pigeons or other fowl or birds may permit the same to run at large or
enter upon the premises of another without permission, nor may any such fowl or
birds be kept, raised or permitted to go on any street, park, lake or public
ponding area.
   B.   Limitation On Number: No more than three (3) fowl or birds and no more
than twenty five (25) pigeons may be kept on any residential property in the
city.
   C.   Injury Or Annoyance To Others: No fowl or birds may be kept in a manner
as to cause injury or annoyance to persons on other property in the vicinity by
reason of noise, odor or filth.
   D.   Impounding Of Fowl Or Birds: A fowl or bird at large in violation of
this section may be impounded by the city, and after being impounded for five
(5) business days or more without being reclaimed by the owner, may be humanely
euthanized or sold. A person reclaiming any impounded fowl or bird shall pay
the cost of impounding and keeping the same.
   E.   Feeding Within Loft Or Coop: Pigeons and fowl shall be fed within the
confines of the loft or coop on the premises on which the pigeons or fowl are
housed.
   F.   Confinement: Pigeons and fowl must be confined to the loft or coop
except for short periods of exercise during which time they may be permitted to
exercise in the fenced enclosure area, or in the case of pigeons, to fly
outside the loft. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4B-12: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Commercial Kennels:
      1.   Must comply with all requirements in the zoning code.
      2.   Shall be maintained and operated in a neat and sanitary manner. All
refuse, garbage and animal waste shall be removed at least daily so as to keep
the surrounding area free from obnoxious odors.
   B.   Lofts And Coops:
      1.   Lofts and coops must be cleaned and kept in a sanitary manner free
of objectionable odors and wastes as often as necessary to prevent
contamination of the animal(s) contained therein, and any other animals or
humans who may come in contact with them, but in no case less than weekly.
      2.   Grains and food stored for the use of pigeons or fowl shall be kept
in rodentproof containers.
      3.   The loft or coop shall be elevated a minimum of twelve inches (12")
and a maximum of twenty four inches (24") above grade to ensure circulation
beneath the loft or coop.
      4.   The loft or coop shall:
         a.   Be a maximum height of six feet (6');
         b.   Be screened from view by fencing or evergreen plantings with a
minimum height of four feet (4'), unless the structure meets the standards for
accessory structures in the zoning code; and
         c.   Be set back a minimum of fifty feet (50') from any adjoining
principal structure, and a minimum of ten feet (10') from the property line.
   C.   Housing Facilities: All facilities for housing animals shall:
      1.   Be constructed of material appropriate for the animal involved;
      2.   Contain and restrain the animal they are designed or built to
contain without causing injury to, or depriving the animal of necessary
environmental elements;
      3.   Be maintained in good repair;
      4.   Be controlled as to temperature, ventilation, lighting, and humidity
as necessary to provide conditions compatible with the health and comfort of
the animal(s);
      5.   Be of sufficient size to allow each animal to make normal postural
and social adjustments with adequate freedom of movement. Inadequate space may
be indicated by evidence of malnutrition, poor condition, debility, stress or
abnormal behavior patterns;
      6.   Conform with the front, side and rear yard setback standards for
buildings in the zoning district where the structure is to be located;
      7.   Be cleaned as often as necessary to prevent contamination of
animals, and any humans who may come in contact with them and to reduce
objectionable odors, but in no case less than weekly; and
      8.   Be cleaned in a manner utilizing proper protocols, methods,
equipment and materials recommended to minimize disease hazards or transmission
as required by particular species of animal.
      9.   On through lots be permitted on the side adjacent to the rear of the
principal structure and shall meet the required front yard setback; and
      10.   On corner lots be prohibited in a side yard that is adjacent to a
street or roadway.
   D.   Enclosures: Enclosures confining domestic animals to an area of less
than half of a rear yard area must comply with the property line setback
standards for accessory structures. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
ARTICLE C. POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS AND DANGEROUS DOGS
SECTION:
7-4C-1: Adoption By Reference
7-4C-2: Declaration By Police Or Animal Control
7-4C-3: Exceptions
7-4C-4: Notice To Owner
7-4C-5: Contesting Declaration Of Potentially Dangerous Or Dangerous Dog
7-4C-6: Hearing Procedure
7-4C-7: Effect Of Findings
7-4C-8: Appeal
7-4C-9: Review Of Designation
7-4C-10: Registration Of Potentially Dangerous And Dangerous Dogs
7-4C-11: Additional Requirements
7-4C-12: Seizure
7-4C-13: Restrictions On Dog Ownership
7-4C-14: Destruction Of Dog In Certain Circumstances
7-4C-15: Penalties
7-4C-1: ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:
Except as otherwise provided in sections
7-4C-2 to
7-4C-15 of this article, the regulatory and procedural provisions of Minnesota
statutes sections 347.50 to 347.565 are adopted by reference. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-
1-2011)
7-4C-2: DECLARATION BY POLICE OR ANIMAL CONTROL:
A police officer, community service officer, or animal control officer may
declare a dog to be dangerous or potentially dangerous. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-
2011)
7-4C-3: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   The provisions of sections
7-4C-1 to
7-4C-15 of this article do not apply to dogs used by law enforcement officials
for police work.
   B.   Dogs may not be declared dangerous or potentially dangerous if the
threat, injury or danger was sustained by a person who was:
      1.   Committing a wilful trespass or other tort upon the premises
occupied by the owner of the dog;
      2.   Provoking, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog, or who can be
shown to have a history of repeatedly provoking, tormenting, abusing, or
assaulting the dog; or
      3.   Committing or attempting to commit a crime. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4C-4: NOTICE TO OWNER:
If a dog is declared potentially dangerous or dangerous, the police department
will give notice, by delivering or mailing it to the owner of the dog, of
intent to declare the dog potentially dangerous or dangerous. Such notice shall
inform the owner of this designation, the basis for the designation, the
procedures for contesting the designation as described in subsection
7-4C-5A of this article and the result of the failure to contest the
designation as described in subsection
7-4C-5B of this article. Immediately upon receipt of the notice, the dog owner
must comply with the requirements of section
7-4C-11 of this article and continue to comply with such requirements until the
dog is dead or removed from the city, or the city has determined that the dog
is not dangerous or potentially dangerous. The owner shall be informed of this
requirement in the notice of intent. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4C-5: CONTESTING DECLARATION OF POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS OR DANGEROUS DOG:
   A.   If the dog owner has received a notice of intent to declare the dog as
potentially dangerous or dangerous, the owner may request that a hearing be
conducted to determine whether or not such a designation is justified. This
request must be made in writing and delivered to the police department within
fourteen (14) days of receipt of the notice of intent to declare an animal as
potentially dangerous or dangerous.
   B.   If the owner fails to contest a notice within fourteen (14) days, the
owner shall be considered as having forfeited the right to the hearing and the
designation of the dog as potentially dangerous or dangerous is final. The
Police Department will then issue a declaration of dangerous or potentially
dangerous dog to the owner and the owner must immediately comply with all
applicable requirements of this chapter or cause the dog to be humanely
destroyed or removed from the City. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4C-6: HEARING PROCEDURE:
The animal control review panel will conduct the hearing. The panel will
consist of the Mayor, a Council member, and a citizen representative. The panel
will schedule a hearing and may call witnesses and review documents as needed
to make a determination on the issue. Owners shall have the right to present
evidence on their behalf and to cross examine any witnesses. A simple majority
of the members of the panel is necessary for a finding that the animal is
either dangerous or potentially dangerous. A finding supporting a designation
of dangerous or potentially dangerous must be proven by a preponderance of the
evidence. The decision of the animal control review panel shall be in writing
and shall indicate the reasons for the findings. A copy of the findings shall
be provided to animal control and the animal owner. If the panel upholds the
designation of the dog, the owner is responsible for all costs, up to a maximum
of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), associated with the hearing. (Ord. 2011-
09, 8-1-2011)
7-4C-7: EFFECT OF FINDINGS:
If the panel finds there is sufficient basis to declare the dog potentially
dangerous or dangerous, the owner must immediately comply with all applicable
requirements of this chapter or immediately cause the dog to be humanely
destroyed or removed from the City limits. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4C-8: APPEAL:
If the owner of the dog disputes the decision of the panel, the owner shall
have the right to appeal the decision to the Rosemount City Council. The appeal
must be filed with the Police Department within fourteen (14) days of the
panel's ruling. If the dog owner disputes the findings of the City Council, the
owner may appeal to the Minnesota Court of Appeals as provided by State law.
(Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4C-9: REVIEW OF DESIGNATION:
Beginning six (6) months after a dog is declared potentially dangerous or
dangerous dog, an owner may request annually that the animal control review
panel review the designation. The owner must provide evidence that the dog's
behavior has changed due to the dog's age, neutering, environment, completion
of obedience training that includes modification of aggressive behavior, or
other factors. If the panel finds sufficient evidence that the dog's behavior
has changed, the panel may rescind the potentially dangerous or dangerous dog
designation. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4C-10: REGISTRATION OF POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS AND DANGEROUS DOGS:
   A.   Requirement: No person may own a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog
in the City unless the dog is registered as provided in this section. (Ord.
2011-09, 8-1-2011)
   B.   Certificate Of Registration: The City will issue a certificate of
registration to the owner of a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog if the
owner presents:
      1.   Evidence that a proper enclosure exists for the dog and all accesses
to the premises are posted with clearly visible warning signs issued or
approved by the Police Department that there is a dangerous dog on the
property;
      2.   A certificate of liability insurance issued by an insurance company
authorized to conduct business, which specifically states that the owner is
insured for any personal injuries inflicted by the potentially dangerous or
dangerous dog, in the amount of at least three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00);
      3.   Proof of payment of the required annual registration fee;
      4.   Proof that the owner has had microchip identification implanted in
the dog as required under Minnesota Statutes section 347.515; and
      5.   Proof of payment of any hearing costs, if applicable. (Ord. 2017-02,
5-16-2017)
   C.   Warning Sign: If the City issues a certificate of registration to the
owner of a dangerous dog under subsection B of this section, the City will
provide, for posting on the owner's property, a copy of a warning symbol to
inform children that there is a dangerous dog on the property. The City may
charge the dog owner a reasonable fee to cover its administrative costs and the
costs of the warning symbol.
   D.   Fee: The city will charge the owner an annual fee to obtain a
certificate of registration for a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog.
   E.   Tag: A dangerous dog registered under this section must have a tag,
issued by the city, identifying the dog as dangerous. This tag must be affixed
to the dog's collar and worn by the dog at all times. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4C-11: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Enclosure And Proper Restraint: An owner of a dangerous dog shall keep
the dog, while on the owner's property, in a proper enclosure. If the dog is
outside the proper enclosure, the dog must be muzzled and restrained by a
substantial chain or leash and under the physical restraint of a responsible
person. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will prevent the dog from
biting any person or animal but that will not cause injury to the dog or
interfere with its vision or respiration.
   B.   Registration Renewal: An owner of a potentially dangerous or dangerous
dog must renew the registration of the dog annually until the dog is deceased.
If the dog is removed from the jurisdiction, it must be registered in its new
jurisdiction.
   C.   Death Or Transfer: An owner of a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog
must notify the city police department in writing of the death of the dog or
its transfer, and must, if requested by the police department, execute an
affidavit under oath setting forth either the circumstances of the dog's death
and disposition or the complete name, address, and telephone number of the
person to whom the dog has been transferred.
   D.   Sterilization: The city shall require a dangerous dog to be sterilized
at the owner's expense. If the owner does not have the animal sterilized within
thirty (30) days, the city shall have the animal sterilized at the owner's
expense. The owner may contest and appeal a decision requiring a dog to be
sterilized in accordance with the procedures set forth in subsection
7-4C-5A of this article.
   E.   Rental Property: A person who owns a potentially dangerous or dangerous
dog and who rents property from another where the dog will reside must disclose
to the property owner prior to entering the lease agreement and at the time of
any lease renewal that the person owns a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog
that will reside at the property. A dog owner, who is currently renting
property, must notify the property owner within fourteen (14) days of city
notification if the dog is newly declared as potentially dangerous or dangerous
and the owner keeps the dog on the property.
   F.   Sale: A person who sells a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog must
notify the purchaser that the dog has been declared potentially dangerous or
dangerous. The seller must also notify the city police department with the new
owner's name, address, and telephone number.
   G.   Training Required: Any dangerous or potentially dangerous dog and its
owner shall be required to attend and complete animal behavioral modification
and socialization training, from a provider approved by the city. The costs for
this training will be the responsibility of the animal owner.
   H.   New Resident: If any dog comes into residency in the city and has been
previously declared dangerous or potentially dangerous by another agency or
jurisdiction within the state, the owner shall report this to the city police
department within ten (10) days of taking up residency in the city. The owner
must comply immediately with all requirements for posting, restraint, muzzling,
and confinement. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4C-12: SEIZURE:
   A.   Immediate Seizure: An animal control officer or any police officer may
immediately seize any dangerous or potentially dangerous dog and/or issue a
citation or summons to the owner of the dog if:
      1.   Within fourteen (14) days after the owner has received notice that
the dog is dangerous, the dog is not validly registered and microchipped as
required by this article; or
      2.   The dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure; or
      3.   The dog is outside the proper enclosure and is not muzzled and
restrained by a substantial chain or leash and under the physical restraint of
a responsible competent person; or
      4.   Fourteen (14) days after the owner has received notice that the dog
is dangerous or potentially dangerous, the owner does not secure the proper
liability insurance or surety bond as required by this article; or
      5.   After the owner has been notified that the dog is dangerous or
potentially dangerous, the dog bites or attacks a person or domestic animal; or
      6.   The dog is not sterilized within thirty (30) days pursuant to
subsection
7-4C-11D of this article.
   B.   Conviction: If an owner of a dog is convicted of a crime for which the
dog was originally seized, the court may order that the dog be confiscated and
destroyed in a proper manner, and that the owner pay the costs incurred in
confiscating, confining, and destroying the dog.
   C.   Reclaimed: A dog seized under subsection A of this section may be
reclaimed by the owner of the dog upon payment of impounding and boarding fees,
and presenting proof to the police department that the requirements of sections
7-4C-10 and
7-4C-11 of this article will be met. A dog not reclaimed within seven (7) days
of seizure may be disposed of as provided in Minnesota statutes section 35.71,
subdivision 3. The owner is liable to the city for costs incurred in confining
and disposing of the dog.
   D.   Subsequent Offenses: If a person has been convicted of a misdemeanor
for violating a provision of section
7-4C-10 or
7-4C-11 of this article, and the person is charged with a subsequent violation
relating to the same dog, the police department must seize the dog. If the
owner is convicted of the crime for which the dog was seized, the court shall
order that the dog be destroyed in a proper and humane manner and the owner is
responsible for paying the cost of confining and destroying the animal. If the
person is not convicted of the crime for which the dog was seized, the owner
may reclaim the dog upon payment to the city of a fee for the care and boarding
of the dog. If the dog is not reclaimed by the owner within seven (7) days
after the owner has been notified that the dog may be reclaimed, the dog may be
disposed of as provided under Minnesota statutes section 35.71, subdivision 3.
The owner is liable to the city for the costs incurred in confining,
impounding, and disposing of the dog.
   E.   Disposition Of Seized Dogs:
      1.   Right To Hearing: The owner of any seized dog has the right to a
hearing by the animal control review panel. The notice and hearing requirements
in sections
7-4C-4 to
7-4C-8 of this article will apply to a hearing requested under this section.
Any hearing requested under this section will be held within fourteen (14) days
of the request. In the event that the seizure is upheld by the panel, actual
expenses of the hearing up to a maximum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
will be the responsibility of the dog owner. The panel will issue a decision
within ten (10) days after the hearing. The decision will be hand delivered to
the dog's owner or delivered via registered mail as soon as practical and a
copy will be provided to the city police department.
      2.   Security: A person claiming an interest in a seized dog may prevent
disposition of the dog by posting security in an amount sufficient to provide
for the dog's actual cost of care and keeping. The security must be posted
within seven (7) days of the seizure inclusive of the date of seizure. (Ord.
2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4C-13: RESTRICTIONS ON DOG OWNERSHIP:
   A.   Dog Ownership Prohibited: Except as provided in subsection C of this
section, no person may own a dog if the person has been:
      1.   Convicted of a third or subsequent violation of section
7-4C-10 or
7-4C-11 of this article or Minnesota statutes section 347.515;
      2.   Convicted of second degree manslaughter due to negligent or
intentional use of a dog under a violation under Minnesota statutes section
609.205, clause 4;
      3.   Convicted of a gross misdemeanor harm caused by a dog under
Minnesota statutes section 609.226, subdivision 1;
      4.   Been convicted of a violation under Minnesota statutes section
609.226, subdivision 2;
      5.   Had a dog ordered destroyed under section
7-4C-14 of this article and been convicted of one or more violations of section
7-4C-10 or
7-4C-11 of this article, or Minnesota statutes section 347.515 or 609.226,
subdivision 2.
   B.   Household Members: If any member of a household is prohibited from
owning a dog under subsection A of this section, unless specifically approved
with or without restrictions by the city, no person in the household is
permitted to own a dog.
   C.   Dog Ownership Prohibition Review: Beginning three (3) years after a
conviction under subsection A of this section that prohibits a person from
owning a dog, and annually thereafter, the person may request in writing to the
city police department that the animal control review panel review the
prohibition. The panel may consider such facts as the seriousness of the
violation or violations that led to the prohibition, any criminal convictions,
or other facts that the panel deems appropriate. The panel may rescind the
prohibition entirely or rescind it with limitations. The panel also may
establish conditions a person must meet before the prohibition is rescinded,
including, but not limited to, successfully completing dog training or dog
handling courses. If the panel rescinds a person's prohibition and the person
subsequently fails to comply with any limitations imposed by the city or the
person is convicted of any animal violation involving unprovoked bites or dog
attacks, the panel may permanently prohibit the person from owning a dog in
this state. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4C-14: DESTRUCTION OF DOG IN CERTAIN CIRCUMSTANCES:
   A.   Circumstances: Notwithstanding sections
7-4C-10 to
7-4C-13 of this article, a dog may be ordered destroyed in a proper and humane
manner by the city police department if the dog:
      1.   Inflicted substantial or great bodily harm on a human being on
public or private property without provocation;
      2.   Inflicted multiple bites on a human being on public or private
property without provocation;
      3.   Bit multiple human victims on public or private property in the same
attack without provocation; or
      4.   Bit a human on public or private property without provocation in an
attack where more than one dog participated in the attack.
   B.   Hearing: The police department may not destroy the dog until the dog
owner has had the opportunity for a hearing before the animal control review
panel. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4C-15: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person violating the provisions of section
7-4C-10 or
7-4C-11 of this article, shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to penalties specified for misdemeanors in
Minnesota statutes section 609.03, as amended from time to time. Each day that
a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
   B.   It is a misdemeanor to remove a microchip from a dangerous dog, to fail
to renew the registration of a dangerous dog, to fail to account for a
dangerous dog's death or change of location where the dog will reside, to sign
a false affidavit with respect to a dangerous dog's death or change of location
where the dog will reside, or to fail to disclose ownership of a dangerous dog
to a property owner from whom the person rents property.
   C.   A person who is convicted of a second or subsequent violation of
subsection A or B of this section is guilty of a gross misdemeanor.
   D.   An owner who violates Minnesota statutes section 347.542 or section
7-4C-13 of this article is guilty of a gross misdemeanor.
   E.   Any household member who knowingly violates Minnesota statutes section
347.542, subdivision 2, or section
7-4C-13 of this article is guilty of a gross misdemeanor. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-
2011)
ARTICLE D. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
SECTION:
7-4D-1: Violation, Revocation And Hearing
7-4D-2: Penalties
7-4D-3: Statutory Citations
7-4D-4: Conflict
7-4D-1: VIOLATION, REVOCATION AND HEARING:
   A.   The council may revoke any city animal registration for violation of
this chapter or for violation of any other applicable local, state, or federal
law or regulation.
   B.   Before revoking a registration, the animal owner shall be given notice
of the meeting at which such revocation will be considered and if the owner is
present at such meeting, an opportunity to be heard.
      1.   Notice of such meeting shall be given to the owner in writing,
mailed to the address of the owner as set forth in the application, and mailed
at least five (5) days prior to the date of the meeting for consideration of
the matter.
      2.   If the council finds, after hearing evidence and testimony, that a
violation has occurred, it may suspend, place conditions on, or revoke the
animal registration. The council may also take any appropriate action to abate
a public nuisance caused by an animal or its owner.
      3.   If the owner does not comply with the council action, then the city
may seize and hold the animal pursuant to applicable laws.
      4.   Registration and hearings related to potentially dangerous and
dangerous dogs are governed by article C of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-
2011)
7-4D-2: PENALTIES:
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, any person(s) who violates this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be
punishable by a fine or imprisonment, or both, as provided by Minnesota state
statutes.
If penalties greater than those set forth in this section are allowed by
Minnesota state statute, the more severe penalties may be applied. (Ord. 2011-
09, 8-1-2011)
7-4D-3: STATUTORY CITATIONS:
References to Minnesota state statutes in this chapter also include any
amendments to those statutes. (Ord. 2011-09, 8-1-2011)
7-4D-4: CONFLICT:
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a
provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or health ordinance or code in
this city, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the
promotion and protection of the health and safety of people or animals shall
prevail. In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in
conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or code of the city existing
on the effective date of this chapter which established a lower standard for
the promotion and protection of the health and safety of people or animals, the
provision of this chapter shall be deemed to prevail. The determination of the
applicability of this chapter, in light of the above rules of interpretation,
shall be made by the city and its determination shall be final. (Ord. 2011-09,
8-1-2011)
CHAPTER 5
BOWS, FIREARMS AND TRAPPING
SECTION:
7-5-1: Definitions
7-5-2: Designated Areas
7-5-3: Permitted Uses Of Bows And Firearms
7-5-4: Additional Permitted Uses Of Firearms In Area NR
7-5-5: Bow And Firearm Prohibitions
7-5-6: Permitted Uses Of Shotguns Within The Restricted R Area
7-5-7: Hunting Map
7-5-8: Trapping Permitted In Designated Areas And Prohibitions
7-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
BOW: Any device capable of propelling an arrow or similar projectile for a
distance greater than fifty feet (50').
CARRY: The handling or transportation of a bow or firearm concealed or
otherwise outside a person's domicile.
DISMANTLED BOW OR FIREARM: Any unloaded firearm or bow which is dismantled in
such a manner so as to prevent shooting it.
ENCASED BOW OR FIREARM: Any unloaded bow or firearm, placed in a case which is
tied or otherwise secured, to prevent shooting it.
FIREARM: A device that discharges shot or a projectile by means of an
explosive, a gas, a spring or compressed air.
LANDOWNER: Any person, group, firm or corporation owning, leasing or legally
controlling any lands within the territorial limits of the City.
NONRESTRICTED: That area in the City in which the use of firearms and bows and
arrows are regulated only by State and Federal Statutes, without any further
restrictions of this chapter.
PROJECTILE: Any object intended and capable of being discharged from a bow or
firearm.
RESTRICTED: That area of the City in which the use of firearms and bows and
arrows is restricted by regulations included in this chapter in addition to
State and Federal Statutes.
RESTRICTED SHOTGUN: That area of the City in which hunting with a firearm is
restricted to the use of a shotgun.
SHOOTING: The firing or discharge of any bow or firearm.
SUITABLE BACKSTOP: Any natural or manmade barrier of sufficient mass, size, or
construction to wholly contain the projectile being discharged from a bow or
firearm.
TRAPPING: The act of setting or laying a trap used to catch, snare or kill an
animal or bird.
WRITTEN PERMISSION: A written document containing the following information:
the full name, address, date of birth and signature of the person authorized to
hunt or shoot; the full name, address, and signature of the landowner providing
the written permission. (Ord. XIV.11, 10-6-1992; amd. Ord. XVI.51, 6-3-2003;
Ord. XVI.58, 9-16-2008)
7-5-2: DESIGNATED AREAS:
For purposes of regulating the use of bows and firearms within the City, all
area within the corporate City limits is divided into certain restricted R and
non-restricted NR areas. The area designated restricted bow and restricted
shotgun, restricted bow, non-restricted, and no hunting are depicted in the
approved Hunting Restrictions Map. (Ord. 2017-04, 6-6-2017)
7-5-3: PERMITTED USES OF BOWS AND FIREARMS:
In areas R and NR, the shooting or carrying of bows and firearms which are not
encased or dismantled is permitted under the following circumstances in the
designated areas R and NR unless otherwise prohibited by State or Federal law:
   A.   By law enforcement officers in the line of duty or military personnel
in the line of duty.
   B.   By any person to resist or prevent an offense which that person
reasonably believes exposes him or her or another person to great bodily harm
or death.
   C.   By any person on a rifle, trap, archery or target range established in
accordance with the City's zoning ordinance or as part of a City sponsored or
authorized activity. (Ord. XIV.11, 10-6-1992)
   D.   By any person target practicing with a bow and a suitable backstop in a
designated City park(s) area(s) or on school grounds in connection with a
school sponsored class or program or in an area zoned Rural Residential and at
least two hundred feet (200') from all buildings, unless the buildings are
owned by him or her or unless he or she has the owner's written permission
carried on his or her person. Bow and arrow target practice may also take place
within the confines of a building if a suitable backstop is used. (Ord. XVI.47,
6-5-2001)
   E.   By a person participating in a special hunting season, which season may
not conflict with State law or regulations, established by the City Council
upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police for the purpose of wildlife
management. The seasons shall be established by the City Council when, based
upon competent professional advice (such as a conservation officer), a season
is needed to reduce an animal population. (Ord. XIV.11, 10-6-1992)
   F.   Bow and arrow use for hunting purposes is permitted on platted parcels
of a minimum of 2.5 acres that are zoned Rural Residential or Agriculture. All
hunting must be done from an elevated stand of a minimum of five feet (5').
Hunting with a bow and arrow shall be in accordance with all applicable State
laws and regulations. (Ord. XVI.51, 6-3-2003)
7-5-4: ADDITIONAL PERMITTED USES OF FIREARMS IN AREA NR:
The shooting or carrying of firearms which are not encased or dismantled is
permitted under the following circumstances in designated area NR unless
otherwise prohibited by State or Federal law:
   A.   By any person for target practice provided that the projectiles are
stopped by a suitable backstop and provided further that the property on which
the target practice occurs is owned by him or her or is undertaken with the
owner's written permission carried on his or her person.
   B.   By any person hunting provided that the projectiles do not leave the
property on which the hunting is occurring and provided further that the
shooting occurs at least five hundred feet (500') from all buildings unless
owned by the hunter or with the owner's written permission carried on the
hunter's person. (Ord. XIV.11, 10-6-1992)
7-5-5: BOW AND FIREARM PROHIBITIONS:
Except as specifically allowed in sections
7-5-3 and
7-5-4 of this chapter:
   A.   Unless it is encased or dismantled, the carrying of a bow or firearm in
a motor vehicle, in a place or area open to the public or in any private place
or area, unless the private place or area is owned by the person carrying the
bow or firearm, or with the owner's permission, is prohibited.
   B.   The shooting of or hunting using a bow or firearm is prohibited.
   C.   Carrying or shooting a bow or firearm by any person under the age of
fourteen (14) is prohibited except when accompanied by a parent, adult guardian
or certified safety training instructor. (Ord. XIV.11, 10-6-1992)
7-5-6: PERMITTED USES OF SHOTGUNS WITHIN THE RESTRICTED R AREA:
The shooting or carrying of shotguns that are not encased or dismantled is
permitted under the following circumstances in designated SH areas in
accordance with applicable State and Federal law:
   A.   Single projectile slugs are authorized only for deer hunting.
   B.   Shot up to Number 2 shot is authorized for all other hunting or target
shooting.
   C.   All hunting of deer must be done from an elevated stand of a minimum of
five feet (5') in height. (Ord. XVI.51, 6-3-2003)
7-5-7: HUNTING MAP:
Hunting Map dated June 1, 2017.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4b51a377144822298e340f2016f76ebbfa73789c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-45.gif]
(Ord. 2017-04, 6-6-2017)
7-5-8: TRAPPING PERMITTED IN DESIGNATED AREAS AND PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Permitted Where; Exceptions:
      1.   Trapping is permitted on platted parcels of a minimum of 2.5 acres
that are zoned rural residential or agriculture; and parcels of a minimum of
five (5) acres located east of County Road 71 (Blaine Avenue) and zoned heavy
industrial. All trapping shall be conducted in accordance with all applicable
state laws and regulations. Trapping may be conducted by an owner, members of
the owner's family or by written consent of the owner of the platted parcel.
Written consent shall be carried on the person while trapping is being
conducted on the property.
      2.   In addition, trapping shall not be done:
         a.   Within fifty feet (50') of any city, county or state park land or
other public property. This restriction shall include public roadways and the
fifty feet (50') shall be measured from the curb or edge of the roadway.
         b.   Within twenty five feet (25') of any property line when the
trapping is conducted in an area zoned as rural residential.
         c.   Within twenty five feet (25') of any property line when the
trapping is conducted in an area zoned as agriculture if the adjoining property
is not also zoned as agriculture.
   B.   Prohibited Where: Trapping is prohibited in all areas not listed in
subsection A of this section.
   C.   Restrictions Of Types And Sizes Of Traps: Traps used in the permitted
areas are restricted as follows:
      1.   Snare traps are prohibited.
      2.   No leg hold trap larger than #2 or conibear type with a jaw spread
larger than six and one-half inches (61/2") shall be used.
      3.   If conibear type traps are to be baited or bait is used in
conjunction with the trap sets, it must be set in the following way: They must
be set in a cubby with the trap inserted a minimum of seven inches (7") from
the front, with the cubby opening no more than fifty (50) square inches in
area. Openings may be restricted with wire mesh, wood strips, or other
material.
   D.   Exceptions: This section does not apply to:
      1.   Quick kill trapping if the traps are designed and intended to kill
rats, mice, gophers or moles.
      2.   Live trapping of wild animals.
      3.   Any person duly appointed and designated through city council action
for the purpose of wildlife management and control. (Ord. XVI.58, 9-16-2008)
CHAPTER 6
DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
SECTION:
7-6-1: Definitions
7-6-2: Disposal Of Property Other Than Motor Vehicles
7-6-3: Deposit Of Net Proceeds
7-6-4: Disposal Of Motor Vehicles
7-6-4-1: Right Of Reclaim
7-6-4-2: Public Sale
7-6-4-3: Retention By City In Lieu Of Public Sale
7-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
In this Chapter:
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled.
NET PROCEEDS: The sale price of any item of property or of a motor vehicle,
less any costs of handling, storage and sale.
PROPERTY: All forms of tangible personal property. (Ord., 10-16-1984)
7-6-2: DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY OTHER THAN MOTOR VEHICLES:
Unless otherwise specified in this Section or by law, property lawfully coming
into the possession of the City and its duly designated agents, in the course
of its Municipal operations, shall be stored and safely maintained by the City
for a period of sixty (60) days. Such property shall be disposed of by the City
in the following manner: (Ord. XIV.19, 4-20-1999)
   A.   During such sixty (60) day period, the City may deliver such property
to the true owner thereof upon proof of ownership, and upon ten (10) days'
notice by mail to other persons who may have asserted a claim of true
ownership. In the event ownership cannot be determined to the satisfaction of
the City Clerk, or his designee, he may refuse to deliver such property to
anyone until ordered to do so by the court. The City Clerk may in his
discretion choose to deposit such property with the court if there are
sufficient competing claims to the property.
   B.   If the true owner does not claim the property during the sixty (60) day
period, the City may release the unclaimed property to the finder of the
property if, at the time of delivery to the City, the finder indicated in
writing that he or she wished to assert a claim to the property as finder. This
subsection is not applicable if the property was found by a City officer,
employee or agent in the ordinary course of his duties. (Ord., 10-16-1984)
   C.   Upon the expiration of the sixty (60) day period, property remaining
unclaimed may be sold by the City to the highest bidder at public auction or
sale following ten (10) days' published notice thereof. In lieu of public
auction or sale, any of such unclaimed property may be appropriated to the use
of the City upon the affirmative resolution of the City Council. If the
property is not sold at public auction or sale and is not deemed appropriate
for use by the City, the City Clerk may then dispose of the property in any
manner deemed appropriate. (Ord. XIV.19, 4-20-1999)
   D.   The City Clerk, or his designee, may at any time without notice and in
such manner as he determines to be in the public interest, dispose summarily of
any property coming into the City's possession which he determines to be
dangerous or perishable. The City Clerk shall make a record of the pertinent
facts of the receipt and disposal of such property. (Ord., 10-16-1984)
7-6-3: DEPOSIT OF NET PROCEEDS:
The net proceeds of the sale of any property, other than a motor vehicle,
whether by public auction or sale, shall be deposited in the General Fund of
the City subject to the right of the former owner of the property to the
payment of the net sale proceeds from the General Fund upon application and
satisfactory proof of ownership within six (6) months of the sale. (Ord., 10-
16-1984)
7-6-4: DISPOSAL OF MOTOR VEHICLES:
Unless otherwise provided by law, motor vehicles impounded by the City and its
duly designated agents, or otherwise lawfully coming into its possession during
the course of its Municipal operations, shall be disposed of as follows:
   A.   Notice of the taking shall be given within five (5) days unless the
vehicle is reclaimed prior thereto. (Ord. XIV.19, 4-20-1999)
   B.   The notice shall set forth the date and place of taking, the year,
make, model and serial number of the vehicle, if such information can be
reasonably obtained, and the place where the vehicle is being held.
   C.   The notice shall inform the owner and any lien holders of the right to
reclaim the vehicle.
   D.   The notice shall state that failure of the owner or lien holders to
exercise their right to reclaim shall be deemed a waiver by them of all right,
title and interest in the vehicle and contents and a consent to the sale of the
vehicle and contents at a public auction or sale.
   E.   The notice shall be sent by mail to the registered owner, if any, of
the vehicle, and to all readily identifiable lien holders of record. If it is
impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and address of
the registered owner and all lien holders, the notice shall be published once
in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the motor vehicle was
taken. (Ord., 10-16-1984)
7-6-4-1: RIGHT OF RECLAIM:
The owner or lien holder shall have the right to reclaim the vehicle from the
City upon payment of all towing and storage charges resulting from the taking
within fifteen (15) days of the notice required by this Section in the case of
abandoned or junk vehicles or forty five (45) days in the case of unauthorized
vehicles, both as defined in Minnesota Statutes, section 168B.011. (Ord.
XIV.19, 4-20-1999)
7-6-4-2: PUBLIC SALE:
   A.   If the vehicle is not reclaimed pursuant to Section
7-6-4-1 of this Chapter, it may be sold to the highest bidder at a public
auction or sale. The purchaser shall be given a receipt in a form prescribed by
the registrar of motor vehicles which shall be sufficient title to dispose of
the vehicle. The receipt shall entitle the purchaser to register the vehicle
and receive a certificate of title, free and clear of all liens and claims of
ownership. Before such vehicle is issued a new certificate of title, it must
receive a motor vehicle safety check.
   B.   Proceeds of the sale will be used to reimburse the City for its costs
involved in towing, preserving and storing the vehicle, and all administrative,
notice and publication costs. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall
be held for the previous owner or entitled lien holders for ninety (90) days
and then shall be deposited in the Treasury of the City. (Ord., 10-16-1984)
7-6-4-3: RETENTION BY CITY IN LIEU OF PUBLIC SALE:
The City may, in lieu of public auction or sale as provided in Section
7-6-4-2 of this Chapter, retain possession and use of any motor vehicle not
reclaimed pursuant to Section
7-6-4-1 of this Chapter, subject to the following provisions:
   A.   The City shall retain possession upon affirmative resolution by the
City Council.
   B.   The City shall given notice as provided in subsections
 7-6-4A through E of this Chapter.
   C.   The City shall register the vehicle and receive a certificate of title
as provided for purchasers at public sale in Section
7-6-4-2 of this Chapter.
   D.   The previous owner or lien holder shall have the right to reclaim the
vehicle from the City, upon payment of all towing and storage charges resulting
from the taking, within ninety (90) days of the City Council resolution
authorizing the retention of the vehicle by the City. (Ord., 10-16-1984)
CHAPTER 7
GRAFFITI CONTROL
SECTION:
7-7-1: Purpose
7-7-2: Definitions
7-7-3: Unlawful Conduct Regarding Creation Of Graffiti And Possession Of
Graffiti Materials
7-7-4: Limited Entry Upon Land; Interference With Official Duties
7-7-5: Unlawful Conduct; Owner Responsibility
7-7-6: City Police To Identify
7-7-7: Hearing
7-7-8: Notice To Owner
7-7-9: Costs To Be Assessed
7-7-10: Graffiti Abatement Civil In Nature
7-7-11: Severability
7-7-12: Penalty
7-7-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The council finds that there are incidents of graffiti throughout the
city and that these incidents are undesirable for the city. The council finds
that quick removal of the graffiti may assist in preventing encouragement of
undesirable elements.
   B.   The council finds that exposure to the graffiti adversely affects the
emotional well being of city youth and creates peer pressure on city youth to
join these undesirable and detrimental acts of vandalism.
   C.   The council further finds that graffiti creates a condition of blight
which can result in the deterioration of property values and is inconsistent
with the city's property maintenance goals and aesthetic standards. In
addition, unless graffiti is removed, other properties soon become the targets
of graffiti.
   D.   The council hereby declares its intention to minimize and to quickly
remove graffiti to limit its adverse impact on city youth and neighborhoods.
Graffiti is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and a public health and
safety hazard for purposes of Minnesota statutes section 429.101, subdivision 1
(c) and section 429.021, subdivision 1(8). (Ord. XIV.14, 5-2-1995)
7-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the terms defined in this section shall have the
following meanings ascribed to them.
GRAFFITI: Any writing, printing, marks, signs, symbols, figures, designs,
inscriptions, or other drawings which are scratched, scrawled, painted, drawn,
or otherwise placed on any surface of objects such as buildings, walls, fences,
sidewalks, curbs, trees, rocks, or other permanent structures or objects on
public or private property or the interior surfaces of those parts of buildings
accessible to the general public and which have the effect of defacing the
property.
GRAFFITI MATERIALS: Paint, aerosol, or pressurized containers of paint,
indelible markers, ink, dye, or any other substance capable of defacing
property. (Ord. XIV.14, 5-2-1995)
7-7-3: UNLAWFUL CONDUCT REGARDING CREATION OF GRAFFITI AND POSSESSION OF
GRAFFITI MATERIALS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally place graffiti on
any surface or the interior surfaces of those parts of buildings accessible to
the general public located on public or private property except with the
permission of the person in lawful ownership or possession of such property and
according with the requirements of the city's sign ordinance.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess graffiti materials with
the intent to place graffiti on any surface or the interior surfaces of those
parts of buildings accessible to the general public located on public or
private property. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
7-7-4: LIMITED ENTRY UPON LAND; INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL DUTIES:
   A.   Police department personnel that have probable cause to believe a
violation of this chapter exists may enter upon private property at any
reasonable time for the purpose of carrying out any of the duties assigned to
them under this chapter. However, prior to entry upon private property to
verify the existence of a violation of this chapter, an appropriate warrant
authorizing the contemplated search or other necessary actions shall be first
obtained from a court of competent jurisdiction. If a property owner or person
in possession of private property consents to entry by police onto the
property, no warrant shall be required.
   B.   Upon a finding by the council that graffiti exists or with the consent
of the property owner, members of other city departments authorized by the
council may enter upon private premises at any reasonable time for the purpose
of carrying out any of the duties assigned to them under this chapter.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay, or interfere
with representatives of the city police department or other city departments
while they are engaged in the performance of duties imposed by this chapter.
   D.   A property owner may ask the city to remove graffiti from the owner's
property before being ordered to do so following the abatement procedure set
forth in sections
7-7-5 through
7-7-9 of this chapter. If the city agrees to remove the graffiti, the city
shall have the property owner or its designated agent sign a consent form
authorizing the city or its agents to enter onto the property and a release of
liability form. The property owner shall be liable for any costs which the city
incurs in removing the graffiti. The city may collect the costs as a special
assessment pursuant to Minnesota statutes 429.101, subdivision 1(c) if the
property owner fails to reimburse the city upon request. (Ord. XIV.14, 5-2-
1995)
7-7-5: UNLAWFUL CONDUCT; OWNER RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property to allow graffiti to
be placed on any surface or the interior surfaces of those parts of buildings
accessible to the general public on the owner's property.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property to allow the
graffiti to remain without making reasonable attempts to remove the graffiti
within thirty (30) days. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
7-7-6: CITY POLICE TO IDENTIFY:
   A.   Based upon information received from the public or upon police
observation, the city police shall investigate and identify graffiti. After the
police department has verified the existence of graffiti, the police chief
shall send a letter to the property owner by certified mail informing the
property owner about the graffiti and requesting the property owner to remove
the graffiti within a reasonable period of time which shall be less than thirty
(30) days, based upon consideration of weather conditions and other relevant
factors. The police department shall verify whether the graffiti has in fact
been removed.
   B.   If the police department finds that the graffiti has not been removed
within the time allotted, the department shall contact the city clerk, who
shall schedule a public hearing. The city clerk shall notify the affected
property owner of the hearing date, the preliminary findings that graffiti
exists on the owner's property and that the council may after the hearing order
the removal of the graffiti by either the property owner or the city's
department of public works, and if said department has to remove the graffiti,
the costs will be assessed against the owner's property. (Ord. XIV.14, 5-2-
1995)
7-7-7: HEARING:
   A.   At a hearing before the council, the council shall receive evidence
from the police department and from any other persons with knowledge as to the
existence of graffiti. The property owner shall be entitled to be heard on all
matters relating to graffiti and the process of removal. The existence of
graffiti must be proven by a preponderance of the evidence.
   B.   If the council finds that graffiti exists, the council shall notify the
department of public works and direct its removal in accordance with section
7-7-8 of this chapter. The department of public works may authorize private
contractors to handle graffiti removal. (Ord. XIV.14, 5-2-1995)
7-7-8: NOTICE TO OWNER:
In the event the council finds that graffiti exists, the police department
shall mail a written order to the owner of the subject real property, addressed
to the owner's last known address. The written order shall contain the
following:
   A.   A description of the real estate sufficient for identification.
   B.   Inform the owner that the council has found graffiti exists on the
owner's property.
   C.   A request that the owner remove or obliterate the graffiti within a
reasonable time as determined by the council.
   D.   Inform the owner that unless corrective action is taken within the time
allotted, the department of public works may remove the graffiti and charge all
costs incurred therein against the real estate as a special assessment to be
collected in the same manner as taxes against real estate. (Ord. XIV.14, 5-2-
1995)
7-7-9: COSTS TO BE ASSESSED:
   A.   In the event the city removes and/or abates the graffiti, an accurate
record of the costs incurred therein shall be kept by the department of public
works and reported to the department of finance. The total costs of this
abatement, including the administrative costs incurred by the department of
finance in processing the abatement and costs incurred by the police department
in investigating the graffiti, shall be considered the cost of the project. The
city shall invoice such costs to the property owner and payment therefore shall
be due within one hundred eighty (180) days of the date of such invoice. At any
time thereafter, the city council may assess project costs.
   B.   In the event the person or persons responsible for the graffiti are
convicted and the court orders the offenders to pay restitution for the cost of
the clean up, and either the city or a private property owner have expended
funds to clean up the graffiti, the restitution shall be directed to either the
city or the private property owner as reimbursement for the cost of the clean
up. (Ord. XIV.14, 5-2-1995)
7-7-10: GRAFFITI ABATEMENT CIVIL IN NATURE:
A violation of this chapter relating to the abatement of graffiti, shall not be
treated as misdemeanors nor shall they be criminal in nature. (Ord. XIV.14, 5-
2-1995)
7-7-11: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter is declared by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be illegal and in conflict with any law, the validity of the
remaining provisions and their application to other persons and circumstances
shall not be affected. (Ord. XIV.14, 5-2-1995)
7-7-12: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as described in title
1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
CHAPTER 8
ALARM SYSTEMS
SECTION:
7-8-1: Purpose
7-8-2: Definitions
7-8-3: Notification; Multiple False Alarms
7-8-4: Fees
7-8-5: Exception
7-8-6: Restrictions
7-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to preserve and protect the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of Rosemount from the nuisance and negligent operation
of alarm systems while providing the highest level of service to alarm users.
(Ord. 2015-09, 11-17-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
7-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ALARM USER: A person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind in control of any building, structure, or facility in
the city of Rosemount in which an alarm system is maintained.
AUTOMATIC ALARM SYSTEM: Any device or system which is designed to be used for
the detection of an unauthorized person in any structure, for alerting others
of the commission of an unlawful act, or for the detection of smoke, fire,
heat, carbon monoxide, or other hazardous condition within a structure, and
which emits a sound or transmits a signal or message when activated. An
automobile alarm device shall not be considered to be an alarm system under the
terms of this chapter.
AUTOMATIC NOTIFICATION DEVICE: An automatic alarm which automatically sends to
another location, a message or signal indicating the existence of an emergency
situation.
CALENDAR YEAR: The period of January 1 through December 31 of each year.
CENTRAL STATION SYSTEM: Alarm system that functions through a constantly
attended location (central station) operated by an alarm company. Alarm signals
from the protected property are received in the central station and are then
retransmitted by trained personnel to the city's police or fire department's
alarm communications center for dispatch.
FALSE ALARM: An alarm signal that elicits a response by police or fire
personnel when a situation requiring a response does not, in fact, exist and
that is caused by the activation of the alarm system through mechanical
failure, alarm malfunction, improper installation or the inadvertence of the
owner or lessee of an alarm system or of his or her employees or agents. A
false alarm does not include an alarm caused by utility line mishaps, violent
conditions of nature or other conditions determined to be beyond the control of
the alarm manufacturer, installer or user. (Ord. 2015-09, 11-17-2015, eff. 1-1-
2016)
7-8-3: NOTIFICATION; MULTIPLE FALSE ALARMS:
When any automatic alarm has emitted three (3) false alarms in any calendar
year, the city's police department or fire department, as applicable, shall
notify the alarm user and property owner (if not the alarm user) of the three
(3) false alarms and the false alarm fee regulations set forth herein. (Ord.
2015-09, 11-17-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
7-8-4: FEES:
   A.   A fee shall be imposed upon the alarm user of any automatic alarm, and
the property owner of the premises on which the automatic alarm is located, for
the fourth false alarm and each false alarm thereafter within a calendar year.
The number of false alarms shall be counted and the fee imposed separately for
responses by each the police department and the fire department. The fee shall
be in the amount duly adopted by the council resolution.
   B.   The fee shall be imposed regardless of whether the city's police
department or fire department receives the alarm by direct connection or
through any intermediary such as central station. No fee is imposed under this
section when notification to either department is made directly by a person not
as a result of or in response to an activated automatic alarm.
   C.   The property owner and alarm user shall be personally liable for any
fee imposed under this section. Payment of fees under this section shall be
made to the city within thirty (30) days after mailing the invoice. Payments
not made within thirty (30) days are delinquent. All unpaid fees and penalties,
together with interest, shall become a lien against the property on which the
automatic alarm is located, and shall be certified by the city clerk to the
county treasurer-auditor each year as a special assessment in accordance with
the statutes of the state. (Ord. 2015-09, 11-17-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
7-8-5: EXCEPTION:
A newly installed automatic alarm shall be exempt from the provisions of this
chapter for a period of thirty (30) days from the date of installation in order
to allow for proper testing and troubleshooting of the system. (Ord. 2015-09,
11-17-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
7-8-6: RESTRICTIONS:
No person shall install or use, monitor, and possess an automatic alarm that
utilizes taped or prerecorded messages that are delivered or otherwise
transmitted directly to the police or fire department or the city's dispatch
center, including automatic transmission of the emergency number 911. (Ord.
2015-09, 11-17-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
CHAPTER 9
SOCIAL HOSTS
SECTION:
7-9-1: Purpose And Findings
7-9-2: Definitions
7-9-3: Prohibited Acts
7-9-4: Exceptions
7-9-5: Penalty
7-9-1: PURPOSE AND FINDINGS:
The city council intends to discourage underage possession and consumption of
alcohol, even if done within the confines of a private residence, and intends
to hold persons criminally responsible who host events or gatherings where
persons under twenty one (21) years of age possess or consume alcohol
regardless of whether the person hosting the event or gathering supplied the
alcohol. The city council finds:
   A.   Events and gatherings held on private or public property where alcohol
is possessed or consumed by persons under the age of twenty one (21) are
harmful to those persons and constitute a potential threat to public health
requiring prevention or abatement.
   B.   Prohibiting underage consumption acts to protect underage persons, as
well as the general public, from injuries related to alcohol consumption, such
as alcohol overdose or alcohol related traffic collisions.
   C.   Often, events or gatherings involving underage possession and
consumption occur outside the presence of parents. However, there are times
when the parents are present and condone the activity, and in some
circumstances provide the alcohol.
   D.   Even though giving or furnishing alcohol to an underage person is a
crime, it is difficult to prove, and an ordinance is necessary to help further
combat underage consumption.
   E.   A deterrent effect will be created by holding a person criminally
responsible for hosting an event or gathering where underage possession or
consumption occurs. (Ord. XVI.60, 12-2-2008)
7-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
ALCOHOL: Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, whiskey,
rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits including dilutions and
mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or
solid that contains alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and that contains one-half
of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and that is fit for beverage
purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other
substances.
EVENT OR GATHERING: Any group of three (3) or more persons who have assembled
or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.
HOST OR ALLOW: To aid, conduct, entertain, organize, supervise, control, or
permit a gathering or event.
PARENT: Any person having legal custody of a juvenile:
   A.   As natural, adoptive parent, or stepparent;
   B.   As a legal guardian; or
   C.   As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the court.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, corporation, or any
association of one or more individuals. A person does not include any city,
county, or state agency.
RESIDENCE, PREMISES OR PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any home, yard, farm, field,
land, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a
hall or meeting room, park, or any other place of assembly, whether occupied on
a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or specifically
for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or
used with or without permission or compensation.
UNDERAGE PERSON: Any individual under twenty one (21) years of age. (Ord.
XVI.60, 12-2-2008)
7-9-3: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person(s) to: Host or allow an event or
gathering at any residence, premises, or on any other private or public
property where alcohol or alcoholic beverages are present when the person knows
that an underage person will or does: 1) consume any alcohol or alcoholic
beverage, or 2) possess any alcohol or alcoholic beverage with the intent to
consume it; and the person fails to take reasonable steps to prevent possession
or consumption by the underage person(s).
   B.   A person is criminally responsible for violating subsection A of this
section if the person intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels, or
conspires with or otherwise procures another to commit the prohibited act.
   C.   A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have to be present at
the event or gathering to be criminally responsible. (Ord. XVI.60, 12-2-2008)
7-9-4: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   This chapter does not apply to conduct solely between an underage
person and his or her parents while present in the parent's household.
   B.   This chapter does not apply to legally protected religious observances.
   C.   This chapter does not apply to retail intoxicating liquor or 3.2
percent malt liquor licensees, municipal liquor stores, or bottle club permit
holders who are regulated by Minnesota statutes section 340A.503 subdivision 1
(a)(1).
   D.   This chapter does not apply to situations where underage persons are
lawfully in possession of alcohol or alcoholic beverages during the course and
scope of employment. (Ord. XVI.60, 12-2-2008)
7-9-5: PENALTY:
Violation of section
7-9-3 of this chapter is a misdemeanor. (Ord. XVI.60, 12-2-2008)
CHAPTER 10
PREDATORY OFFENDER RESIDENCY REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-10-1: Findings And Purpose
7-10-2: Definitions
7-10-3: Prohibited Acts
7-10-4: Measurement Of Distance
7-10-5: Penalties
7-10-6: Exceptions
7-10-7: Severability
7-10-1: FINDINGS AND PURPOSE:
   A.   Individuals who have been required to register as Level III predatory
offenders pursuant to State law present an extreme threat to the public safety,
especially to children and other vulnerable populations. These offenders are
extremely likely to use physical violence and to repeat their offenses. Many of
these offenders also commit other crimes.
   B.   The City has a compelling interest to take action to promote and
protect certain areas within the City from the risks to public safety posed by
Level III predatory offenders. The City's compelling interest is furthered by
the creation of a regulatory scheme which establishes areas around locations
where children and vulnerable adults regularly congregate in concentrated
numbers. The purpose of this chapter is to create such a regulatory scheme to
further the City's compelling interest in maintaining public safety by
prescribing where Level III predatory offenders may reside within the City.
(Ord. 2017-03, 5-16-2017)
7-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the following
meanings:
CHILDREN: Persons under the age of eighteen (18).
DEDICATED VULNERABLE ADULT HOUSING: A residential facility that specializes in
providing housing for vulnerable adults, as defined in Minnesota Statutes,
section 626.5572.
DESIGNATED PREDATORY OFFENDER: Any person who has been categorized as a Level
III predatory offender under Minnesota Statutes, section 244.052, a successor
statute, or a similar statute from another state in which that person's risk
assessment indicates a high risk of re-offense.
LICENSED CHILDCARE FACILITY: A facility licensed by the State of Minnesota in
which care, supervision and training for children is provided for part of a 24-
hour period.
PARK: Any land, including improvements, established for the use by the general
public as a recreational area, including, but not limited to, playgrounds and
athletic fields.
PERMANENT RESIDENCE: A place where the person abides, lodges or resides for
fourteen (14) or more consecutive days.
PLACE OF WORSHIP: A place where individuals congregate to practice their
religious faith including, but not limited to, churches, mosques, synagogues,
and temples.
SCHOOL: Any public, private or parochial educational institution that offers
educational instruction to individuals under the age of eighteen (18).
TEMPORARY RESIDENCE: A place where the person abides, lodges or resides for a
period of fourteen (14) or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year,
and which is not the person's permanent address or a place where the person
routinely abides, lodges or resides for a period of four (4) or more
consecutive or non-consecutive days in any month, and which is not the person's
permanent residence. (Ord. 2017-03, 5-16-2017)
7-10-3: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   No designated predatory offender may establish in the City a permanent
residence or temporary residence within two thousand feet (2,000') of any
school, park, licensed childcare facility, place of worship that provides
regular educational programs for children (i.e., Sunday school), or dedicated
vulnerable adult housing.
   B.   No person shall let or rent any place, structure, or part thereof,
trailer or other dwelling in the City, with the knowledge that it will be used
as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any person prohibited from
establishing such permanent residence or temporary residence pursuant to this
chapter, if such place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other dwelling,
is located within a prohibited zone described in subsection A of this section.
      1.   If a property owner discovers or is informed that a tenant is a
designated predatory offender after signing a lease or otherwise agreeing to
let the offender reside on a property within the prohibited zone, the owner or
property manager shall take measures to terminate the lease or to evict the
offender.
      2.   A property owner's failure to comply with provisions of this section
shall constitute a violation and shall subject the property owner to the
enforcement provisions and procedures as provided in this chapter and this
Code. (Ord. 2017-03, 5-16-2017)
7-10-4: MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCE:
For purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement
shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of
the permanent residence or temporary residence to the nearest outer property
line of the applicable prohibited location. The City Administrator, or
designee, shall maintain an official map showing prohibited locations as
defined by this chapter. (Ord. 2017-03, 5-16-2017)
7-10-5: PENALTIES:
A person who violates this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be
punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), by
incarceration of not more than ninety (90) days, or both. Each day a person
maintains a residence in violation of this chapter constitutes a separate
violation. Additionally, the City may seek a court order to enjoin any person
in violation of this chapter from taking any prohibited action hereunder. (Ord.
2017-03, 5-16-2017)
7-10-6: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   A designated predatory offender residing within a prohibited zone as
described in subsection
7-10-3A of this chapter does not commit a violation of this chapter if any of
the following apply:
      1.   The designated predatory offender established the permanent
residence or temporary residence and reported and registered the residence
pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, sections 243.166, 243.167, or a successor
statute, prior to the effective date of this chapter.
      2.   The school, park, licensed childcare facility, place of worship, or
dedicated vulnerable adult housing within two thousand feet (2,000') of the
person's residence was designated or opened after the designated predatory
offender established the permanent residence or temporary residence and
reported and registered the residence pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, sections
243.166 or 243.167, or a successor statute.
      3.   The designated predatory offender is a minor.
      4.   The designated predatory offender was a minor when he or she
committed all offenses leading to his or her status as a designated predatory
offender.
      5.   The residence is also the primary residence of the designated
predatory offender's parents, grandparents, siblings, or spouse. (Ord. 2017-03,
5-16-2017)
7-10-7: SEVERABILITY:
If any portion of this chapter, or its application to any circumstances, is
held invalid, the remaining provisions shall be considered severable, and shall
be given effect to the maximum extent possible. (Ord. 2017-03, 5-16-2017)
CHAPTER 11
TARGETED PICKETING
SECTION:
7-11-1: Purpose
7-11-2: Definitions
7-11-3: Prohibited Activity
7-11-4: Violation/Penalty
7-11-1: PURPOSE:
The City has an interest in the protection of residential privacy, the
wellbeing and tranquility of the home, and protecting citizens from unwanted
speech when they are a captive audience within their homes. The City Council
finds that, without resorting to targeted residential picketing, ample
opportunities exist for those otherwise engaged in targeted residential
picketing to exercise constitutionally protected freedoms of speech and
expression. (Ord. 2021-01, 1-19-2021)
7-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the term "targeted residential picketing"
means:
   A.   Marching, standing or patrolling by one or more persons directed solely
at a particular residential building in a manner that adversely affects the
safety, security, or privacy of an occupant of the building; or
   B.   Marching, standing or patrolling by one or more persons which prevents
an occupant of a residential building from gaining access to or exiting from
the property on which the residential building is located; or
   C.   Standing, marching, patrolling or picketing by one or more persons
focused in front of or adjacent to a particular residential dwelling without
the consent of that dwelling's occupant or occupants. (Ord. 2021-01, 1-19-2021)
7-11-3: PROHIBITED ACTIVITY:
No person shall engage in targeted residential picketing within the City. (Ord.
2021-01, 1-19-2021)
7-11-4: VIOLATION/PENALTY:
Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2021-01, 1-19-2021)
CHAPTER 12
CANNABIS AND HEMP
SECTION:
7-12-1: Definitions
7-12-2: Use Of Cannabis And Hemp Prohibited In Public Places
7-12-3: Reserved
7-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   For purposes of this article, the terms "cannabis flower," "cannabis
products," "lower- potency hemp edibles," and "hemp-derived consumer products"
shall have the definitions given to them in Minn. Stat. § 342.01, as it may be
amended from time to time.
   B.   For purposes of this article, "public place" is defined as any indoor
or outdoor area that is used or held out for use by the public whether owned or
operated by public or private interests. Pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 152.0263,
subd. 5, "public place" does not include the following: (i) a private
residence, including the person's curtilage or yard; (ii) private property not
generally accessible by the public; and (iii) the premises of an establishment
or event licensed to permit on-site consumption of cannabis flower, cannabis
products, lower-potency hemp edibles, or hemp- derived consumer products. (Ord.
2024-05, 6-28-2024)
7-12-2: USE OF CANNABIS AND HEMP PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PLACE:
No person shall use cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency hemp
edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products in a public place. A violation of
this section shall be considered a petty misdemeanor notwithstanding any other
penalty provision in the city code, and the city council may establish a
corresponding fine in its fee schedule for violations of this section. (Ord.
2024-05, 6-28-2024)
7-12-3: RESERVED:
(This section was created by Ord. 2024-05, 6-28-2024)
TITLE 8
TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC CODE
SECTION:
8-1-1: State Law Adopted
8-1-2: Unreasonable Acceleration Of Motor Vehicle
8-1-3: Penalty
8-1-1: STATE LAW ADOPTED:
The regulatory provisions of Minnesota statutes, chapter 169, as amended, are
hereby adopted as the traffic code regulating the use of highways, streets and
alleys within the city and are incorporated in and made a part of this chapter
as completely as if set out here in full. (Ord. XII.1, 9-28-1972)
8-1-2: UNREASONABLE ACCELERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLE:
No person shall start or accelerate a motor vehicle with an unnecessary
exhibition of speed on any public or private way within the city limits. Prima
facie evidence of such unnecessary exhibition of speed shall be unreasonable
squealing or screeching sounds emitted by tires, or the throwing of sand,
gravel or rocks by the tires, or fishtailing by the vehicle. (1983 Code)
8-1-3: PENALTY:
Any violation of the statute adopted by reference herein is a violation of this
chapter when it occurs within the city. Any person thus violating any provision
of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as
described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. If a minimum fine or imprisonment
is prescribed by the state highway traffic act for an offense, such penalty
shall apply to a person convicted of the same offense under this chapter. (Ord.
XII.21, 6-15-2004)
CHAPTER 2
DRIVING AND PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Definitions
8-2-2: Parking Provisions
8-2-3: Towing And Storage Of Illegally Parked Vehicles
8-2-4: Driving Near Fires Restricted
8-2-5: Parking And Storage Of Recreation Vehicles
8-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as
follows:
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: A truck, truck-tractor, semitrailer, van or bus having a
licensed gross weight over nine thousand (9,000) pounds.
JUNKED VEHICLE: Any "vehicle", as defined in this section, which is not
properly licensed for operation, or the condition of which is wrecked,
dismantled, partially dismantled, used for sale of parts, or as a source of
repair or replacement parts for other vehicles, or which is kept for scrapping,
or has flat tires or is otherwise inoperative.
OPERATOR: Includes every individual who shall operate a vehicle as the owner
thereof, or as the agent, employee, or permittee of the owner or any individual
who is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
OVERSIZED RECREATION VEHICLE: A recreation vehicle twenty three feet (23') or
more in length or six thousand five hundred (6,500) pounds or more in empty
weight.
PARKING: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a street,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in,
receiving or discharging passengers or loading or unloading merchandise, or in
obedience to traffic regulations, signs or signals or an involuntary stopping
of the vehicle by reason of causes beyond the control of the operator of the
vehicle.
PASSENGER VEHICLE: A vehicle which meets the criteria for "passenger" class
registration and license plate as established by the Minnesota department of
public safety, and licensed motorcycles.
PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any real property within the city which is privately owned
and which is not "public property" as defined in this section.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any street or highway and includes the entire width between
the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the purposes of
vehicular travel, and shall also mean any other publicly owned property or
facility.
RECREATION VEHICLE: Any vehicle which meets the criteria for "recreation" class
registration and license plate, DNR registration, or trailer registration used
for conveyance of recreation vehicles as established by the Minnesota
department of public safety, Minnesota department of natural resources, or this
chapter, including, but not limited to: travel trailers, stock car trailers,
campers, motor homes, tent trailers, vehicles converted to motor homes, boat
trailers, snowmobiles, snowmobile trailers, boats, personal watercraft, all-
terrain vehicles, and all-terrain vehicle trailers.
RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS: Zoning districts R-1, RR and RM.
SEMITRAILER: Any vehicle of the trailer type so designed and used in
conjunction with truck-tractor that a considerable part of its own weight or
that of its load rests upon and is carried by the truck-tractor and includes a
trailer drawn by a truck-tractor semitrailer combination.
STREET: Any public street, avenue, road, alley or highway located in the city
and established for the use of vehicles.
TRUCK: Any vehicle designed and used for carrying things other than passengers,
except pickup trucks and vans included within the definition of passenger
automobile.
TRUCK-TRACTOR: Any vehicle designed or used for drawing other vehicles and not
constructed to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and
load drawn.
VEHICLE: Any device which is self-propelled or designed to be pushed or pulled
and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses, motorbikes,
motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, snowmobiles, personal
watercraft, go-carts, golf carts, campers, trailers, boats, planes and gliders.
Each vehicle shall be considered as an individual vehicle whether it is on a
trailer or is separate from a trailer. (Ord. XII.11, 11-3-1987; amd. Ord.
XII.17, 2-20-2001; Ord. XII.20, 7-20-2004; Ord. B-197, 10-7-2008)
8-2-2: PARKING PROVISIONS:
   A.   Parking Designated By Council: The city council is authorized to
designate parking and restrict the length of time parking shall be permitted at
any place within the city. In establishing or changing parking zones or parking
restrictions, the council shall pass a resolution at a meeting adequately
describing and defining said parking zones or parking restrictions. The chief
of police is authorized to erect signs prohibiting or limiting parking at
locations he deems appropriate.
   B.   Parking Generally: No owner of a vehicle shall leave, park or permit
the same to stand on any city street or alley for more than twenty four (24)
hours. (Ord. XII.11, 11-3-1987)
   C.   Seasonal Parking Restrictions: No person shall park a vehicle or permit
it to stand upon any public street, highway or alley during the following
times:
      1.   At any time after a snowfall, wind or other weather condition has
resulted in an accumulation of snow of two inches (2") or more in depth on the
public street, highway or alley until the street, or highway or alley is plowed
curb to curb.
      2.   Between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. between November 1 and April 1 of each calendar year. (Ord. XII.18, 10-2-
2001)
   D.   Parking Near Fires: No person except fire department members shall park
a car within three hundred feet (300') of a fire 1 .
   E.   Violating Parking Signs: No person shall park a vehicle in such a
manner or location as to disobey or violate a parking sign which was posted by
the city. The registered owner of a vehicle shall be deemed responsible for the
parking of a vehicle under this subsection, along with the person who actually
parks the vehicle.
   F.   Storing Or Parking Junked Vehicle Prohibited: It is unlawful for any
person to park, store or leave any junked vehicle, whether attended or not,
upon any public or private property within the city, or for any person, as an
owner of or an occupant having control of private property within the city to
permit the parking, storing or leaving of any junked vehicle upon such private
property, unless such junked vehicle is within an enclosed building or
structure lawfully situated upon private property or is so parked, stored or
left upon private property lawfully zoned and operated as a junkyard. (Ord.
XII.11, 11-3-1987)
   G.   Unauthorized Parking Of Vehicles: Unauthorized parking of vehicles or
display of vehicles for sale shall not be permitted on public property or
publicly zoned property. Vehicles offered for sale shall comply with the
following:
      1.   The vehicles sold in residential areas shall be personal property of
the occupant or owner of the premises.
      2.   Vehicles for sale shall be parked on an approved parking surface.
(Ord. XII.17, 2-20-2001)
   H.   Outdoor Parking Or Storage Of Vehicles In Residential Districts: The
following standards apply to the outdoor parking or storage of vehicles in all
residential districts:
      1.   General: The parking or storage of vehicles in any residential
zoning district shall comply with all applicable performance standards for the
zoning district in which they are located as well as the off street parking
regulations in title 11, chapter 6, "Off Street Parking, Loading And
Landscaping", of this code.
      2.   Number: The maximum number of vehicles parked or stored outdoors on
any rural residential zoned property (RR) shall not exceed ten (10) vehicles
per dwelling unit and any residential property zoned R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3 or R-
4 shall not exceed six (6) vehicles per dwelling unit. These vehicles must be
owned by and for the primary use of the owner or occupant of the dwelling unit.
Junk vehicles parked or stored outdoors are prohibited by subsection F of this
section. (Ord. B-197, 10-7-2008)
   I.   Residential Streets: No commercial vehicles, trailer or equipment shall
be parked or stored in a rural residential or residential district except when
loading, unloading, or rendering a service, unless parked in a fully enclosed,
authorized structure. No utility trailer, boat trailer, or other recreational
trailers are permitted to be parked on a public street in a rural residential
or residential district between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. XII.17, 2-20-2001; amd. Ord. B-197, 10-7-2008)
   J.   Parking Surface:
      1.   All parking in RL, R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, C-1, DT, C-3, C-4, GI, PUD
and BP districts in areas served by sanitary sewer or where a planned unit
development agreement requires approved surfaces must be on one of the
following surfaces: (Ord. XII.20, 7-20-2004; amd. Ord. B-174, 10-17-2006; Ord.
B-197, 10-7-2008; Ord. B-211, 1-4-2011)
         a.   Concrete;
         b.   Bituminous; or
         c.   Brick pavers.
      2.   In addition to the parking surfaces in subsections J1a through J1c
of this section, recreation vehicles may be parked on a decorative rock surface
meeting the following requirements:
         a.   The decorative rock material is minimum class V(5), and is a
minimum depth of four inches (4") with a commercial grade weed preventative
mesh underlayment;
         b.   Edging must be installed to prevent the rock from spreading from
the designated parking area;
         c.   The parking area must be at least equal in size to the recreation
vehicle being stored; and
         d.   The decorative rock and the required weed preventative mesh
underlayment must be continuously maintained to prevent weed growth and
deterioration.
      3.   All properties with existing rock (class 5) parking surfaces not in
compliance with the requirements of subsections J1 and J2 of this section must
be brought into compliance within one year of the effective date hereof. (Ord.
XII.20, 7-20-2004; amd. Ord. B-197, 10-7-2008)
   K.   Public Nuisance Declared: The presence of a junked vehicle upon private
or public property within the city, except as permitted by the provisions of
subsection F of this section, or the violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter, is hereby declared to be a hazard to the public health and safety and
a public nuisance which may be abated by the city as such. (Ord. XII.11, 11-3-
1987; amd. Ord. B-197, 10-7-2008)
   L.   In All Commercial Districts: No commercial trucks, truck- tractor, or
semitrailer combinations are allowed to be parked and/or stored longer than
forty eight (48) hours in any commercial district, unless parked in designated
loading areas. (Ord. XII.17, 2-20-2001; amd. Ord. B-197, 10-7-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  8-2-4 of this chapter.
8-2-3: TOWING AND STORAGE OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES:
   A.   Removal And Storage: Members of the police department are hereby
authorized and empowered to have removed any vehicle on any street or alley in
violation of section
8-2-2 of this chapter or stalled thereon and to have such vehicle placed in a
garage or outdoor area by any person engaged in the general garage or filling
station business.
   B.   Redemption, Charge: Such vehicle shall not be removed therefrom until
reasonable costs of storing and towing the same have been fully paid. The
police shall have the further authority to direct employees of the city to
remove any such vehicle and to that event the police chief may impose a charge
to be paid to the city clerk before the said vehicle may be taken or recovered
by the owner thereof.
   C.   Lien Provided: In the event that any vehicle held or stored by the
direction of the chief of police upon which there are charges for storage or
towing or both, shall not be reclaimed, recovered or taken by the owner
thereof, there shall be deemed to be imposed upon such vehicle a possessory
lien in the amount so charged and unpaid and should the owner thereof fail to
pay the same, the possessory lien may be foreclosed in the manner provided for
by law. (Ord. XII.11, 11-3-1987)
8-2-4: DRIVING NEAR FIRES RESTRICTED:
No person shall come within three hundred feet (300') of fire apparatus going
to a fire; immediately upon the approach of any fire apparatus or fire
officers' cars sounding proper signals and responding to an alarm, all other
vehicles shall draw as near as possible to the curb and remain standing until
such apparatus or vehicle shall have passed 1 . (Ord. XII.11, 11-3-1987)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  8-2-2D of this chapter.
8-2-5: PARKING AND STORAGE OF RECREATION VEHICLES:
   A.   Permitted Districts: Outdoor storage of recreation vehicles is
permitted in the RL, R-1, R-1A, R-2, and R-3 Residential Districts,
Agricultural, Agricultural Preserve, and Rural Residential Zoning Districts,
subject to the requirements of this section.
   B.   Conditions On Permitted Storage And Parking: The following conditions
apply in all districts in which outdoor storage of recreation vehicles is
permitted:
      1.   Only recreation vehicles owned by an individual residing at the
premises may be stored outdoors on the premises.
      2.   Recreation vehicles must be parked in compliance with applicable
setbacks as defined in the City of Rosemount zoning regulations.
      3.   Recreation vehicles must be parked in compliance with the
intersection sight triangle visibility requirements under the City of Rosemount
zoning regulations.
      4.   Recreation vehicles must be parked on a parking surface in
compliance with subsection
 8-2-2J of this chapter.
   C.   Prohibitions On Storage And Parking: The following prohibitions apply
to all districts in which outdoor storage of recreation vehicles is permitted:
      1.   Recreation vehicles may not be stored or parked:
         a.   On public property, including the public right-of-way and
boulevard;
         b.   On any portion of a front yard, except as follows:
            (1)   Boats, personal watercraft, all-terrain vehicles, and the
trailers used to convey them, campers, and other recreation vehicles less than
twenty three feet (23') in length and less than six thousand five hundred
(6,500) pounds (empty weight) may be stored from April 1 to November 1 in a
front yard driveway;
            (2)   Snowmobiles and the trailers used to convey them may be
stored from November 1 to April 1 in a front yard driveway;
            (3)   In a front yard driveway for temporary loading, not to exceed
forty eight (48) hours; or
            (4)   As allowed by a temporary storage permit.
         c.   In such a manner as to block public sidewalks or paths;
      2.   Recreation vehicles may not be used as a temporary residence, shop,
or office, except as follows:
         a.   Recreation vehicles may be used by police, fire, EMS, public
works or other similar agencies requested by the City to provide emergency
assistance;
         b.   Recreation vehicles may be used on a construction job site, or
used as temporary offices for development, real estate, or sales shops as
authorized by the Building and Planning Departments; and
         c.   Recreation vehicles may be used for services such as a
bloodmobile, bookmobile, or clinic, lab, or other public services as authorized
by the Community Development Department.
   D.   Conditions For Storage On Residential Property:
      1.   The following conditions apply to outdoor storage of recreation
vehicles in the RL, R-1, R-1A, R-2, and R-3 Residential Districts:
         a.   Two (2) recreation vehicles may be stored at any time, only one
(1) of which may be an oversized recreation vehicle.
         b.   One (1) additional oversized guest recreation vehicle may be
stored in compliance with a temporary storage permit issued under subsection F
of this section.
         c.   Recreation vehicles parked in a front yard driveway must be
parked at least fifteen feet (15') from the curb line.
      2.   In addition to the requirements in subsection D1 of this section,
the requirements in the city of Rosemount zoning regulations apply to storage
of recreation vehicles in R-3 residential districts.
   E.   Conditions For Storage On Rural Residential And Agricultural Property:
The following conditions apply to storage of recreation vehicles in rural
residential and the agricultural and agricultural preserve districts:
      1.   Three (3) recreation vehicles may be stored outdoors at any time,
only one of which may be an oversized recreation vehicle.
      2.   Boats, personal watercraft, all-terrain vehicles, snowmobiles, and
the trailers used to convey them, campers, and other recreation vehicles may be
stored in a front yard driveway and are not subject to the time limitations in
subsections C1b(1) and C1b(2) of this section.
      3.   Oversized recreation vehicles may be stored in a front yard driveway
for temporary loading, not to exceed forty eight (48) hours.
   F.   Permits For Temporary Storage Of Oversized Recreation Vehicles: Storage
of oversized recreation vehicles in a front yard driveway area in the RL, R-1,
R-1A, R-2, and R-3 residential districts is permitted only pursuant to a
temporary storage permit issued by the city. The following criteria apply to
temporary storage permits:
      1.   An applicant must meet all of the permit requirements and pay the
required fee.
      2.   The permit will allow the temporary storage of one oversized
recreation vehicle for a period of ten (10) days.
      3.   No more than four (4) permits will be issued for any property in one
calendar year.
      4.   At least fourteen (14) days must elapse after the expiration date of
a permit before another permit will be issued.
      5.   The permit must be displayed on the vehicle at all times and must be
visible from the street.
      6.   A permit is not required for temporary storage of oversized
recreation vehicles in the agricultural, agricultural preserve and rural
residential districts.
      7.   A permit is not required for outdoor storage of oversized recreation
vehicles in side or rear yards.
   G.   Screening Requirements:
      1.   Side and rear yard outdoor storage of oversized recreation vehicles
in the RL, R-1, R-1A, and R-2 residential districts is subject to the following
screening requirements:
         a.   An oversized recreation vehicle must be screened from view of any
immediately adjacent neighbor, street, common green space, ponding area, and
public park using plant materials.
         b.   Plant materials used to screen the vehicle must be eighty five
percent (85%) of the height of the vehicle at the time of planting and must
completely screen the vehicle from view when they reach maturity.
         c.   A fence with a gate may be used only to provide ingress and
egress to the storage area, not as a means of providing screening of the
vehicle. The gate must be at least six feet (6') in height; must provide eighty
five percent (85%) opacity; and must be constructed in compliance with all
applicable zoning and building code requirements.
         d.   Plant materials and gates must be maintained as follows:
            (1)   Plantings that die must be immediately replaced and must
comply with the requirements for original plantings;
            (2)   Original plantings that fail to completely screen the vehicle
within three (3) years must be replaced; and
            (3)   A gate must be maintained at the eighty five percent (85%)
opacity level and in compliance with all applicable zoning and building codes
requirements.
      2.   Oversized recreation vehicles stored outdoors in agricultural,
agricultural preserve or rural residential districts must meet the screening
requirements in subsection G1 of this section if the storage area is within
three hundred feet (300') of another residence, road, or any lake, pond, or
river with authorized public access.
      3.   The screening requirements in the zoning regulations of the city
must be met for storage of recreation vehicles in R-3 residential districts.
      4.   The planning, building, and engineering departments of the city must
review and approve all site plans for oversize recreation vehicle storage
areas. (Ord. XII.20, 7-20-2004)
CHAPTER 3
SNOWMOBILES
SECTION:
8-3-1: State Law Applied, Purpose
8-3-2: Definitions
8-3-3: Operation Restrictions
8-3-4: Yielding Right of Way
8-3-5: Penalties
8-3-1: STATE LAW APPLIED, PURPOSE:
It is the intent of this Chapter to supplement the regulatory provisions of
Minnesota Statutes, section 84.87, as amended. Said regulatory provisions are
hereby incorporated by reference and made a part of this Chapter as completely
as if set out here in full. (Ord. XII.5, 12-28-72)
8-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, terms defined herein shall have the meanings
ascribed to them as follows:
OPERATE: To ride in or on and control the operation of a snowmobile.
OPERATOR: Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
snowmobile.
OWNER: A person, other than a lien holder, having the property in or title to a
snowmobile, or entitled to the use or possession thereof.
PERSON: An individual, partnership, corporation, the State and its agencies and
subdivisions, and any body of persons, whether incorporated or not.
SNOWMOBILE: A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice or
natural terrain steered by wheels, skis or runners.
STREET: A public thoroughfare, roadway, alley or trail used for motor vehicular
traffic which is not an interstate, trunk, County State Aid Road or County
Highway. (Ord. XII.5, 12-28-72)
8-3-3: OPERATION RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Unlawful Operation: Except as otherwise herein provided, snowmobiles
may be operated within the limits of the City. It is unlawful for any person to
operate a snowmobile within the City limits as follows:
      1.   Upon any street within a platted area except on the most direct
route to the operator's destination.
      2.   Upon private property of another without specific permission of the
owner or person in control of said property.
      3.   Upon public sidewalk provided for pedestrian travel or on
boulevards.
      4.   Upon the streets within platted areas as permitted by this Chapter,
at a speed exceeding ten (10) miles per hour.
      5.   Upon public bike or walking trail.
      6.   Upon City park property or public school property.
      7.   Persons under the age of sixteen (16) may not operate a snowmobile
without proof of Minnesota snowmobile safety training certificate.
   B.   Permitting Unlawful Operation: It is unlawful for the owner of a
snowmobile to permit the snowmobile to be operated contrary to the provisions
of this Chapter. (Ord. XII.14, 4-4-95)
8-3-4: YIELDING RIGHT OF WAY:
No snowmobile shall enter any intersection without making a complete stop. The
operator shall then yield the right of way to any vehicles or pedestrians at
the intersection, or so close to the intersection as to constitute an immediate
hazard. (Ord. XII.5, 12-28-1972)
8-3-5: PENALTIES:
Any violation of the statute adopted by reference in this chapter is a
violation of this chapter when it occurs within the city. Any person thus
violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be punished as described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord.
XII.21, 6-15-2004)
CHAPTER 4
LICENSING AND REGISTRATION
SECTION:
8-4-1: Vehicle License Required
8-4-2: Driver's License Required
8-4-3: Definitions
8-4-4: Penalties
8-4-1: VEHICLE LICENSE REQUIRED:
Every motor vehicle used or operated on any highway within the city shall be
registered in compliance with the provisions of the Minnesota statutes, chapter
168, as amended. (Ord. XII.2, 9-28-1972)
8-4-2: DRIVER'S LICENSE REQUIRED:
Every person who is required by Minnesota statutes, chapter 171, as amended, to
be licensed in order to operate a vehicle or a motor vehicle upon a highway
within the state of Minnesota, shall at all times while operating a vehicle or
motor vehicle on any highway within the city have in his immediate possession a
license, issued in compliance with the provisions of Minnesota statutes,
chapter 171, as amended. (Ord. XII.2, 9-28-1972)
8-4-3: DEFINITIONS:
The words and phrases "vehicle", "motor vehicle", "highway", "person" and
"owner" shall have the meanings ascribed to them by Minnesota statutes,
chapters 168 and 171. (Ord. XII.2, 9-28-1972)
8-4-4: PENALTIES:
The owner and operator of any motor vehicle operated in violation of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as described in
title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
CHAPTER 5
EMERGENCY VEHICLE PREEMPTION SYSTEM
SECTION:
8-5-1: Purpose
8-5-2: Definitions
8-5-3: Conditions For Using The EVPS
8-5-4: EVPS Maintenance Procedures
8-5-5: EVPS Training
8-5-6: Disciplinary Action
8-5-7: Penalty
8-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose for using the Emergency Vehicle Preemption System (EVPS) in
Rosemount is to allow emergency vehicles to perform emergency services in a
safer and more timely manner by temporarily controlling motorized vehicle
traffic flow at signalized intersection. The Council deems it advisable to
formulate policies and procedures for the use of the EVPS emitters so that both
pedestrians and drivers of motorized vehicles have adequate warning that
emergency vehicles are changing normal traffic control timing at signalized
intersections. (Ord. XII.15, 11-7-1995)
8-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
EMERGENCY VEHICLE: A vehicle equipped and identified according to law and
operated by the Police Department and/or Fire Department or any other vehicle
so recognized by State statute.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE PREEMPTION SYSTEM: A traffic control system designed for use
by emergency vehicles to improve traffic movement by temporarily controlling
signalized intersections. The EVPS is comprised of four (4) separate
components: an emitter, a detector, an indicator, and a phase selector. The
emitter (a high intensity light source) is attached to the emergency vehicle
and functions in excess of ten (10) "beats" per second. As an emergency vehicle
approaches the intersection, this pulsating light is received by a detector
that is located at or near the traffic signal. The detector relays the coded
message to the phase selector, located in the traffic light control box, which
then either holds the existing green light in favor of the approaching
emergency vehicle or accelerates the normal cycle of a signal change to provide
green by the time the vehicle reaches the intersection. The indicator is a
light source located near the detector which is directed toward the oncoming
emergency vehicle to indicate to the driver whether or not the traffic light
has been preempted in their favor. (Ord. XII.15, 11-7-1995)
8-5-3: CONDITIONS FOR USING THE EVPS:
   A.   Fire Department: City owned Fire Department vehicles shall use the EVPS
while on emergency responses only. Unless otherwise provided for herein, all
other use by the Department is prohibited. Conditions for the use of EVPS
hereby become a part of the Fire Department Standard Operating Procedures.
   B.   Police Department: City owned Police Department vehicles shall use the
EVPS while on emergency responses only. Unless otherwise provided for herein,
all other use by the Department is prohibited. Conditions for the use of the
EVPS hereby become a part of the Police Department Standard Operating
Procedures.
   C.   City, County Or State Maintenance Personnel: County, State or City
maintenance personnel, or their contractors under written agreement, may
activate the EVPS only when testing or repairing the system. Sirens and
flashing red lights need not be used except when the test vehicle must exceed
the posted speed limits. In such instances, said test must be preapproved and
coordinated with the Police Chief or his designee.
   D.   Emergency Vehicles Not Owned By The City: The use of the EVPS within
the City by non-City emergency vehicles is allowed if said emergency vehicle is
one which is recognized by the City in which it is based. The participating
organization or unit of government shall be trained and shall follow all
procedures prescribed by the City in utilizing the EVPS.
   E.   Unlawful Activation: Unless specifically approved herein, it shall be
unlawful for any person to activate the EVPS in Rosemount by any means
whatsoever. This clause specifically prohibits the installation of EVPS
emitters on any vehicle not identified in subsections A through D of this
Section. (Ord. XII.15, 11-7-1995)
8-5-4: EVPS MAINTENANCE PROCEDURES:
   A.   It shall be the City's policy to routinely test the EVPS to ensure
proper functioning of the system. During such tests, each intersection which is
EVPS equipped shall be checked from all approaches. Test results will be
recorded on a standardized form indicating the intersection tested, date of
test, person conducting test, and evaluation result. This test is to be
completed jointly by the Police, Fire and Public Works Departments, and a copy
of the completed test form shall be sent to the respective department heads.
   B.   When a traffic signal is found to malfunction during a test, the person
conducting the test shall immediately notify the Police Department of the
defect and the location of the defective signal and promptly provide separate
written notice to the Police Chief. (Ord. XII.15, 11-7-1995)
8-5-5: EVPS TRAINING:
An explanation of the policies and procedures governing the use of the EVPS in
Rosemount shall be included in the basic and in- service training courses for
both the Police and Fire Departments. Appropriate training shall also be
mandated for those non-City entities authorized to utilize the EVPS within the
City. (Ord. XII.15, 11-7-1995)
8-5-6: DISCIPLINARY ACTION:
Violation of the policies and procedures set forth above by any authorized
person shall be cause for disciplinary action in accordance with adopted City
and Department policies. (Ord. XII.15, 11-7-1995)
8-5-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter is guilty as provided by
State law. (Ord. XII.15, 11-7-1995)
TITLE 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
9-1-1: State Building Code Adopted
9-1-2: Application, Administration And Enforcement
9-1-3: Permits, Fees And Surcharge
9-1-4: Violations, Penalties And Appeals
9-1-1: STATE BUILDING CODE ADOPTED:
   A.   Building Code: The Minnesota state building code, in its most current
edition, established pursuant to Minnesota statutes, 16B.59 to 16B.75, is
hereby adopted as the building code for the city. The code is hereby
incorporated as completely as if fully set out herein. A copy of the state
building code shall be kept available for public use in the office of the city
building official. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
   B.   Optional Appendixes: As authorized by Minnesota rule, part 1300.000,
the following appendix chapters of the international building code are hereby
adopted without change and incorporated as part of the building code for the
city:
      1.   Appendix chapter J, excavation and grading.
(Ord. XVIII.13, 6-15-2004)
9-1-2: APPLICATION, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Procedures And Administration: The application, administration and
enforcement of the code shall be in accordance with Minnesota rule, chapter
1300. (Ord. XVIII.13, 6-15-2004)
   B.   Building Inspections Division: The community development department
shall contain the "building inspections division". The building inspections
division shall be the code enforcement agency of the city, under the direction
of the community development director. The administrative authority of the
building inspections division shall be the building official. (Ord. XVIII.10,
9-2-1997; amd. Ord. XVIII.12, 2-5-2002)
   C.   Building Official: For the purposes of this section, the building
official is responsible for the administration and enforcement of all
applicable building codes in the city.
   D.   Licensed Activities: Except as otherwise provided in this section, it
is unlawful for any person or firm to perform any work subject to the
provisions of the building code unless he/she is currently licensed to do so
under applicable provisions of this title or state law. Such work includes, but
is not limited to, general residential contracting or roofing or reroofing,
general contracting electrical, plumbing, gas appliance installation, high
pressure steamfitting and elevator construction.
   E.   Certificate Of Occupancy: With the exception of group U occupancies, no
building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing
use or occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof
shall be made until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy
in accordance with the Minnesota building code for said use. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-
2-1997)
9-1-3: PERMITS, FEES AND SURCHARGE:
   A.   Permits Required, General Rule: It is unlawful for any person to
perform work subject to the building code for which a permit is required
without having obtained such permit and paid the fees as required and
established by the city council by resolution. The building official shall
establish a system for permit issuance, fee collection, permit expiration and/
or suspension and fee refunds of said permits in accordance with the building
code.
   B.   Plumbing Permits, Required: It is unlawful for any person to make any
installation, alteration, repair or replacement or to remodel any plumbing
system regulated by this code without having obtained a plumbing permit and
paid required fees as established by the city council by resolution. The
provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the following:
      1.   The stopping of leaks in drains, soil, waste or vent pipe, provided,
however, that should any concealed trap, drainpipe, soil, waste or vent pipe
become defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with
new material, the same shall be considered as new work and a plumbing permit
shall be procured and inspection made as provided in this code.
      2.   The cleaning of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves
or fixtures, or the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such
repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves,
pipes or fixtures.
Exemption from the permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to
grant authorization for any work done in violation of this code. (Ord.
XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
   C.   Permit Validity And Expiration: All permits issued in the city in
accordance with this code, shall be valid, shall expire or be suspended or
revoked in accordance with Minnesota rule, chapter 1300.0120 subparts 10 and
11.
   D.   Permit Fees: The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall
be as authorized in Minnesota rule, chapter 1300.0160. All permit fees shall be
established and reevaluated by the city council on a periodic basis, and be
charged in accordance with the fee schedule, as adopted by resolution. (Ord.
XVIII.13, 6-15-2004)
   E.   Valuation: The building official shall utilize the "Chart Of Estimated
Construction Cost" as annually published by the Minnesota department of
administration, building codes and standards division, to compute building
valuations for the purposes of establishing Rosemount permit fees. The
construction cost chart shall be updated annually and adopted by the city
council by resolution. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-1-4: VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND APPEALS:
   A.   Violation: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy
or maintain any building or structure or portion thereof in the city, or cause
the same to be done contrary to or in violation of any provision of the
building code embodied in this chapter. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
   B.   Penalties: Persons found to be in violation of any provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor offense and punished as
described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Each day during which a violation
of the building code is committed, continued or permitted, constitutes a
separate offense. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
   C.   Appeals: In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or
determinations made by the building official relative to the application and
interpretation of this chapter, an appellant shall complete the city
application for code appeals and submit said application to the city clerk;
and, a hearing shall be scheduled within thirty (30) days of receipt of the
complete application. For the purposes of code appeals, the city council shall
be deemed to be the official board of appeals. All decisions and findings shall
be rendered final as determined by the board of appeals unless or until
overruled by the commissioner of the Minnesota department of administration, in
accordance with Minnesota statutes, section 16B.67. The board shall render all
decisions and findings within thirty (30) days, in writing, to the appellant.
The board of appeals shall not have the authority to waive any requirements of
this code. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
CHAPTER 2
EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING
SECTION:
9-2-1: Special Requirements
9-2-2: Variances
9-2-3: Violations, Enforcement And Penalties
9-2-1: SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Excavation And Grading Conditions And Special Requirements: The
building official may impose additional conditions and special requirements,
consistent with the intent and purpose of international building code appendix
chapter J, as adopted herein, including, but not limited to, fencing,
screening, erosion control measures relating to the excavation and grading of
sites, where protection of public welfare, public interest and property
warrants such action. (Ord. XVIII.13, 6-15-2004)
   B.   Water Resources Management: In addition to the requirements contained
herein, all excavation and grading activities within the city shall be
performed in strict compliance with this code. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
   C.   As Built Certificate Of Survey: For all new construction for which a
building permit has been issued, the permit holder must submit an as built
certificate of survey as a condition of issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
The survey must be prepared by a licensed surveyor and it must certify that the
lot is graded in accordance with the approved grading plan. The following
conditions also apply:
      1.   For lots that will be occupied between May 1 and October 31, the as
built survey must be submitted to the city two (2) days before a certificate of
occupancy will be issued.
      2.   For lots that will be occupied between November 1 and April 30, the
building permit applicant must provide a cash deposit in accordance with the
city's fee schedule. The city will collect the security with the building
permit application and retain it until the requirements of this subsection are
met. If the permit holder fails to fulfill the requirements of this subsection
by providing a final grade as built survey by the next June 15, the security
will be surrendered to the city and the city will take steps to complete the
final grade of the property as approved. The city will return unused security
funds after completion of grading in accordance with the approved grading plan.
No interest will accrue on the cash deposit. (Ord. XVIII.14, 11-1-2005, eff. 1-
1-2006)
9-2-2: VARIANCES:
Where the city council finds that hardships may result from strict compliance
with these regulations or that unusual topographical conditions exist, it may
vary these regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public
interest secured, provided that such variation will not have the effect of
nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-2-3: VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Enforcement: The city council may, for failure of any person to comply
with any requirements made in writing under the provisions of section
9-2-1 of this chapter, as promptly as the same can reasonably be done, proceed
to cause such requirement to be complied with, and the cost of such work be
taxed against the property whereon the pit, excavation, grading or fill is
situated when authorized by law; or the city may at its option proceed to
collect such costs by an action against the person to whom such permit has been
issued, and their superiors, if a bond or cash deposit exists. (Ord. XVIII.10,
9-2-1997)
   B.   Penalties: Any person who shall refuse, neglect or fail to comply with
any requirement of this chapter or who shall fail to comply with any order
issued under this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor offense. Violators shall
be punished as described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Each day of
violation shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished
accordingly. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
CHAPTER 3
ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS, REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-3-1: Application Of Provisions
9-3-2: Electrical Inspector; Qualifications And Appointment
9-3-3: Standards For Electrical Equipment Installations
9-3-4: Electrical Installations
9-3-5: Connections To Installations
9-3-6: Permits And Inspections
9-3-7: Inspection Fees
9-3-8: Liability For Damages
9-3-9: Penalty
9-3-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Electrical Code Applications: The provisions of this Chapter shall
apply to all installations of electrical conductors, fittings, devices and
fixtures hereinafter referred to as electrical equipment within or on public
and private buildings and premises, with the following general exceptions. The
provisions of this Chapter do not apply to installations in mines, ships,
railway cars, aircraft or automotive equipment, or the installations or
equipment employed by a railway, electric or communication utility in the
exercise of its functions as a utility, except as otherwise provided in this
Chapter.
   B.   Safe Installations: As used in this Chapter, "reasonably safe to
persons and property" as applied to electrical installations and electrical
equipment means safe to use in the service for which the installation or
equipment is intended without unnecessary hazard to life, limb or property.
   C.   Electrical Code: For the purposes of interpretation of the provisions
of this Chapter, the most recently published edition of the National Electrical
Code shall be prima facie evidence of the definitions, interpretations and
scope of words and terms used in this Chapter. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-3-2: ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR; QUALIFICATIONS AND APPOINTMENT:
   A.   Electrical Inspector: There is hereby created the office of Electrical
Inspector.
   B.   Appointment: A certified State Electrical Inspector shall be appointed
by the City Council and need not be a City employee. Any assistant shall meet
the same requirements as the Electrical Inspector.
   C.   Inspector Qualifications: The salary of the Electrical Inspector shall
be determined by resolution of the City Council. Before commencing duties, and
on a biennial basis, the Electrical Inspector shall provide evidence of State
licensing as a State Electrical Inspector and provide proof of required bonding
through the State Board of Electricity to the City Clerk.
   D.   Duties: It shall be the duty of the Inspector to enforce the provisions
of this Chapter. The Electrical Inspector shall, upon application, grant
permits for the installation or alteration of electrical equipment and shall
make inspections of electrical installations, all as provided in this Chapter.
The Electrical Inspector shall keep complete records of all permits issued,
inspections, and reinspection(s) made and other official work performed in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
   E.   Inspector Prerequisites: It shall be unlawful for the Inspector or any
assistant to engage in the sale, installation or maintenance of electrical
equipment, directly or indirectly, and they shall have no financial interest in
any concern engaged in such business in the City.
   F.   Authority Of Electrical Inspector: The Inspector shall have the right
during reasonable hours to enter any building or premises in the discharge of
official duties, or for the purpose of making any inspection, reinspection or
test of electrical equipment contained therein or its installation. When any
electrical equipment is found by the Inspector to be dangerous to persons or
property because it is defective or defectively installed, the person
responsible for the electrical equipment shall be notified in writing and shall
make any changes or repair required in the judgment of the Inspector to place
such equipment in safe conditions. If such work is not completed within fifteen
(15) days or any longer period that may be specified by the inspector in said
notice, the inspector shall have the authority to disconnect or order
discontinuance of electrical service to said electrical equipment. In cases of
emergency where necessary for safety to persons and property, or where
electrical equipment may interfere with the work of the fire department, the
inspector shall have the authority to disconnect or cause disconnection
immediately of any electrical equipment.
   G.   Deputies: The inspector may delegate any of the inspector's powers to
any of the inspector's assistants. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
   H.   Responsibility: The city electrical inspector shall function under the
applicable policies of the city building inspections division and the city
building official. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997; amd. Ord. XVIII.12, 2-5-2002)
9-3-3: STANDARDS FOR ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT INSTALLATIONS:
   A.   Standards: All installations of electrical equipment shall be
reasonably safe to persons and property and in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter, the applicable statutes of the state and all orders, rules and
regulations issued by the authority thereof.
   B.   National Electrical Code: Conformity of installations of electrical
equipment with applicable regulations set forth in the current national
electrical code, national electrical safety code or electrical provisions of
other safety codes which have been approved by the American Standards
Association shall be prima facie evidence that such installations are
reasonably safe to persons and property, together with such additions and
exceptions contained herein. Noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter
shall be prima facie evidence that the installation is not reasonably safe to
persons and property.
   C.   Alternative Methods And Modifications: When there are practical
difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this code, the
electrical inspector, with approval of the city building official, may grant
modifications or accept alternative methods for individual cases. The
electrical inspector shall first find that a special individual reason makes
strict letter of this code impractical and that said alternative or
modification is in conformance with the intent and purpose of this code and
that said alternative or modification does not lessen any life safety or fire
protection requirements or any degree of structural integrity. The details of
said actions shall be recorded and entered into the permanent files of the
department.
   D.   Moved Buildings And Structures: Buildings or structures moved from
without to within and within the limits of the city shall conform to all of the
requirements of this chapter for new buildings or structures.
   E.   Change Of Use Or Occupancy: Existing buildings or structures hereafter
changed in use shall conform in all respects to the requirements of this
chapter for the new use. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-3-4: ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS:
All electrical installations shall be designed and installed in accordance with
the most current edition of the Minnesota building code and national electrical
code as adopted by the state. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-3-5: CONNECTIONS TO INSTALLATIONS:
   A.   Equipment Connections: It shall be unlawful for any person to make
connections from a supply of electricity to any electrical equipment for the
installation of which a permit is required or which has been disconnected by
the electrical inspector without first securing a permit.
   B.   Electrical Disconnection Orders: The public or private utility
providing services shall disconnect the same upon a written order from the
electrical inspector, if the inspector considers any electrical installation
unsafe to life and property or installed contrary to this chapter.
   C.   Permit Exemptions: No permit shall be required for minor repair work as
defined in Minnesota statutes, section 326.244, meaning the adjustment or
repair and replacement of worn or defective parts of electrical fixtures,
switches, receptacles and other equipment; provided, that such minor repairs
are made in compliance with accepted standards of construction for safety to
life and property as defined in Minnesota statutes, section 326.243 and do not
require replacement of the wiring to them. The city's inspectors or agents may
inspect any such minor repairs at the request of the owner or person making
such repairs. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-3-6: PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Permits Required: An electrical permit is required for each
installation, alteration or addition of electrical work for light, heat and
power within the limits of the City.
   B.   Work Exempt From Permit: No permit shall be required for electrical
installations of equipment owned, leased, operated or maintained by a public
service corporation which is used by said corporation in the performance of its
function as a utility, except that such electrical installations shall conform
to the minimum standards of the National Electrical Code.
   C.   Public Utilities: Ownership of any transmission or distribution lines
or appurtenances thereto, including, but not limited to, transformers, shall
not be transferred by a public service corporation to any person, except
another franchised public service corporation dealing in electric energy for
distribution and sale, without a permit first having been issued therefor by
the City. Such permit shall be issued only after the facilities to be
transferred have been inspected and approved as provided in this Chapter and
upon payment of an inspection fee as set forth in this Section.
   D.   Permit Fees: Before any permit is granted for the installation or
alteration of electrical equipment, the person making application for such
permit shall pay the City a fee in such amount as is set by resolution of the
City Council and furnish proof of a valid State electrical contractor's
license, in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code and Minnesota
Statutes.
   E.   Permit Application: Application for such permit, describing the
electrical work to be done, shall be made on a State application, in writing,
to the City by the person registered to do such work. The application shall be
accompanied by such plans, specifications and schedules as may be necessary to
determine whether the electrical installation described will be in conformity
with all legal requirements. The fees for electrical inspection as set forth by
resolution shall accompany such application. If the applicant has complied with
all of the provisions of this Chapter, a permit for such electrical
installation shall be issued.
   F.   Inspection Scheduling: The electrical inspections process will be in
accordance with the following:
      1.   All electrical installations which involve the concealment of wiring
or equipment shall have a "rough in" inspection prior to concealment, wherein
the Inspector shall be duly notified in advance, excluding Saturdays, Sundays
and holidays.
      2.   When any electrical equipment is to be hidden from view by the
permanent placement of parts of the building, the person installing the
equipment shall notify the Electrical Inspector and such equipment shall not be
concealed until it has been inspected and approved by the Electrical Inspector
or until twenty four (24) hours, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays,
shall have elapsed from the time of such notifications; provided, that on large
installations, where the concealment of equipment proceeds continuously, the
person installing the electrical equipment shall give the Electrical Inspector
due notice and inspection shall be made periodically during the progress of the
work.
      3.   At regular intervals the Electrical Inspector shall visit all
premises where work may be done under annual permits and shall inspect all
electrical equipment installed under such a permit since the previous
inspection, and shall issue a certificate of approval for such work as is found
to be in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter, after the required fee
has been paid.
   G.   Correction Notice Process: If upon inspection the installation is not
found to be fully in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter, the
Electrical Inspector shall at once forward to the person making the
installation a written notice stating the defects which have been found to
exist. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-3-7: INSPECTION FEES:
Inspection fees and inspections of transient projects, including, but not
limited to, carnivals and circuses, will be set forth by resolution of the City
Council. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-3-8: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
This Chapter shall not be construed to affect the responsibility or liability
for any party owning, operating, controlling or installing any electrical
equipment for damages to persons or property caused by any defect therein, nor
shall the City be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the
inspection or reinspection authorized herein or the certificate of approval or
disapproval of any equipment authorized herein. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-3-9: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Each act of violation or each day
a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord.
XII.21, 6-15-2004)
CHAPTER 4
BUILDING AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
SECTION:
9-4-1: Title
9-4-2: Legislative Finding
9-4-3: Purpose
9-4-4: Discrimination And Privacy
9-4-5: Definitions
9-4-6: Responsibility Of Owners And Occupants
9-4-7: Public Nuisance Defined
9-4-8: Manufactured Home Park Maintenance Standards
9-4-9: Violation Of Provisions
9-4-10: Enforcement
9-4-11: Abatement Procedure
9-4-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the BUILDING AND PROPERTY
MAINTENANCE ORDINANCE or "this chapter" hereafter. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-4-2: LEGISLATIVE FINDING:
It is hereby found that there exists and may in the future exist in the city,
structures used for human habitation which for reasons of their structure,
equipment, sanitation, maintenance, use or occupancy affect or are likely to
affect adversely the public health (including the physical, mental, and social
well being of persons and families), safety, and general welfare. To correct
and prevent the existence of such adverse conditions, to achieve and maintain
such levels of residential, commercial, and industrial environmental quality as
will protect and promote public health, safety, and general welfare, it is
found that the establishment and enforcement of minimum building and property
standards are required. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-4-3: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect, preserve and promote the public
health, safety, and the general welfare of the people of the city, to prevent
building conditions that adversely affect or are likely to adversely affect the
life, safety, general welfare, and health, including the physical, mental and
social well being of persons occupying dwellings within the city, to promote
and encourage property lawn maintenance, and set standards for an adequate
level of maintenance to preserve the value of land and buildings throughout the
city; and to provide for the administration and enforcement thereof. (Ord.
XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-4-4: DISCRIMINATION AND PRIVACY:
This chapter is to be enforced in a nondiscriminatory manner and exclusively
for the purpose of promoting public, as opposed to private, welfare. Except as
may be specifically provided herein or incidental to the enforcement hereof,
this chapter is not intended to interfere with personal policy or with private
legal rights and liabilities, including, without limitation, landlord/tenant
and lessor/lessee relationships, and in enacting and enforcing this chapter,
the city neither expressly nor by implication assumes any obligations or
liabilities respecting such private rights or disputes, including those which
involve or arise out of the nonconformity of any premises in the city to the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-4-5: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms defined in this section have the
meanings given to them:
BUILDING: A structure erected for the support, shelter, or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattel, or movable property of any kind.
DWELLING: A building, or portion thereof, designed or used for residential or
business occupancy, including one-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and
multi-family dwellings. Whenever the word "dwellings" is used in this chapter,
it shall be construed as though it was followed by the words "or any part
thereof".
DWELLING UNIT: One room or rooms connected together constituting a separate,
independent housekeeping unit for owner occupancy, or rental or lease on a
weekly, monthly, or longer basis, and physically separated from any other rooms
or dwelling units which may be in the same structure, and containing
independent cooking, toilet and sleeping facilities. Whenever the term
"dwelling units" is used in this Chapter, it is to be construed as though it
was followed by the words "or any part thereof".
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: A person designated by the City Administrator to
administer and enforce this Chapter, or his or her designee.
GARBAGE: Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes, including those resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
HABITABLE: Fit to be lived in.
NUISANCE: A. A public nuisance known as such under common law or in equity or
recognized by Minnesota Statutes or the City Code.
   B.   A public nuisance which may prove detrimental to children whether in a
building, on the premises of a building, or upon an unoccupied lot. This
includes, but is not limited to, any abandoned wells, shafts, basements, or
excavations; abandoned refrigerators in a hazardous condition; unlicensed or
inoperable motor vehicles; or any structurally unsound fences or structures; or
any lumber, garbage, rubbish, fences, or debris which may become a hazard for
inquisitive minors.
   C.   Overcrowding a room with occupants.
   D.   Insufficient ventilation or illumination.
   E.   Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities.
   F.   Uncleanliness.
   G.   Any situation or activity which renders air, food, or drink unwholesome
or detrimental to the health of human beings.
   H.   Any condition which is offensive or has a blighting influence on the
community.
   I.   Any other activity or situation that is dangerous to human life or is
detrimental to health.
OCCUPANCY: A taking or possessing of something.
OWNER: A person who, alone, jointly, or severally with others, shall be in
actual possession of, or have charge, care, or control of, any dwelling or
dwelling unit within the City as owner, employee, or agent of the owner, or as
trustee or guardian of the estate of person of the title holder. A person
representing the actual owner must comply with the provisions of this Chapter
to the same extent as the owner.
PUBLIC AREA: Those areas which are normally open to the general public or the
occupants of more than one dwelling unit of a multiple-family dwelling.
REFUSE: Putrescible and nonputrescible solids including garbage and rubbish.
RESIDENCE: A place of habitation.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: A. Agent;
   B.   Designee or collector of rents;
   C.   Holder of a contract for deed;
   D.   Receiver, executor, or trustee;
   E.   Lessee;
   F.   Other person, firm, or corporation exercising control over a party.
RODENT HARBORAGE: A shelter where rodents are liable to live, nest, or seek
shelter.
RODENTS: An infestation of vermin such as rats, mice, skunks, snakes, bats,
grackles, starlings, pigeons, bees, wasps, cockroaches, or flies.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, grass and shrubbery
clippings, wood, glass, brick, plaster, bedding, crockery, cement, and similar
materials.
STRUCTURE: Anything erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent
location on the ground; or attached to something having a permanent location on
the ground. Whenever the word "structure" is used in this Chapter, it shall be
construed as though it was followed by the words "or any part thereof".
YARD: All ground, lawn, court, walk, driveway, or other space constituting part
of the same premises. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-4-6: RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS:
The owner of a dwelling is responsible for the maintenance of buildings and
structures and for meeting the provisions of this Chapter, unless otherwise
noted.
   A.   Joint Responsibility Of Occupants And Owner:
      1.   An owner, agent or occupant of a dwelling may not allow the
accumulation of dirt or filth on the premises occupied or controlled in a
manner that could create a health hazard to the dwelling occupants or the
general public.
      2.   An owner, agent or occupant of a dwelling may not allow the
accumulation of rubbish or garbage on the premises occupied or controlled in a
manner that could create a health hazard to the dwelling occupants or the
general public 1 .
      3.   An owner, agent or occupant may not allow formation of rodent
harborage in or about the premises occupied or controlled.
      4.   The occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit is
responsible for the extermination of rodents, insects or vermin on the
premises. Every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than
one dwelling unit is responsible for such extermination whenever the dwelling
unit is the only one infested. However, whenever infestation is caused by the
failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a reasonable rodentproof
condition, extermination is the responsibility of the owner. Whenever
infestation exists in two (2) or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling, or
in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two (2) or more
dwelling units, extermination thereof is the responsibility of the owner. (Ord.
XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
 
Notes
  1. See Sections
1 5-1-2 through
  5-1-7 of this Code.
9-4-7: PUBLIC NUISANCE DEFINED:
Whoever by an act or failure to perform a legal duty intentionally does any of
the following is guilty of violating this Chapter:
   A.   Maintains or permits an unfavorable building or structure appearance or
level of maintenance:
      1.   Adverse Impact: Buildings, structures, fences and retaining walls
which have been so poorly maintained that their physical condition and
appearance detract from the surrounding neighborhood are declared to be public
nuisances because they: a) decrease adjoining landowners' and occupants'
enjoyment of their property and neighborhood; and b) may adversely affect
property values and neighborhood patterns.
      2.   Standards:
         a.   Any building, structure, fence or retaining wall is a public
nuisance if it does not comply with the following requirements:
            (1)   No part of any exterior surface shall have deterioration,
holes, breaks, gaps, loose or rotting boards or timber.
            (2)   Every exterior surface which has had a surface finish such as
paint applied shall be maintained to avoid noticeable deterioration of the
finish. No wall or other exterior surface shall have peeling, cracked, chipped,
or otherwise deteriorated surface finish on more than twenty percent (20%) of:
               (A)   Any one wall or other flat surface;
               (B)   All door and window moldings, eaves, gutters, and similar
projections on any one side or surface.
            (3)   No glass, including windows and exterior light fixtures,
shall be broken or cracked and no seams shall be torn or separated from
moldings.
            (4)   All exterior doors and shutters shall be hung properly and
have an operable mechanism to keep them securely shut or in place.
            (5)   All cornices, moldings, lintels, sills, bay or dormer
windows, and similar projections shall be kept in good repair and free from
cracks and defects which make them hazardous or unsightly.
            (6)   Roof structures shall be tight and have no defects which
admit water. All roof drainage systems shall be secured and hung properly.
            (7)   Chimney, antennas, air vents, and other similar projections
shall be structurally sound and in good repair. Such projections shall be
secured properly, where applicable, to an exterior wall or roof.
   B.   Maintains or permits buildings or structures which endanger public
safety, health or property within the City:
      1.   Any building, structure, fence or retaining wall in the City which
is found by the City Building Inspectors or Fire Marshall, or their designee,
to be dangerous to public safety, health or property by reason of:
         a.   Damage by fire;
         b.   Defective chimneys or stovepipes;
         c.   Dilapidated condition or decay;
         d.   Defective electrical wiring;
         e.   Defective gas installations;
         f.   Defective heating apparatus;
         g.   Defective sewage disposal system or plumbing;
         h.   Any other defect endangering the public safety, health, or other
property;
are hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
      2.   Any building or structure which is damaged, decayed, dilapidated,
unsanitary, unsafe, vermin or rodent infested, or which lacks provisions for
basic illumination, ventilation, or sanitary facilities to the extent that the
defects create a hazard to the health, safety, or welfare to the occupants or
of the public, may be declared unfit for human habitation. Whenever any
building has been declared unfit for human habitation, the enforcement officer
shall order same vacated within a reasonable time and shall post a placard on
the property which shall: a) be in writing, b) include a description of the
property sufficient for identification, c) include a statement of a reason or
reasons why it is being issued, d) include a description of the repairs and
improvements required to bring the dwelling into compliance with the provisions
of this Chapter, and e) include a statement of time allowed to correct the
violations.
   C.   Maintains or permits garbage or refuse to be placed or stored in yards:
      1.   To enhance the safety of residents, no garbage, junk or debris shall
be placed in yards or properties in the City. The City Zoning Ordinance states
that except as specifically authorized by the Zoning Ordinance, all equipment,
merchandise, materials, supplies, unlicensed vehicles, junk vehicles, trash and
junk, and finished and semi-finished products shall be stored within
"structures" as defined in the Zoning Ordinance. Violation of such provisions
of the City Zoning Ordinance is a violation of this Chapter.
   D.   Special provision; lawn maintenance:
      1.   Preamble: There are a variety of landscapes in the City which
diversify and add a richness to the quality of life. Certain areas in the City
have been left, or allowed to go, unmaintained. They have been accepted by the
vast majority of the City residents as appropriate and as part of the unique
quality of life in this community. There are community expectations, however,
that once an area has been disturbed, landscaped, or otherwise maintained, that
area will continue to be maintained in a consistent manner. When vegetation in
that area is not continually maintained, it becomes aesthetically unpleasing
and violates community standards. Property which appears neglected may decrease
the value of adjacent properties. In addition, if vegetation is not properly
maintained, there may be the following adverse impacts on public health,
safety, and welfare:
         a.   Undesirable vegetation such as common buckthorn, quack grass, and
other weeds may invade and threaten to supplant other more desirable
vegetation.
         b.   Vegetation which causes allergic reactions, such as ragweed, may
develop.
         c.   Tall vegetation along driveways and public roads may impair
visibility when entering or exiting public roads.
      2.   Definitions: For the purpose of this Section the following words
shall have the meanings specified below:
    MEADOW VEGETATION: Grasses and flowering and broad leaf plants which are
native to, or adopted to, the State, which are commonly found in meadow and
prairie plant communities, except weeds.
   NOXIOUS WEEDS: Those plants which are determined from time to time to be
noxious weeds pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, section 18.77, subdivision 8.
   REGULARLY CUT: Mowing or otherwise cutting the vegetation so that it does
not exceed eight inches (8").
   TURF GRASSES: Grasses commonly used in regularly cut lawn areas, such as
bluegrass, fescue, and rye grass blends, and nonwoody vegetation interspersed
with them.
   WEEDS: Include all noxious weeds buffalobur, common cocklebur, crabgrass,
dandelions, jimsonweed, quack grass, common and giant ragweed, field sandbur,
velvetleaf, and wild sunflower. Weeds also include anything that is
horticulturally out of place. For example, a tree seedling is a weed in a
vegetable garden. A property owner may establish that a plant or plants are not
horticulturally out of place by providing a written landscape plan for the area
in question, complete with a listing and locations of plant species. The plants
specifically listed above may not be included within the landscape plan.
Vegetation which does not comply with this plan are weeds.
      3.   Maintenance Standard: The minimum standard in this Section applies
to property which has been developed with a "building" as defined in the
Building Code, including vacant property combined with developed property for
this purpose, and a parcel of property which has been completely or partially
disturbed by demolition, grading or other means in preparation for development
or redevelopment.
         a.   All turf grasses and weeds must not exceed a height of eight
inches (8"), measured from the base at ground level to the tip of each stalk,
stem blade, or leaf.
         b.   This requirement does not apply to the following:
            (1)   A wetland or flood plain designated on the Official Zoning
Map or any other available wetland inventory maps on file with the City.
            (2)   A drainage pond or ditch which stores or conveys storm water.
            (3)   A pasture which is: a) currently being used for the exercise
or feeding of domestic hoofed animals, b) physically surrounded by a permanent
fence which separates the pasture from property used for other purposes, c) at
least one-half (1/2) acre in size, and d) undeveloped with any habitable
buildings.
            (4)   An area in which the land and vegetation appear not to have
been graded, landscaped, mowed, or otherwise disturbed by human or mechanical
means at any time. Determination of what constitutes this type of area will be
based on a reasonable judgment of the present appearance of the area. The
recent history of the area may be relevant to this determination.
            (5)   An area established with meadow vegetation if:
               (A)   The prior vegetation is eliminated and the meadow
vegetation is planted through transplants or seed by human or mechanical means.
               (B)   The area is cut at least once per year to a height of
eight inches (8"), if weeds cover more than twenty five percent (25%) of the
area.
               (C)   A sign is posted on the property in a location likely to
be seen by the public, advising that a meadow or prairie is being established.
The sign is required only if the vegetation is in an area likely to be seen by
the public. This sign shall be in addition to any sign permitted by the sign
ordinance but shall be no smaller than ten inches (10") square, no larger than
one square foot, and no higher than three feet (3') tall. The sign is no longer
required when weeds cover twenty five percent (25%) or less of the area.
         c.   See section
5-2-2 of this code for noxious weed control requirements.
   E.   Special Provision; Parking Maintenance:
      1.   It shall be the joint responsibility of the operator and owner of
any principal use to maintain, in a neat and aesthetic manner, the parking
space, accessway, driveway, landscaping, required fences or walls and retaining
walls. Violation of section
5-2-2 of this code is a violation of this chapter. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-4-8: MANUFACTURED HOME PARK MAINTENANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Maintenance Standards: All streets, roadways and sidewalks shall be
maintained to a level sufficient to allow free vehicular passage for the
residents, their guests, and emergency service responders under all reasonably
anticipated conditions. The existence of a sufficient level of maintenance
shall be determined as follows:
      1.   Street Surface Condition: The hard surface of the streets shall not
be covered by dirt, sand, gravel or other materials to the extent that traction
between the street surface and vehicle tires is substantially diminished. The
street shall be maintained in a manner that horizontal or vertical separations
or cracks of the traveled surface are not of a magnitude which will jar a
passing motor vehicle operating within the speed limit. Street repair and
patching shall also occur whenever a pothole with exposed base material exists,
when a separation of crack results in crumbling pavement, or when any dip or
settlement is pronounced enough to cause storm water to collect and not drain
away.
      2.   Snow Removal And Ice Control: Snow removal operations shall occur as
necessary to provide safe and unimpeded vehicular passage of the streets, and
shall provide for curb to curb snow removal. At a minimum, snow removal
operations shall be completed within twelve (12) hours after the end of a
snowfall event which deposits more than two inches (2") of snow upon the street
surface. Snow removal operations shall be conducted in a manner to achieve as
close to a bare pavement surface as possible. To mitigate slippery street
surfaces, sand and salt shall be applied to control ice where necessary, but
especially at street intersections, sharp curves and other locations where
motorists are likely to brake or turn.
   B.   Trash Collection; Recycling: Trash containers stored outside of
manufactured home units must be placed behind the front entry stoop and be
provided with additional screening if necessary so as not to be visible from
the street, except that on the day of collection the containers may be placed
at curbside along the private manufactured home park street. If contract trash
removal is provided through the park owner with a master contract rather than
contracted by individual manufactured home unit owners, the master contract
must provide recycling opportunities for each manufactured home owner.
   C.   Accessory Structure Removal: Upon the removal of any manufactured home
from a manufactured home park, it shall be the responsibility of the park owner
to see that all freestanding or attached accessory structures, fences and
debris left on the mobile home lot are removed within forty eight (48) hours
after the removal of the unit. The city zoning administrator may approve the
retention of all or part of the accessory structures, if the park owner
requests same in writing, can demonstrate that they will meet the required
setbacks from any replacement manufactured home unit to be placed on the lot,
and if they are shown to be in sound condition. The park owner must also
provide a written commitment to remove or relocate the accessory structure(s)
permitted to remain if the required setbacks fail to be verified after the
replacement manufactured home is placed. (Ord. XXI.15, 12-5-2006)
9-4-9: VIOLATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   B.   For the purpose of safeguarding the health and safety of the general
public and of the occupants of dwellings, it is the duty of the appropriate
city official, or his or her designee, to enforce this chapter, and, this
official is hereby authorized and directed to conduct inspections to determine
the condition of dwellings, residences, and premises located within the city.
For the purpose of making such inspections, the appropriate city official is
hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey, between the hours of seven
thirty o'clock (7:30) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M., all dwellings,
residences, and premises. The appropriate city official, prior to making such
inspection, shall inform the occupant of the dwelling by letter postmarked not
less than seventy two (72) hours prior to the time such inspection is made.
After such written notice is given, the owner or occupant of such dwelling
shall allow entry, during such time, for the purpose of such inspection,
examination or survey; provided that such inspection, examination or survey
shall not have for its purpose the harassment of such owner or occupant and
that such inspection, examination, or survey shall be made so as to cause the
least amount of inconvenience to the owner or occupant, consistent with an
efficient performance of the duties of the appropriate city official; provided
that the purpose of such inspection, examination, or survey shall not be for
the procurement of evidence to be used in any criminal proceeding; provided
that nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the entry of the
appropriate city official. The required notice is waived when:
      1.   At any time when in the opinion of the appropriate city official an
actual emergency tending to create an immediate danger to public health and
safety exists; or
      2.   At any time when such inspection, examination, or survey may be
requested by the owner or tenant. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997; amd. Ord. XXI.15,
12-5-2006)
9-4-10: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the city council to enforce the provisions of
this chapter and the city council may delegate to other officers or agencies
power to enforce particular provisions of this section, including the power to
inspect private premises, and the officer charged with the enforcement, or his
or her designee, of this chapter shall take all reasonable precautions to
prevent the commission and maintenance of public nuisances. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-
2-1997; amd. Ord. XXI.15, 12-5-2006)
9-4-11: ABATEMENT PROCEDURE:
   A.   Abatement:
      1.   Notice: Whenever the officer charged with enforcement determines
that a public nuisance is being maintained or exists on property within the
city, the officer shall notify the property owner and occupant or other
responsible party in writing of that fact and order the nuisance terminated and
abated. Notice shall be served in person or by certified mail. Notice to the
owner shall be satisfied by return receipt from the person listed as the
taxpayer on the county's tax record. If the property is not occupied, the owner
is unknown, or no other responsible party can be reasonably identified, notice
may be served by posting said notice on the property. The posted notice shall
specify the steps to be taken to abate the nuisance and the maximum time period
allowed for compliance. The posted notice shall also state that the city may,
after notice to the owner and occupant or other responsible party, provide for
abating the nuisance by the city. Three (3) separate notices shall be written
and delivered or posted as outlined above. The first notice shall specify
compliance within twenty (20) days. The second consecutive notice shall
reference the first notice and specify an additional ten (10) days for
compliance. The third consecutive notice shall reference the first two (2)
notices, specify that it is the last notice prior to the city council's hearing
for abating the matter by the city, and allow for an additional five (5) days
for final compliance with the written order(s). In cases where any or all of
the notices are posted, at least forty five (45) days shall elapse between the
day of the first posting and the council hearing.
      2.   Summary Abatement: The enforcement officer, or his or her designee,
may provide for abating a public nuisance without following the procedures
required in subsection A1 of this section when:
         a.   There is an immediate threat to the public health or safety.
         b.   There is an immediate threat of serious property damage.
         c.   A public nuisance has been caused by private parties on public
property.
If the enforcement officer abates the nuisance pursuant to this section, the
officer must reasonably attempt to notify the owner, occupant, or other
responsible party of the intended action and the right to appeal the abatement
and any cost recovery at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting.
      3.   Hazardous And Substandard Buildings Or Structures: In appropriate
cases the city may elect to enforce the provisions of this chapter pursuant to
Minnesota statutes, sections 463.15 through 463.26.
      4.   Cost Recovery: The owner of property on which a nuisance has been
abated by the city, or a person who has caused a public nuisance on property
not owned by that person, shall be personally responsible to the city for the
cost of abatement, including administrative costs and any other expenses
incurred by the city while performing the work. As soon as the work has been
completed and the cost determined, the city clerk or other official designated
by the council shall prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner or
other responsible party. Thereupon, the amount shall be immediately due and
payable at the office of the city clerk.
      5.   Assessment: If the cost, or any portion of it, has not been paid
under subsection A4 of this section within thirty (30) days after the date of
the bill, the unpaid cost may be certified against the property to which the
cost is attributable in accordance with Minnesota statutes, chapter 429. Before
the unpaid costs are certified against the property, the property owner must be
given notice and hearing as required by Minnesota statutes, 429.061. (Ord.
XVIII.10, 9-2-1997; amd. Ord. XXI.15, 12-5-2006)
      6.   Penalty: Any person in violation of any of the provisions in this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as described in title 1,
chapter 4 of this code. Each day on which such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004; amd. Ord. XXI.15, 12-5-
2006)
      7.   Hindrance: Any person hindering the efforts of city officials to
investigate possible violations of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
      8.   Conflict Of Chapter: In any case where a provision of this chapter
is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire,
safety, or health ordinance or code in this city, the provision which
establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health
and safety of the people shall prevail. In any case where a provision of this
chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or
code of the city existing on the effective date of this chapter which
established a lower standard for the promotion and protection of the health and
safety of the people, the provision of this chapter shall be deemed to prevail.
The determination of the applicability of this chapter in light of the above
rules of interpretation shall be made by the city and its determination shall
be final. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997; amd. Ord. XXI.15, 12-5-2006)
CHAPTER 5
MOVED BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
SECTION:
9-5-1: Moved Buildings And Structures
9-5-2: Definitions
9-5-3: Administration And Application
9-5-4: Violations And Penalties
9-5-1: MOVED BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
All buildings or structures moved within, into or out of the city shall be
subject to the following rules and regulations as promulgated by the city
building official. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
BUILDING: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use
or occupancy.
CITY INSPECTOR: The designated city official charged with the authority to
administer and enforce this code.
OSHA: The federal occupational safety and health act.
STRUCTURE: That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any
kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined
together in some definite manner. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-5-3: ADMINISTRATION AND APPLICATION:
   A.   Permit Required: Any person desiring to move a building or structure
into, within or out of the city must apply for a moving permit with the city
building inspections division and pay the appropriate moving permit fee as
adopted by the city council. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997; amd. Ord. XVIII.12, 2-5-
2002)
Exception: Garages, sheds and utility buildings limited to one story in height
and which will require no special traffic signage or lighting for safe road
transfer, in accordance with Minnesota statutes, chapter 169.
   B.   Construction Regulations: All buildings or structures proposed to be
moved within or into the city limits of Rosemount shall be constructed so as to
be in compliance with all city and state building and zoning codes and
ordinances in effect at the time of permit issuance. All buildings or
structures shall be in good repair and condition. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
   C.   Preinspection: Prior to moving buildings or structures within or into
the city limits, a preinspection of said structures may be required. The
requirements for this inspection are at the discretion of the city building
official. A special inspection application form and the appropriate fee, as
approved by the city council, must also be applied for and paid, for said
preinspection. The applicant shall make such buildings or structures available
and accessible for preinspection and shall schedule a preinspection in
accordance with the city building inspections division's policy. Upon
completion of the preinspection, the city inspector shall compile a report
outlining code deficiencies and/or violations which would be required to bring
said buildings or structures into compliance with current codes. Upon
notification of deficiencies and/or code violations, the applicant may be
issued a conditional moving and building permit as set forth in the city
inspector's report. It shall be further required that the applicant shall, at
the time of permit issuance, sign a statement acknowledging acceptance of said
conditions. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997; amd. Ord. XVIII.12, 2-5-2002)
   D.   Construction Guarantee: When a permit is required to move a building or
structure into or within the city limits, it shall be further required that the
applicant post a penal bond in the sum of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00)
in favor of the city. The penal bond shall guarantee compliance with said
conditions outlined in the city inspector's report and that the building or
structure will be placed on a foundation, and connected to the municipal sewer
and water service or a complying septic system and well (if required) and that
the final grading and a driveway will be completed within one hundred eighty
(180) days of the permit issuance date.
   E.   Additional Permits: In addition to the moving and special inspection
permits and fees, all other permits as required by city and state codes must be
obtained to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, remodel or improve the building
or structure and any components related to the project.
   F.   Structure Placement: Except as provided under the exception of
subsections A and H of this section, all buildings and structures moved within
or into the city limits must be placed on a permanent foundation and/or slab
within fifteen (15) working days after the building or structure has been moved
within or into the city limits.
   G.   Aesthetic Conditions: Except for buildings and structures specifically
exempted in subsection A of this section, all buildings or structures moved
within or into the city limits shall have all exterior wall surfaces completely
resided or repainted and the roof reroofed with new materials complying with
the Rosemount zoning code. Said requirements shall be completed within one
hundred eighty (180) days of permit issuance.
   H.   Building Storage: Moved buildings or structures shall be prohibited
from being either temporarily or permanently stored or set for the purposes of
transport, transfer or sale within the city unless the structure is a
prefabricated building or structure of less than one hundred fifty (150) square
feet, in conformance with the Rosemount zoning code, and the building or
structure is in a commercial district allowing such uses.
   I.   Licensing And Coordination: All buildings or structures shall be moved
by licensed building movers in accordance with Minnesota statutes, sections
221.81 and 160.26. All building movers shall file a moving plan with the permit
application indicating the proposed route within the city and the proposed date
and the time of the move. The building mover shall notify and coordinate the
building move with the city police and public works departments. Should the
moving plan change, the building mover shall notify the Rosemount police and
public works departments a minimum of twelve (12) hours in advance of the
original scheduled moving time and reschedule said move as required. The
Rosemount police and/or public works personnel have the right to deny,
reschedule or reroute any building or structure move on jurisdictional roadways
at any time.
   J.   Site Conditions: Upon moving any building or structure from its
existing location, all public utilities shall be terminated at the property
line per code. Any remaining concrete or other miscellaneous debris including
slabs, foundations, sidewalks or footings must be removed and disposed of at an
approved construction demolition landfill in accordance with state law and
Dakota County ordinance 110. All existing wells and/or septic systems must be
sealed and abandoned per code. If an excavation hole or pit is formed due to
the removal or cleanup of the moved building or structure, the excavation must
be filled with clean fill to match existing and surrounding finished grade
conditions. No open and/or unsafe excavation(s) shall remain open overnight
unless secure fencing and safety signage is provided and installed in
accordance with OSHA regulations. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
   K.   Age Of Building: Prior to moving any single-family building into or
within the city limits, proof of the age of the building must be verified to
the city building inspections division. No moved single-family building which
is more than five (5) years of age older in comparison to the oldest single-
family building(s) located within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed
site shall be permitted. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997; amd. Ord. XVIII.12, 2-5-
2002)
9-5-4: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Violation: It shall be unlawful for any person to move a building or
structure into, within or out of the city, or cause the same to be done,
contrary to or in violation of any provision embodied in this chapter or the
Minnesota state building code. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
   B.   Penalties: Persons found to be in violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor offense and punished as
described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Each day during which a violation
of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted, constitutes a separate
offense. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-2004)
CHAPTER 6
SUBSURFACE SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEMS
SECTION:
9-6-1: Purpose
9-6-2: Definitions
9-6-3: General Provisions
9-6-4: Administration
9-6-5: General Requirements
9-6-6: SSTS Standards
9-6-7: SSTS Permitting
9-6-8: Abandonment Certification
9-6-9: Variances
9-6-10: Violations
9-6-11: Hearings
9-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum requirements for regulation
of SSTS for the treatment and dispersal of sewage within the city of Rosemount
to protect public health and safety, groundwater quality, and to prevent or
eliminate the development of public nuisances. It is intended to serve the best
interest of the city's citizens by protecting its health, safety, general
welfare and natural resources.
   A.   The protection of lakes, rivers and streams, wetlands, and groundwater
in the city essential to the promotion of public health, safety, welfare,
socioeconomic growth and development of the city in perpetuity.
   B.   The regulation of proper SSTS construction, reconstruction, repair and
maintenance to prevent the entry and migration of contaminates, thereby
protecting the degradation of surface water and groundwater quality.
   C.   The establishment of minimum standards for SSTS placement, design,
construction, reconstruction, repair and maintenance to prevent contamination
and, if contamination is discovered, the identification and control of its
consequences and the abatement of its source and migration.
   D.   The appropriate utilization of privy vaults and other nonwater carried
sewage collection and storage facilities.
   E.   The provision of technical assistance and education, plan review,
inspections, SSTS surveys and complaint investigations to prevent and control
waterborne diseases, lake degradation, groundwater related hazards, and public
nuisance conditions.
   F.   This chapter is adopted pursuant to Minnesota statutes chapters 115,
145A, 375, or successor statutes, and Minnesota rules chapters 7080, 7081 and
7082 or successor rules. (Ord. 2012-01, 1-17-2012)
9-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and phrases
shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section. Unless specifically
defined herein, terms used in this chapter shall have the same definition as
provided in Minnesota statutes section 115.55 and Minnesota rules chapters
7080, 7081, 7082, and 7083 and if not defined there, shall have common usage
meaning. For purposes of this chapter, the words "must" and "shall" are
mandatory and not permissive unless a different definition appears in this
chapter.
AS BUILTS: "Record drawings" as defined herein.
CITY: The city of Rosemount, Minnesota.
CITY ADMINISTRATOR: The administrator of the city of Rosemount.
CITY COUNCIL: City council of the city of Rosemount.
CLASS V INJECTION WELL: A shallow well used to place a variety of fluids
directly below the land surface, which include a domestic SSTS serving more
than twenty (20) people. The United States environmental protection agency and
delegated state groundwater programs permit these wells to inject wastes below
the ground surface provided they meet certain requirements and do not endanger
underground sources of drinking water. Class V motor vehicle waste disposal
wells and large capacity cesspools are specifically prohibited (see 40 CFR
parts 144 and 146).
CLUSTER SYSTEM: A wastewater collection and treatment system under some form of
common ownership that collects wastewater from two (2) or more dwellings or
buildings and conveys it to a treatment and dispersal system located on an
acceptable site near the dwelling or buildings.
DEPARTMENT: The city of Rosemount community development department.
DESIGN FLOW: The daily volume of wastewater for which an on site/cluster system
is designed to treat and discharge.
FAILURE TO PROTECT GROUNDWATER: An SSTS that does not protect groundwater such
as a seepage pit, cesspool, drywell, leaching pit, or other pit; an SSTS with
less than the required vertical separation distance described in Minnesota
rules part 7080.1500, subparts 4(3) and 4(E); and a system not abandoned in
accordance with Minnesota rules part 7080.2500. The determination of the threat
to groundwater for other conditions must be made by a qualified employee or a
licensed inspection business.
ISTS: An individual sewage treatment system as defined in Minnesota rules part
7080.1100, subpart 42.
IMMINENT THREAT TO PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY: An SSTS with a discharge of sewage
or sewage effluent to the ground surface, drainage systems, ditches, or
stormwater drains or directly to surface water; SSTS that cause a reoccurring
sewage backup into a dwelling or other establishment; SSTS with electrical
hazards; sewage tanks with unsecured, damaged, or weak maintenance access
covers; or any other situation with the potential to immediately and adversely
affect or threaten public health or safety. The determination of protectiveness
for other conditions must be made by a qualified employee inspector or a
licensed inspection business.
MPCA: The Minnesota pollution control agency.
MSTS: A midsized subsurface sewage treatment system as defined in Minnesota
rules part 7081.0020, subpart 4.
MINOR REPAIR: The repair or replacement of an existing damaged or faulty
component/part of an SSTS that will return the SSTS to its operable condition.
The repair shall not alter the original area, dimensions, design,
specifications or concepts of the SSTS.
MUNICIPALITY: Any incorporated city or township within the boundaries of Dakota
County, Minnesota.
PERSON: Any human being, any municipality or other governmental or political
subdivision, or other public agency, any public or private corporation, any
partnership, firm, association, or other organization, any receiver, trustee,
assignee, agent, or other legal representative or any of the foregoing or any
other legal entity.
RECORD DRAWINGS: A set of drawings that reasonably document the final in place
location, size, and type of all SSTS components including the results of any
materials testing performed and a description of conditions during construction
of the system. Record drawings were previously known as "as builts".
SSTS: A subsurface sewage treatment system as defined in Minnesota rules part
7080.1100, subpart 82.
SHORELAND/FLOODPLAIN AREA: Those areas covered by Dakota County ordinance 50,
shoreland and floodplain management.
STATE: The state of Minnesota.
TREATMENT LEVEL: Treatment system performance levels as defined in Minnesota
rules part 7083.4030, table III for testing or proprietary treatment products.
TYPE I SYSTEM: An SSTS designed according to Minnesota rules parts 7080.2200 to
7080.2240, as may be amended.
TYPE II SYSTEM: An SSTS designed according to Minnesota rules parts 7080.2250
to 7080.2290, as may be amended.
TYPE III SYSTEM: An SSTS designed according to Minnesota rules part 7080.2300,
as may be amended.
TYPE IV SYSTEM: An SSTS designed according to Minnesota rules part 7080.2350,
as may be amended.
TYPE V SYSTEM: An SSTS designed according to Minnesota rules part 7080.2400, as
may be amended. (Ord. 2012-01, 1-17-2012)
9-6-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Scope: This chapter regulates the siting, design, installation,
alterations, operation, maintenance, monitoring, and management of all SSTS
within the city's jurisdiction including, but not limited to, individual SSTS
and cluster or community SSTS, privy vaults, and other nonwater carried SSTS.
All sewage generated in unsewered areas of the city shall be treated and
dispersed by an approved SSTS that is sited, designed, installed, operated, and
maintained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or by a system
that has been permitted by MPCA.
   B.   Jurisdiction: This chapter applies to all land area within the city.
(Ord. 2012-01, 1-17-2012)
9-6-4: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   City: The department shall administer the SSTS program and all
provisions of this chapter. At appropriate times, the city shall review, revise
and update this chapter as necessary. The city shall employ or retain under
contract qualified and appropriately licensed professionals to administer and
operate the SSTS program.
   B.   State Of Minnesota: When a single SSTS or group of SSTS under single
ownership within one-half (1/2) mile of each other have a design flow greater
than ten thousand (10,000) gallons per day, the owner or owners shall make
application for and obtain a state disposal system permit from the MPCA in
accordance with Minnesota rules chapter 7001. If the measured daily flows for a
consecutive seven (7) day period exceed ten thousand (10,000) gallons per day,
a state disposal system permit is required.
A state disposal system permit is also required for any SSTS or group of SSTS
that the MPCA commissioner determines has the potential or an increased
potential to cause adverse public health or environmental impacts if not
regulated under a state permit. Conditions for these permits include systems in
environmentally sensitive areas, unsubstantiated or unexpected flow volumes,
and systems requiring exceptional operation, monitoring, and management. (Ord.
2012-01, 1-17-2012)
9-6-5: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Retroactivity:
      1.   All SSTS: Except as provided in subsection A2 of this section, all
provisions of this chapter shall apply to any SSTS regardless of the date it
was originally permitted.
      2.   Existing Permits: Unexpired permits that were issued prior to the
effective date hereof shall remain valid under the terms and conditions of the
original permit until the original expiration date or until a change in system
ownership.
      3.   SSTS On Lots Created After January 23, 1996: All lots created after
January 23, 1996, must have a minimum of two (2) soil treatment and dispersal
areas that can support systems as described in Minnesota rules parts 7080.2200
through 7080.2230 or site conditions described in Minnesota rules part
7081.0270, subparts 3 through 7.
   B.   Upgrade, Repair, Replacement, And Abandonment:
      1.   Failure To Protect Groundwater: An SSTS that is determined not to be
protective of groundwater in accordance with Minnesota rules part 7080.1500,
subpart 4(B) shall be upgraded, repaired, replaced or abandoned by the owner in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter within ten (10) months of
receipt of notice of noncompliance from the department.
      2.   Imminent Threat To Public Health Or Safety: An SSTS that is
determined to be an imminent threat to public health or safety shall be
upgraded, repaired, replaced or abandoned by the owner in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice of
noncompliance from the department.
      3.   Abandonment: Any SSTS, or any component thereof, that is no longer
intended to be used must be abandoned in accordance with section
9-6-8 of this chapter and Minnesota rules part 7080.2500.
   C.   SSTS In Floodplains: SSTS shall not be located in a floodway and
wherever possible, location within any part of a floodplain should be avoided.
If no option exists to locate an SSTS outside of a floodplain, location within
the flood fringe is allowed if the requirements of Minnesota rules part
7080.2270 and all relevant local requirements are met.
   D.   Class V Injection Wells: All owners of new or replacement SSTS that are
considered to be class V injection wells as defined in the code of federal
regulations, title 40, part 144, are required to submit SSTS inventory
information to the United States environmental protection agency and the MPCA.
Owners are also required to identify all class V injection wells in property
transfer disclosures.
   E.   SSTS License Required: All design, installation, alteration, repair,
maintenance, operation, pumping and inspection activities for SSTS located in
the city must be completed by a business licensed by the state under Minnesota
rules chapter 7083, an appropriately certified qualified employee, or a person
exempted under Minnesota rules part 7083.0700, subparts 1(A), (C), (D), (F),
(G), (H), and (I). Individuals exempt from a state SSTS license under Minnesota
rules part 7083.0700, subparts 1(A), (C), (D), (F), (G), (H), and (I) must
follow all applicable local, state and federal requirements. Property owners
that employ a business to perform this work must hire a business that is
licensed in accordance with Minnesota rules chapter 7083.
No person shall engage in site evaluation, inspection, design, installation,
construction, alteration, extension, repair, maintenance, or pumping of SSTS
without an appropriate and valid license issued by the MPCA in accordance with
Minnesota rules chapter 7083, except as exempted in Minnesota rules part
7083.0700, subparts 1(A), (C), (D), (F), (G), (H), and (I).
   F.   Prohibitions:
      1.   Occupancy Or Use Of Building Without A Compliant SSTS: It is
unlawful for any person to maintain, occupy, or use any building intended for
habitation to dispose of wastewater in a manner that does not comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
      2.   Sewage Discharge To Ground Surface Or Surface Water: It is unlawful
for any person to construct, maintain, or use any wastewater treatment system
regulated under this chapter that results in raw or partially treated
wastewater seeping to the ground surface or flowing into any surface water. Any
surface discharging system must be permitted by the MPCA under the national
pollutant discharge elimination system program.
      3.   Sewage Discharge To A Well Or Boring: It is unlawful for any person
to discharge raw or treated wastewater into any well or boring as described in
Minnesota rules part 4725.2050, or any other excavation in the ground that is
not in compliance with this chapter.
      4.   Discharge Of Hazardous Or Deleterious Materials: It is unlawful for
any person to discharge into any treatment system regulated under this chapter
any hazardous or deleterious material that adversely affects the treatment or
dispersal performance of the system or groundwater quality.
   G.   Required Submission Of Maintenance Reports: Licensed maintenance
businesses must abide by the requirements described in Minnesota rules part
7083.0770, subpart 2. All written reports required by Minnesota rules part
7083.0770, subpart 2 must be provided to the homeowner and the department
within thirty (30) days after any maintenance work is performed. (Ord. 2012-01,
1-17-2012)
9-6-6: SSTS STANDARDS:
   A.   Standards Adopted By Reference: Minnesota statutes section 115.55 and
Minnesota rules chapters 7080, 7081, 7082, 7083 and all other reference laws
and rules, as may be amended, are adopted by reference and made a part of this
chapter.
   B.   Amendments To The Adopted Standards:
      1.   Determination Of Hydraulic Loading Rate And SSTS Sizing: Table IX
from Minnesota rules part 7080.2150, subpart 3 entitled loading rates for
determining bottom absorption area for trenches and seepage beds for effluent
treatment level C and absorption ratios for determining mound absorption areas
using detail soil descriptions and table IXa from Minnesota rules part
7080.2150, subpart 3(E) entitled loading rates for determining bottom
absorption area for trenches and seepage beds for effluent treatment level C
and absorption ratios for determining mound absorption areas using percolation
tests and herein adopted by reference shall both be used to size SSTS
infiltration areas using the larger sizing factor of the two for SSTS design.
      2.   Holding Tanks: A holding tank may be used for the following
application only after it can be shown conclusively by the property owner or
property owner’s agent that an SSTS permitted under this chapter cannot be
feasibly installed:
         a.   As a replacement for an existing failing SSTS;
         b.   For an SSTS that poses an imminent threat to public health or
safety; or
         c.   For use with buildings with limited water use.
      3.   Compliance Inspections: Compliance inspections shall be required
when any of the following conditions occur:
         a.   Anytime there is an expansion of use of the building being served
by an existing SSTS that may impact the performance of the system.
         b.   As required in subsection
4-1B-10 B.
   C.   Compliance Criteria For Existing SSTS:
      1.   SSTS built before April 1, 1996, outside of areas designated as
shoreland areas, wellhead protection areas, or SSTS providing sewage treatment
for food, beverage, or lodging establishments must have at least two feet (2')
of ertical separation between the bottom of the dispersal system and seasonal
saturation or bedrock. The vertical separation measurement shall be made
outside the area of system influence in an area of similar soil.
      2.   SSTS built after March 31, 1996, or SSTS located in a shoreland
area, wellhead protection area, or serving a food, beverage, or lodging
establishment as defined under Minnesota rules part 7080.110, subpart 84 must
have a three foot (3') vertical separation between the bottom soil infiltrative
surface and the periodically saturated soil and/or bedrock. Unless otherwise
determined by the department, existing systems that have no more than a fifteen
percent (15%) reduction to the minimum required thirty six inch (36")
separation distance are considered compliant (i.e., a separation distance no
less than 30.6 inches). This reduction is to account for settling of sand or
soil, normal variation of separation distance measurements and interpretation
of limiting layer characteristics. The vertical separation measurement shall be
made outside the area of system influence in an area of similar soil.
   D.   Highest Standards Prevail: Where the conditions imposed by a provision
of this chapter are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable
conditions imposed by a provision of this chapter or any other applicable law,
ordinance, rule, or regulation, the provision that establishes the higher
standard for the promotion and protection of the public health, safety, and
general welfare shall prevail. (Ord. 2012-01, 1-17-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-02, 8-
2-2023)
9-6-7: SSTS PERMITTING:
   A.   Permits Required:
      1.   Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person to construct,
install, modify, or replace an SSTS in the city without the appropriate permit
from the department.
      2.   Permitting Not Exclusive: The obtaining of a permit shall not be
deemed to exclude the necessity of obtaining other appropriate permits or
approvals. Compliance with the provision of this chapter shall not relieve any
person of the need to comply with any and all other applicable rules,
regulations and laws.
   B.   Construction Permit:
      1.   Activities Requiring A Construction Permit: A construction permit is
required for installation of a new SSTS, for replacement of an existing SSTS,
or for any repair or replacement of components that will alter the original
function of the system, change the treatment capacity of the system, change the
location of the system, or otherwise change the original system's design,
layout, or function.
      2.   Activities Not Requiring A Construction Permit: A construction
permit is not required for minor repairs or replacements of system components
that do not alter the original function of the system, change the treatment
capacity of the system, change the location of the system, or otherwise change
the original system's design, layout, or function.
      3.   Application For Permit: Permit applications shall be submitted to
the department on forms provided by the department. Applicants shall provide
all information as required for the administration of this chapter.
      4.   Contents Of Permit Application: The permit application shall include
the following:
         a.   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant and
permittee;
         b.   The property identification number and address or other
description of the real property on which the systems will be located;
         c.   A site evaluation report as described in Minnesota rules part
7080.1730;
         d.   A design report as described in Minnesota rules part 7080.2430;
         e.   The infield verification as described in Minnesota rules part
7082.00500, subpart 3(A);
         f.   A management plan as described in Minnesota rules part 7082.0600
and subsection C of this section; and
         g.   Copies of any required municipal, county, state, or federal
permits or approvals.
      5.   Application Fee: The application fee shall accompany the permit
application.
      6.   Application Review: The department shall review a permit application
and supporting documents to determine whether the application is complete. Upon
satisfaction that the proposed work will conform to the provisions of this
chapter, the department shall issue a written permit authorizing construction
of the SSTS as designed. If the applicant changes the proposed work to be
conducted under an approved permit application, the applicant must file an
amended application with the department detailing the changed conditions prior
to initiating or continuing construction, modification, or operation. The
department shall review the amended application and either approve or deny the
application.
      7.   Approval Of Permit Required: The department must review and approve
the permit application and management plan before issuing a permit.
Construction must not be initiated until the department grants a construction
permit.
      8.   Permit Expiration: The construction permit is valid for a period of
no more than one year from its date of issue, unless it is extended in
accordance with this section or construction has been completed satisfactorily,
whichever is shorter. Satisfactory completion of construction shall be
determined by receipt of final record drawings and a signed certification that
the construction or installation of the systems was completed in substantial
conformance to the approved design documents by a qualified employee of the
department or a licensed inspection business that is authorized by the
department and independent of the owner and the SSTS installer.
      9.   Extensions And Renewals: The department may grant an extension of
the construction permit if the construction has commenced prior to the original
expiration date of the permit. The permit may be extended for a period of no
more than six (6) months.
      10.   Permit Not Transferable: A construction permit shall not be
transferable to a new owner. The new owner must apply for a new construction
permit in accordance with this section.
      11.   Posting: The construction permit shall be posted on the property in
such a location and manner so that the permit is visible and available for
inspection until construction is completed and certified.
      12.   Conflict Of Interest:
         a.   A licensed inspection business that inspects an existing SSTS is
allowed to subsequently design and install a new SSTS for that property
provided the inspection business is also licensed to design and install.
         b.   A licensed inspection business working on behalf of the
department must not design or install systems that the business will be
responsible for permitting or inspecting as part of its contract with the city.
      13.   Denial And Right To Appeal: If the department denies a permit to an
applicant, the applicant shall be notified of such denial in writing. The
applicant may appeal the permit denial by filing a request for a hearing
consistent with the appeals process in section
9-8-11 of this title.
   C.   Management Plan:
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of management plans is to describe how a
particular SSTS is intended to be operated and maintained to sustain the
performance required. The plan is to be provided by the certified designer to
the system owner when the treatment system is commissioned.
      2.   SSTS Requiring Management Plans: Management plans are required for
all new or replacement SSTS. The management plan shall be submitted to the
department with the construction permit application for review and approval.
The department shall be notified of any system modifications made during
construction and the management plan revised and resubmitted at the time of
final construction certification.
      3.   Required Contents: Management plans shall include:
         a.   Operating requirements describing tasks that the owner can
perform and tasks that a licensed service provider or maintainer must perform;
         b.   Monitoring requirements;
         c.   Maintenance requirements including maintenance procedures and a
schedule for routine maintenance;
         d.   Statement that the owner is required to notify the department
when the management plan requirements are not being met;
         e.   Disclosure of the location and condition of the additional soil
treatment and dispersal area on the owner's property or a property serving the
owner's residence; and
         f.   Other requirements as determined by the department.
   D.   Operating Permit:
      1.   Permit Required: An operating permit is required for all treatment
systems installed under Minnesota rules part 7080.2290 (holding tanks),
Minnesota rules part 7080.2350 (type IV system), and Minnesota rules chapter
7081 (MSTS). Sewage shall not be discharged to a treatment system requiring an
operating permit until the department certifies that the treatment system was
installed in substantial conformance with the approved plans, receives the
final record drawings of the MSTS, and a valid operating permit is issued to
the owner.
      2.   Application For Permit: Permit applications shall be submitted to
the department on forms provided by the department. Applicants shall provide
all information as required for administration of this chapter.
      3.   Contents Of Permit Application: The permit application shall include
the following:
         a.   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant and
permittee;
         b.   The construction permit reference number and date of issue;
         c.   The final record drawings of the treatment systems; and
         d.   Owners of holding tanks must submit a copy of a valid executed
monitoring and disposal contract with a licensed maintenance business.
      4.   Application Fee: The application fee shall accompany the permit
application.
      5.   Monitoring And Disposal Contract: Owners of holding tanks shall
provide to the department a copy of a valid monitoring and disposal contract
executed between the owner and a licensed maintenance business that guarantees
the removal of the holding tank contents in a timely manner that prevents an
illegal discharge in accordance with Minnesota rules part 7082.011, subpart 3
(G). The owner must hold a valid contract with a licensed maintenance business
at all times until such time the holding tank is abandoned or the property
sold. This contract requirement is waived if the owner is a farmer who is
exempt from licensing under Minnesota statutes section 115.56, subdivision 3(b)
(3).
      6.   Application Review: The department shall review the application, the
record drawings, operation and maintenance manual, management plan, maintenance
and servicing contract, and any other pertinent documents as appropriate for
accuracy and completeness. If any deficiencies are identified, the operating
permit shall be denied until the deficiencies are corrected to the satisfaction
of the department. If the submitted application and documents fulfill the
requirements, the department shall issue an operating permit within ten (10)
working days of receipt of the permit application.
      7.   Permit Terms And Conditions: The operating permit shall include the
following:
         a.   System performance requirements;
         b.   System operating requirements;
         c.   Monitoring locations, procedures and recording requirements;
         d.   Maintenance requirements and schedules;
         e.   Compliance limits and boundaries;
         f.   Reporting requirements;
         g.   Department notification requirements for noncompliance
conditions;
         h.   Valid contract between the owner and licensed maintenance
business;
         i.   Disclosure, location, and condition of acceptable soil treatment
and dispersal system site; and
         j.   Descriptions of acceptable and prohibited discharges.
      8.   Permit Expiration And Renewal:
         a.   Operating permits shall be valid for a specific term stated on
the permit as determined by the department.
         b.   An operating permit must be renewed prior to its expiration. If
not renewed the department may require the system to be removed from service or
operated as a holding tank until such time as the permit is renewed. If not
renewed within sixty (60) calendar days of the expiration date, the department
may require that the system be abandoned.
         c.   The department shall notify the holder of an operating permit of
the permit renewal requirement at least ninety (90) calendar days prior to
expiration of the permit. The owner must apply for renewal at least thirty (30)
calendar days before the permit expiration date.
         d.   Application for permit renewal shall be made on a form provided
by the department including:
            (1)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant
and permittee;
            (2)   Reference number of previous operating permit;
            (3)   Any outstanding compliance monitoring reports as required by
the operating permit;
            (4)   Certified treatment system inspection signed and/or sealed by
a certified designer, maintenance contractor, or operator at the discretion of
the department;
            (5)   Any revisions made to the operation and maintenance manual;
and
            (6)   Any applicable fees.
      9.   Permit Not Transferable: The operating permit may not be
transferred. A new owner shall apply for an operating permit in accordance with
this subsection D. The department shall not terminate the current permit until
sixty (60) calendar days after the date of sale unless an imminent threat to
public health and safety exists. To consider the new owner's application, the
department may require a performance inspection of the treatment systems
certified by a licensed inspector or qualified employee.
      10.   Compliance Monitoring:
         a.   Performance monitoring of an SSTS shall be performed by a
licensed inspection business or licensed service provider hired by the holder
of the operating permit in accordance with the monitoring frequency and
parameters stipulated in the permit.
         b.   A monitoring report shall be prepared and certified by the
licensed inspection business or licensed service provider. The report shall be
submitted to the department on or before the compliance reporting date
stipulated in the operating permit. The report shall contain a description of
the maintenance and servicing activities performed since the last compliance
monitoring report as described below:
            (1)   Owner name and address;
            (2)   Operating permit number;
            (3)   Average daily flow since last compliance monitoring report;
            (4)   Description of type of maintenance and date performed;
            (5)   Description of sample taken (if required), analytical
laboratory used, and results of analyses;
            (6)   Problems noted with the system and actions proposed or taken
to correct them; and
            (7)   Name, signature, license and license number of the licensed
professional who performed the work.
   E.   Duty To Comply With Permit Conditions: The permittee shall comply with
all conditions stated in any permit issued by the department under this
chapter. Failure of the permittee to do so is a violation of this chapter and
is subject to the penalties provided herein.
   F.   Systems Not Operated Under Management Plan: Owners of SSTS that are not
operated under a management plan or operating permit must inspect treatment
tanks and remove solids if needed every three (3) years. Solids must be removed
when their accumulation meets the limit described in Minnesota rules part
7080.2450. (Ord. 2012-01, 1-17-2012)
9-6-8: ABANDONMENT CERTIFICATION:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the system abandonment certification is to
ensure that a treatment system no longer intended to be used is abandoned
following decommissioning and in a manner that protects public health, safety,
and water quality. It also terminates all permits associated with the system.
   B.   Abandonment Requirements:
      1.   Whenever the use of an SSTS or any system component is discontinued
as the result of a system repair, modification, replacement or decommissioning
following connection to a municipal or private sanitary sewer, or condemnation
or demolition of a building served by the system, further use of the system or
any system component for any purpose is prohibited.
      2.   Abandonment shall be completed in accordance with Minnesota rules
part 7080.2500.
      3.   An abandonment certificate shall be submitted to the department. The
report shall include:
         a.   Owner's name and contact information;
         b.   Property address;
         c.   System construction permit and operating permit;
         d.   The reason(s) for abandonment; and
         e.   A brief description of the abandonment methods used, description
of the system components removed or abandoned in place, and disposition of any
materials or residuals. (Ord. 2012-01, 1-17-2012)
9-6-9: VARIANCES:
   A.   Variances Allowed: With the exception below, in any case where it
appears by the reason of exceptional circumstances the strict enforcement of
any provision of the standards would cause unnecessary hardship or that strict
conformity with the standards would be unreasonable, impractical or not
feasible under the circumstances in order to promote the effective and
reasonable application and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, the
city may permit a variance upon such conditions as it may prescribe consistent
with the general purposes of this chapter and the intent of this and all other
applicable state and local regulations.
   B.   Procedure For Variance: See section
11-12-2 of the zoning code.
   C.   Prohibited Variances: The city may not grant variances from the
following standards:
      1.   Minnesota rules part 7080.2150, subpart 2.
      2.   Minnesota rules part 7081.0080, subparts 2 to 5, however, variances
may be granted to Minnesota rules part 7081.0080, subpart 4(D)(1) for the
replacement of MSTS serving existing dwellings or other establishments.
      3.   Flow determinations under Minnesota rules part 7081.0110 if the
deviation reduces the average daily flow from more than ten thousand (10,000)
gallons to ten thousand (10,000) gallons per day or less. (Ord. 2012-01, 1-17-
2012)
9-6-10: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
   B.   Inspections: For the purpose of safeguarding the health and safety of
the general public and of the occupants of dwellings, it is the duty of the
appropriate city official, or his or her designee, to enforce this chapter,
and, this official is hereby authorized and directed to conduct inspections to
determine the condition of dwellings, residences, and premises located within
the city. For the purpose of making such inspections, the appropriate city
official is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey, between the hours
of seven thirty o'clock (7:30) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M., all
dwellings, residences, and premises. The appropriate city official, prior to
making such inspection, shall inform the occupant of the dwelling by letter
postmarked not less than seventy two (72) hours prior to the time such
inspection is made. After such written notice is given, the owner or occupant
of such dwelling shall allow entry, during such time, for the purpose of such
inspection, examination or survey; provided that such inspection, examination
or survey shall not have for its purpose the harassment of such owner or
occupant and that such inspection, examination, or survey shall be made so as
to cause the least amount of inconvenience to the owner or occupant, consistent
with an efficient performance of the duties of the appropriate city official;
provided that the purpose of such inspection, examination, or survey shall not
be for the procurement of evidence to be used in any criminal proceeding;
provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the entry
of the appropriate city official. The required notice is waived when:
      1.   At any time when in the opinion of the appropriate city official an
actual emergency tending to create an immediate danger to public health and
safety exists; or
      2.   At any time when such inspection, examination, or survey may be
requested by the owner or tenant.
   C.   Abatement: If an SSTS constitutes a public health nuisance, the
department may enter the property and abate the nuisance and recover the costs
of the same from the property owner by following procedures listed in section
9-4-11 of this title.
   D.   Penalty: Any person in violation of any of the provisions in this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as described in title 1,
chapter 4 of this code. Each day on which such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
   E.   Hindrance: Any person hindering the efforts of city officials to
investigate possible violations of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   F.   Conflict Of Chapter: In any case in which a provision of this chapter
is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire,
safety, or health ordinance or code in this city, the provision that
establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health
and safety of the people shall prevail. In any case where a provision of this
chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or
code of the city existing on the effective date of this chapter that
established a lower standard for the promotion and protection of the health and
safety of the people, the provision of this chapter shall be deemed to prevail.
The determination of the applicability of this chapter in light of the above
rules of interpretation shall be made by the city and its determination shall
be final.
   G.   Unsafe Buildings Or Structures: A building or structure regulated by
this code is unsafe, for purposes of this section, if it is structurally
unsafe, not provided with adequate egress, a fire hazard, or otherwise
dangerous to human life.
Building service equipment that is regulated by this code is unsafe, for
purposes of this subsection, if it is a fire, electrical, or health hazard; an
unsanitary condition; or otherwise dangerous to human life. Use of a building,
structure, or building service equipment constituting a hazard to safety,
health, or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation,
obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage, or abandonment is, for the
purposes of this subsection, an unsafe use. Parapet walls, cornices, spires,
towers, tanks, statuary, and other appendages or structural members that are
supported by, attached to, or a part of a building and that are in deteriorated
condition or otherwise unable to sustain the design loads that are specified in
this code are unsafe building appendages.
The building official may order any building or portion of a building to be
vacated if continued use is dangerous to life, health, or safety of the
occupants. The order shall be in writing and state the reasons for the action.
All unsafe buildings, structures, or appendages are public nuisances and must
be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal according to
Minnesota statutes sections 463.15 to 463.26.
   H.   Stipulation Agreement: The department and a person alleged to have
violated provisions of this chapter may voluntarily enter into a stipulation
agreement whereby the parties to the agreement: identify conditions on the
property that require corrective action; agree on the corrective actions that
must be performed by the person; and agree on the time frames in which the
corrective actions must be completed. If the person fails to fulfill the
requirements of the agreement, the city may seek compliance with the terms of
the agreement through a court of competent jurisdiction or pursue other
enforcement action allowed by this chapter.
   I.   Suspension And Revocation Of Permit: The building official may suspend
or revoke a permit issued under this chapter if the permit is issued in error;
on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate, or incomplete information; or in
violation of any ordinance or regulation or this code.
   J.   Commencement Of Civil Court Action: In the event of a violation or
threat of violation of this chapter the city may institute appropriate civil
actions or proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction requesting
injunctive relief to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such violations or
threatened violations. The city may recover all costs, including reasonable
attorney fees, incurred for enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-01, 1-17-
2012)
9-6-11: HEARINGS:
Hearings requested under this chapter shall be held before the city or a
hearing examiner as provided below, and shall be open to the public.
   A.   Time Frame For Hearing: Unless an extension of time is requested by the
appellant in writing directed to the city and is granted, the hearing will be
held no later than forty five (45) calendar days after the date of service of
request for a hearing, exclusive of the date of such service. In any event,
such hearing shall be held no later than ninety (90) calendar days after the
date of service of request for a hearing exclusive of the date of such service.
   B.   Notice Of Hearing: The city shall mail notice of the hearing to the
appellant, with a copy to the department and the city attorney's office, at
least fifteen (15) city working days prior to the hearing. Such notice shall
include:
      1.   A statement of time, place and nature of the hearing.
      2.   A statement of the legal authority and jurisdiction under which the
hearing is to be held.
      3.   A reference to the particular section of the code and rules
involved.
   C.   Hearing Examiner: The city may by resolution appoint an individual, to
be known as the hearing examiner, to conduct the hearing and to make findings
of fact, conclusions and recommendations to the city. The hearing examiner
shall submit the findings of fact, conclusions and recommendations to the city
in a written report and the city may adopt, modify, or reject the report.
   D.   Conduct Of The Hearing: The appellant and the department may be
represented by counsel. The department, the appellant and additional parties,
as determined by the city or hearing examiner, in that order, shall present
evidence. All testimony shall be sworn under oath. All parties shall have full
opportunity to respond to and present evidence, cross examine witnesses, and
present argument. The city or hearing examiner may also examine witnesses.
   E.   Burden Of Proof: The department shall have the burden of proving its
position by a preponderance of the evidence, unless a different burden is
provided by substantive law, and all findings of fact, conclusions, and
decisions by the city shall be based on evidence presented and matters
officially noticed.
   F.   Admission Of Evidence: All evidence that possesses probative value,
including hearsay, may be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which
prudent persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of their serious affairs.
Evidence that is incompetent, irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious may
be excluded. The hearing shall be confined to matters raised in the
department's written notice of suspension, summary suspension, revocation or
denial of a permit, or in the written request for a hearing.
   G.   Failure To Appear: If the appellant fails to appear at the hearing,
appellant shall forfeit any right to a hearing before the city or hearing
examiner. Appellant's failure to appear shall also be deemed as a waiver of
appellant's right to appeal the department's decision and the department's
decision shall stand.
   H.   Appeal Of City Decision: Any appellant aggrieved by the decision of the
city may appeal that decision to any court with appropriate jurisdiction. (Ord.
2012-01, 1-17-2012)
CHAPTER 7
CONSTRUCTION OPERATIONS AND EXCESSIVE NOISE
SECTION:
9-7-1: Application Of Provisions
9-7-2: Construction Hours
9-7-3: Exception For Emergency Work
9-7-4: Enforcement And Penalties
9-7-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
For the purposes of general prohibition relating to construction activities, no
person shall make or cause to be made any distinctly and loudly audible noise
that unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose,
health, safety or welfare of any person which impairs their right of enjoyment
of property or affects their property's value. This general prohibition is not
limited by the specific restrictions of the following sections. (Ord. XVIII.10,
9-2-1997)
9-7-2: CONSTRUCTION HOURS:
   A.   Specific Prohibitions: Construction activities described below shall be
restricted to the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. through ten o'clock (10:
00) P.M. Monday through Friday, seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:
00) P.M. on Saturdays and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M.
on Sundays. Except for emergencies or conditions for which the city has granted
approval, the following activities are prohibited outside of said regulated
working hours:
      1.   Construction activities related to buildings and structures,
excavations and grading projects and roadways and utilities. See Rosemount
zoning code for regulations on mineral extraction and mining activities.
      2.   Construction activities involving the operation of appliances,
tools, generators, compressors, or chainsaws powered by electric, electric
motors, internal combustion engines or compressed air. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-
1997)
9-7-3: EXCEPTION FOR EMERGENCY WORK:
Noise created exclusively in the performance of emergency work to preserve the
public health, safety, or welfare, or in the performance of emergency work
necessary to restore a public service or eliminate a public hazard shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter for a period to be established by
the administrative authority. Persons responsible for such work shall inform
the issuing authority of the need to initiate such work, or if the work is
commenced during nonbusiness hours of the city, at the beginning of business
hours of the first business day thereafter. Any person responsible for such
emergency work shall take all reasonable actions to minimize the amount of
noise. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-1997)
9-7-4: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Enforcement Duties: The Rosemount police department and the building
inspections division of the community development department shall enforce the
provisions of this chapter. Representatives of said departments shall make all
reasonable efforts to prevent violations of this chapter. (Ord. XVIII.10, 9-2-
1997; amd. Ord. XVIII.12, 2-5-2002)
   B.   Penalties: Every person who violates any provision of this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor offense and punished as described in
title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Each act of violation or each day a violation
occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. XII.21, 6-15-
2004)
CHAPTER 8
RENTAL LICENSING AND INSPECTION
SECTION:
9-8-1: Purpose
9-8-2: Scope
9-8-3: Definitions
9-8-4: License Required
9-8-5: License Fee
9-8-6: Applicable Codes
9-8-7: Maintenance
9-8-8: City Inspections
9-8-9: Conduct On Licensed Premises
9-8-10: Penalties
9-8-11: Appeals
9-8-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to assure that rental housing in the city is
decent, safe and sanitary and is so operated and maintained as not to become a
nuisance to the neighborhood or to become an influence that fosters blight and
deterioration or creates a disincentive to reinvestment in the community. The
operation of rental dwelling units is a business enterprise that entails
certain responsibilities. Operators are responsible to take such reasonable
steps as are necessary to assure that the citizens of the city who occupy such
units may pursue the quiet enjoyment of the normal activities of life in
surroundings that are: safe, secure and sanitary; free from crimes and criminal
activity, nuisances or annoyances. (Ord. XI.32, 1-2-2008)
9-8-2: SCOPE:
This chapter applies to all dwellings and dwelling units that are leased in
whole or in part for residential purposes. This chapter does not apply to
retail, commercial, or industrial rental activities; nursing homes as licensed
by the state department of health and human services; assisted living
facilities as licensed by the state department of health and human services;
and manufactured home parks where the owner of the building is the primary
occupant of the structure. (Ord. XI.32, 1-2-2008)
9-8-3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise provided herein, the definitions in section
9-4-5 of this title apply to the terms in this chapter.
CITY: The city of Rosemount.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Rosemount.
PREMISES: A lot, plot, or parcel of land including the building or structures
thereon.
RENTAL DWELLING: A building or premises, or portion thereof, used or intended
to be used for residential rental purposes.
RENTAL DWELLING UNIT: A single unit within a rental dwelling that provides
complete independent living facilities for one or more persons including
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
(Ord. XI.32, 1-2-2008)
9-8-4: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall lease any premises, dwelling or dwelling unit for residential
purposes without first obtaining a license and paying a license fee.
   A.   License Application: An application for a license must be made on a
form provided by the city. The application must include all information
requested on the form. An incomplete application may lead to delay of
processing the application or could lead to denial of the license.
   B.   Action On License: The city council or designee may approve or deny the
license upon completion of review of the application. If the city council
denies the license, it will notify the applicant of the denial and appeal
rights under section
9-8-11 of this chapter. (Ord. XI.32, 1-2-2008)
   C.   Term: All licenses are issued for a period of two (2) years from the
date of issuance. (Ord. 2011-10, 12-20-2011)
   D.   Transfers: A license may not be transferred to another location or
another person without the prior approval of the city council or designee.
   E.   Renewals: A license renewal will be handled in the same manner as the
original application.
   F.   Denials: The city council may deny the issuance or renewal of a license
for the following reasons:
      1.   The applicant has had previous rental license revocations;
      2.   The applicant fails to provide any information required on the
city's form, or provides false or misleading information;
      3.   The applicant has outstanding fines, penalties, or property taxes
owed to the city;
      4.   The rental dwelling or any rental dwelling unit fails the initial
property inspection in the opinion of the city's building official.
   G.   Crime Free Multi-Housing Program: Within twelve (12) months of
obtaining a license, licensees operating four (4) or more rental dwelling units
in the city must attend, or require a property manager to attend, an approved
training program in the Minnesota crime free multi-housing program as a
condition of continued licensure. The city may also require such training as a
penalty, in addition to the penalties described in section
9-8-10 of this chapter. (Ord. XI.32, 1-2-2008)
9-8-5: LICENSE FEE:
The city council will determine the license fee by resolution. Applicants must
pay the fee at the time of application. (Ord. 2011-10, 12-20-2011)
9-8-6: APPLICABLE CODES:
The city of Rosemount building and property maintenance ordinance and the state
building code, which adopts by reference the international building and
residential codes and the international fire code in their entirety, except as
modified or amended in this code, are adopted by reference and are made a part
of this chapter as if fully set out at length. (Ord. XI.32, 1-2-2008)
9-8-7: MAINTENANCE:
The owner of rental property must maintain all rental dwellings and rental
dwelling units, including common areas, in compliance with the applicable codes
identified in section
9-8-6 of this chapter. (Ord. XI.32, 1-2-2008)
9-8-8: CITY INSPECTIONS:
All rental dwelling units are subject to city inspections. The owner or
property manager must permit access to the city for the following inspections:
   A.   An initial inspection upon application for a license. The city will not
issue a license until each rental dwelling unit on the premises for which a
license is sought complies with the applicable codes in section
9-8-6 of this chapter. The city may issue a license if, in the city
administrator's or designee's judgment, an owner or licensee is diligently
remedying violations within individual rental dwelling units that do not comply
with the applicable codes.
   B.   Any follow up inspections required due to noncompliant items.
   C.   Inspections scheduled in response to complaints to the city.
   D.   Biennial inspection of each rental dwelling. (Ord. XI.32, 1-2-2008)
9-8-9: CONDUCT ON LICENSED PREMISES:
It is the responsibility of the licensee to see that persons occupying the
licensed premises and their guest(s) conduct themselves in such a manner as not
to cause the premises to be disorderly.
   A.   Disorderly Premises: For purposes of this section, a premises is
disorderly at which any of the following activities occur:
      1.   Violation of section
7-1-1, "Disorderly Conduct", of this code or violation of laws relating to
disorderly conduct as defined in Minnesota statutes section 609.72;
      2.   Violation of section
7-1-5, "Noisy Parties Or Gatherings", of this code;
      3.   Violation of laws relating to prostitution or acts relating to
prostitution as defined in Minnesota statutes section 609.321;
      4.   Violation of laws relating to unlawful use or possession of a
dangerous weapon as defined in Minnesota statutes section 609.66;
      5.   Violation of laws relating to nuisances as defined in Minnesota
statutes section 617.81;
      6.   Violation of laws relating to controlled substances as defined in
Minnesota statutes sections 152.021-152.027;
      7.   Violation of laws relating to drug paraphernalia as defined in
Minnesota statutes sections 152.092-152.095.
   B.   First Instance Of Disorderly Conduct: Upon determination that a
licensed premises was used in a disorderly manner, the city administrator or
designee will give notice to the licensee of the violation and direct the
licensee to take steps to prevent further violations.
   C.   Second Instance Of Disorderly Conduct: If another instance of
disorderly conduct occurs within three (3) months of the first instance in the
same rental dwelling unit, the city administrator or designee will notify the
licensee of the violation and require the licensee to submit a written report
of the actions taken, or proposed to be taken, to prevent further instances of
disorderly conduct. The licensee must submit the written report to the city
administrator within fifteen (15) days of the notice of the disorderly use of
the premises.
   D.   Third Instance Of Disorderly Conduct: If another instance of disorderly
conduct occurs within three (3) months of any two (2) previous instances in the
same rental dwelling unit, the city may revoke, suspend, or not renew the
rental license for all or any part or parts of the licensed premises that it
deems necessary, following notice to the licensee and a hearing before the city
council.
   E.   Adverse License Action: Following a hearing, the city council may
revoke, suspend, or not renew the license for all or any part or parts of the
licensed premises that it deems necessary, or impose a penalty pursuant to
section
9-8-10 of this chapter. The city council may postpone or discontinue adverse
action against a licensee if it appears that the licensee has taken appropriate
measures to prevent further instances of disorderly use. A licensee may appeal
the city council's decision pursuant to section
9-8-11 of this chapter.
   F.   Eviction Proceedings: No adverse license action shall be imposed where
the instance of disorderly use of the licensed premises occurred during the
pendency of eviction proceedings (unlawful detainer) or within thirty (30) days
of notice given by the licensee to a tenant to vacate the premises where the
disorderly use was related to conduct by that tenant or by other occupants or
guests of the tenant's unit. Eviction proceedings are not a bar to adverse
license action, however, unless they are diligently pursued by the licensee.
Further, an action to deny, revoke, suspend, or not renew a license based upon
violations of this section may be postponed or discontinued at any time if it
appears that the licensee has taken appropriate measures which will prevent
further instances of disorderly use. (Ord. XI.32, 1-2-2008)
9-8-10: PENALTIES:
The city may revoke a license or impose a civil fine for violations of this
chapter.
   A.   Revocation: The city may revoke a license for the following reasons:
      1.   Violation of the applicable codes described in section
9-8-6 of this chapter.
      2.   Failure to maintain the property in compliance with the applicable
codes.
      3.   Leasing any rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit without a
license.
      4.   Failure of the owner to take action to evict or otherwise prevent a
recurrence when a felony is committed on the licensed property by the tenant(s)
or person affiliated with the tenant(s).
      5.   The applicant has outstanding fines, penalties, or property taxes
owed to the city.
   B.   Fines: The following fines may be imposed for violation of this
chapter:
 
Violation                                                             Fine
First violation                                                       $100.00
Second new violation (based upon complaint) within 12 months or       200.00
failure to comply with initial order
Third or more new violations (based upon complaint) within 12 months  300.00
or failure to comply with initial order
 
(Ord. XI.32, 1-2-2008)
9-8-11: APPEALS:
The following appeal process will apply in the case of a license denial or
revocation or if a property owner objects to a penalty imposed under section
9-8-9 or
9-8-10 of this chapter.
   A.   Hearing: Following receipt of notice of a license denial or revocation
or a notice of a violation and fine, an owner may request a hearing before the
city council. An owner must request a hearing in writing and file the request
with the city administrator or city administrator's designee within ten (10)
days of the mailing of the notice of the license denial or revocation or the
alleged violation and fine. Following receipt of a written request for hearing,
the owner will have an opportunity for a hearing before a committee consisting
of the city administrator or city administrator's designees.
   B.   Findings: After the committee conducts the hearing, it will report its
findings and make a recommendation to the city council. If the committee finds
that the license denial or revocation is proper or the owner has violated this
chapter, the council may affirm the license denial, revocation, or the fine
given to the owner. The city council may also conclude that the license denial
or revocation or the fine is not warranted and dismiss the penalty.
   C.   Default: If the owner does not request a hearing within the ten (10)
day period, then the license denial, revocation or civil fine imposed will take
immediate effect by default. In that case, the city administrator or designee
will mail notice of the license denial or revocation or fine to the owner. The
owner must pay the fine within thirty (30) days of this notice. (Ord. XI.32, 1-
2-2008)
CHAPTER 9
COAL TAR BASED SEALER PRODUCTS
SECTION:
9-9-1: Definitions
9-9-2: Prohibitions
9-9-3: Exemption
9-9-4: Asphalt Based Sealer Products
9-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms
shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this
chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
ASPHALT BASED SEALER: A petroleum based sealer material that is commonly used
on driveways, parking lots, and other surfaces and that does not contain coal
tar.
COAL TAR: A byproduct of the process used to refine coal.
MPCA: The Minnesota pollution control agency.
PAHs: Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. A group of organic chemicals formed
during the incomplete burning of coal, oil, gas, or other organic substances
present in coal tar and believed harmful to humans, fish, and other aquatic
life.
UNDILUTED COAL TAR BASED SEALER: A sealer material containing coal tar that has
not been mixed with asphalt and that is commonly used on driveways, parking
lots and other surfaces. (Ord. 2012-04, 4-17-2012)
9-9-2: PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   No person shall apply any undiluted coal tar based sealer to any
driveway, parking lot, or other surface within the city of Rosemount.
   B.   No person shall contract with any commercial sealer product applicator,
residential or commercial developer, or any other person for the application of
any undiluted coal tar based sealer to any driveway, parking lot, or other
surface within the city.
   C.   No commercial sealer product applicator, residential or commercial
developer, or other similar individual or organization shall direct any
employee, independent contractor, volunteer, or other person to apply any
undiluted coal tar based sealer to any driveway, parking lot, or other surface
within the city. (Ord. 2012-04, 4-17-2012)
9-9-3: EXEMPTION:
Upon the express written approval from both the city and the MPCA, a person
conducting bona fide research on the effects of undiluted coal tar based sealer
products or PAHs on the environment shall be exempt from the prohibitions
provided in section
9-9-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-04, 4-17-2012)
9-9-4: ASPHALT BASED SEALER PRODUCTS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to use of undiluted coal tar based
sealer in the city and shall not affect the use of asphalt based sealer
products within the city. (Ord. 2012-04, 4-17-2012)
TITLE 10
WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER 1
SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
10-1-1: Statutory Authorization
10-1-2: Findings
10-1-3: Purpose
10-1-4: Definitions
10-1-5: Scope And Effect
10-1-6: Incorporation By Reference
10-1-7: Development Site Stormwater Management Plan Approval Procedures
10-1-8: Plan Review Procedure
10-1-9: Approval Standards
10-1-10: Surface Water Related Fees
10-1-11: Wetlands
10-1-12: Erosion And Sediment Control
10-1-13: Stormwater Management For Permanent Facilities
10-1-14: Lawn Fertilizer Regulations
10-1-15: Penalty
10-1-16: Appeals
10-1-17: Other Controls
10-1-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION:
This chapter is adopted pursuant to Minnesota statutes, section 462.351 (1990).
(Ord. 2015-01, 2-17-2015)
10-1-2: FINDINGS:
The city hereby finds that uncontrolled and inadequately planned use of
wetlands, woodlands, natural habitat areas, areas subject to soil erosion and
areas containing restrictive soils adversely affects the public health, safety
and general welfare by impacting water quality and contributing to other
environmental problems, creating nuisances, impairing other beneficial uses of
environmental resources and hindering the ability of the city to provide
adequate water, sewage, flood control, and other community services. In
addition, extraordinary public expenditures may be required for the protection
of persons and property in such areas and in areas which may be affected by
unplanned land usage. (Ord. 2015-01, 2-17-2015)
10-1-3: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote, preserve and enhance the natural
resources within the city and protect them from adverse effects occasioned by
poorly sited development or incompatible activities: by regulating land
disturbing or development activities that would have an adverse and potentially
irreversible impact on water quality and unique and fragile environmentally
sensitive land; by minimizing conflicts and encouraging compatibility between
land disturbing and development activities and water quality and
environmentally sensitive lands; and by requiring detailed review standards and
procedures for land disturbing or development activities proposed for such
areas, thereby achieving a balance between urban growth and development and
protection of water quality and natural areas. (Ord. 2015-01, 2-17-2015)
10-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivatives shall have the meanings stated below. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense,
words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the
singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory
and not merely directive.
APPLICANT: Any person who wishes to obtain a building permit, grading permit,
zoning or subdivision approval.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): The most effective and practicable means of
erosion prevention and sediment control, and water quality management practices
that are the most effective and practicable means to control, prevent, and
minimize degradation of surface water, including avoidance of impacts,
construction phasing, minimizing the length of time soil areas are exposed,
prohibitions, pollution prevention through good housekeeping, and other
management practices published by state or designated area wide planning
agencies.
CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL OR BUILDING OFFICIAL:  The building official designated
by the city as the chief building official or a representative thereof.
CITY: The city of Rosemount.
CITY ENGINEER: The professional engineer designated by the city as city
engineer or a representative thereof.
CLEARING: Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: A disturbance to the land that results in a change in
the topography, existing soil cover (both vegetative and nonvegetative), or the
existing soil topography that may result in accelerated stormwater runoff,
leading to soil erosion and movement of sediment into surface waters or
drainage systems. Examples of construction activity may include clearing,
grading, filling and excavating.
CONTROL MEASURE: A practice or combination of practices to prevent erosion,
capture sediment, control wastes, or otherwise prevent pollution.
CONTROL PLAN: A plan indicating the specific measures and sequencing to be used
to control grading, sediment and erosion on a development site during and after
construction.
DEVELOPER: Any person, group, firm, corporation, sole proprietorship,
partnership, state agency, or political subdivision thereof engaged in a land
disturbance activity.
DEVELOPMENT: Any land disturbance activity that changes the site's runoff
characteristics in conjunction with residential, commercial, industrial or
institutional construction or alteration.
DEWATERING: The removal of water for construction activity. It can be a
discharge of appropriated surface water or ground water to dry and/or solidify
a construction site. It may require Minnesota Department of Natural Resources
permits to be appropriated and if contaminated may require other MPCA permits
to be discharged.
DNR OR MNDNR: Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
DRAINAGEWAY: Any channel that conveys surface runoff throughout the site.
EASEMENT: A legal land preservation agreement between a landowner and a
municipality or a qualified land protection organization. The easement confers
the transfer of usage rights from one party to another.
EROSION: Any process that wears away the surface of the land by the action of
water or wind.
EROSION CONTROL: Refers to methods employed to prevent erosion. Examples
include soil stabilization practices, horizontal slope grading, temporary or
permanent cover, and construction phasing.
EROSION PREVENTION: Any measures employed to prevent erosion. Examples include,
but are not limited to: soil stabilization practices, limited grading, mulch,
temporary or permanent cover, and construction phasing.
EXPOSED SOIL OR EXPOSED SOIL AREAS: All areas of the construction site where
the vegetation (trees, shrubs, brush, grasses, etc.) or impervious surface have
been removed, thus rendering the soil more prone to erosion. This includes
topsoil stockpile areas, borrow areas and disposal areas within the
construction site.
FINAL GRADE: Excavation or fill of material to final smooth condition. Final
grade completed as part of individual site development.
FINAL STABILIZATION: A. All soil disturbing activities at the site have been
completed and a uniform (e.g., evenly distributed, without large bare areas)
perennial vegetative cover with a density of seventy percent (70%) of the
native background vegetative cover for the area has been established on all
unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or equivalent
permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of riprap, gabions, or
geotextiles) have been employed;
   B.   For individual lots in residential construction by either: 1) the
homebuilder completing final stabilization as specified above, or 2) the
homebuilder establishing temporary stabilization including perimeter controls
for an individual lot prior to occupation of the home by the homeowner and
informing the homeowner of the need for, and benefits of, final stabilization
(Homeowners typically have an incentive to put in the landscaping functionally
equivalent to final stabilization as quick as possible to keep mud out of their
homes and off sidewalks and driveways.); or
   C.   For construction projects on land used for agricultural purposes (e.g.,
pipelines across crop or range land) final stabilization may be accomplished by
returning the disturbed land to its preconstruction agricultural use. Areas
disturbed that were not previously used for agricultural activities, such as
buffer strips immediately adjacent to surface waters and drainage systems, and
areas which are not being returned to their preconstruction agricultural use
must meet the final stabilization criteria in subsection A or B of this
definition.
FLOOD FRINGE: The portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway.
FLOODPLAIN: The areas adjoining a watercourse or water basin that have been or
may be covered by a regional flood.
FLOODWAY: The channel of the watercourse, the bed of water basins, and those
portions of the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and
discharge floodwater and provide water storage during a regional flood.
GRADING: Changing elevation or smoothing of the ground surfaces; excavation or
fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof.
GRADING, EROSION CONTROL AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLANS: A set of plans prepared by
or under the direction of a licensed professional engineer. Plans are required
to meet the specifications as detailed in city of Rosemount regulations and
standards, including those of the Rosemount Engineering Guidelines and
Rosemount Comprehensive Surface Water Management Plan.
GROUNDWATER: Water contained below the surface of the earth in the saturated
zone including, without limitation, all waters whether under confined,
unconfined, or perched conditions, in near surface unconsolidated sediment or
regolith, or in rock formations deeper underground.
HYDRIC SOILS: Soils that are saturated, flooded, or ponded long enough during
the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part.
HYDROPHYTIC VEGETATION: Macrophytic plant life growing in water, soil or on a
substrate that is at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of
excessive water content.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: A constructed hard surface that either prevents or retards
the entry of water into the soil and causes water to run off the surface in
greater quantities and at an increased rate of flow than prior to development.
Examples include rooftops, sidewalks, patios, driveways, parking lots, storage
areas, and concrete, asphalt, or gravel roads.
LAND DISTURBING OR DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES: Any change of the land surface
including removing vegetative cover, removing structures and exposing native
soils underneath, excavating, filling, grading, and the construction of any
structure.
MPCA: Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
MS4 PERMIT: Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems NPDES Permit.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES): The program for
issuing, modifying, revoking, reissuing, terminating, monitoring, and enforcing
permits under the United States Clean Water Act , as amended. Applicable
federal regulations include 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. Section 1342 and 40 CFR
parts 122, 123, 124 and 450. The NPDES Programs regulating discharges to Waters
of the United States for construction stormwater, industrial stormwater, and
municipal stormwater are administered by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
(MPCA) in the State of Minnesota.
PERIMETER CONTROL: A barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a site by
filtering sediment laden runoff or diverting it to a sediment trap or basin.
Examples include silt fence, woodchip logs, compost logs, and stabilized soil
berms.
PERMANENT COVER: Final site stabilization. Examples include grass, gravel,
asphalt, and concrete. See also the definition of Final Stabilization.
PERMITTEE: Any person who has received a building permit, grading permit,
zoning approval or subdivision approval.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, organization, corporation, partnership,
franchisee, association or governmental entity.
PHASING: Clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the stabilization
of each phase completed before the clearing of the next.
PUBLIC WATERS: Waters of the state as defined in Minnesota statutes, section
103G.005, subdivision 15.
ROUGH GRADE: Grading to a condition suitable for general maintenance.
SEDIMENT: The product of an erosion process; solid material both mineral and
organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved by
water, wind, or ice, and has come to rest on the earth's surface either above
or below water level.
SEDIMENT CONTROL: Measures and methods employed to prevent sediment from
leaving the site. Sediment control practices include silt fences, sediment
traps, earth dikes, drainage swales, check dams, subsurface drains, pipe slope
drains, storm drain inlet protection, and temporary or permanent sedimentation
basins.
SEDIMENTATION: The process or action of depositing sediment.
SITE: A parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work
is performed as a single unified operation.
SITE DEVELOPMENT: Improvements and structures for the control of erosion,
runoff, and grading.
SOIL: The unconsolidated mineral and organic material on the immediate surface
of the earth. For the purposes of this chapter temporary stockpiles of clean
sand, gravel, aggregate, concrete or bituminous materials (which have less
stringent protection) are not considered "soil" stockpiles.
SPECS OR ENGINEERING GUIDELINES: Manuals detailing city specifications for all
plan requirements.
STABILIZED: The exposed ground surface has been covered by appropriate
materials such as mulch, staked sod, riprap, wood fiber blanket, or other
material that prevents erosion from occurring. Grass seeding is not
stabilization.
STANDARD PLATES: General drawings having or showing similar characteristics or
qualities that are representative of a construction practice or activity.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: The first land disturbing activity associated with a
development, including land preparation such as clearing, grading, and filling;
installation of streets and walkways; excavation for basements, footings,
piers, or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and installation of
accessory buildings such as garages.
STORMWATER: Surface flows of water generated from precipitation events.
Stormwater includes precipitation runoff, stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff,
and any other surface runoff and drainage.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP): A plan for stormwater discharge
that includes erosion prevention measures, sediment controls, waste controls,
and pollution prevention measures that, when implemented, will decrease soil
erosion on a parcel of land and decrease pollution in surface water and
groundwater.
STRUCTURE: Anything manufactured, constructed or erected which is normally
attached to or positioned on land, including portable structures, earthen
structures, roads, parking lots, and paved storage areas.
SURFACE WATER: All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, wetlands, reservoirs,
springs, rivers, drainage systems, waterways, and watercourses, whether natural
or artificial, public or private.
TEMPORARY EROSION PROTECTION OR TEMPORARY COVER: Methods employed to prevent
erosion. Examples of temporary cover include disc anchored straw, wood fiber
blanket, wood chips, and erosion netting.
WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs either continuously or
intermittently, whether natural or artificially constructed. Examples include,
but are not limited to, streams, rivers, and ditches.
WATERWAY: A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to the
public storm drain.
WETLAND OR WETLANDS: Defined in Minnesota rules 7050.0130, subp. F and includes
those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at
a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life
in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs,
and similar areas. Constructed wetlands designed for wastewater treatment are
not waters of the state. Wetlands must have the following attributes:
   A.   A predominance of hydric soils;
   B.   Inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency
and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation
typically adapted for life in a saturated soil condition; and
   C.   Under normal circumstances support a prevalence of such vegetation.
(Ord. 2015-01, 2-17-2015; amd. Ord. 2015-05, 7-7-2015; Ord. 2023-05, 10-3-2023)
10-1-5: SCOPE AND EFFECT:
   A.   Applicability:
      1.   Every applicant for a subdivision approval or a permit to allow land
disturbing activities must submit a stormwater management plan to the city
engineer. No subdivision approval, or grading permit to allow land disturbing
activities, shall be issued until approval of the stormwater management plan or
a waiver of the approval requirement has been obtained in strict conformance
with the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   Every applicant for a subdivision approval or a grading permit to
allow wetland disturbing activities must submit a wetland assessment report to
the city engineer. No subdivision approval, or grading permit to allow wetland
disturbing activities shall be issued until approval of the wetland replacement
plan application or a certificate of exemption has been obtained in strict
conformance with the provisions of this chapter and the Minnesota wetland
conservation act. This chapter applies to all land, public or private, located
within the city.
      3.   Every applicant for a building permit, subdivision approval, or a
grading permit to allow land disturbing activities must adhere to erosion and
sediment and waste control design criteria, specifications, inspection
requirements, and maintenance requirements in strict conformance with the
provisions of this chapter and its specifications and be consistent with
applicable NPDES Permits or as approved by the city engineer or designated
representative.
      4.   A grading permit is required for land disturbing activities unless
the provisions of this chapter have already been met through a building permit
or a current subdivision approval where the subdivision agreement has been
fully executed. This provision shall not prohibit the building official from
imposing additional conditions and special requirements consistent with
international building code.
   B.   Exemptions: The provisions of this chapter do not apply to:
      1.   Any part of subdivision if a plat for the subdivision has been
approved by the city council on or before the effective date hereof;
      2.   Any land disturbing activity for which plans have been approved by
the Vermillion River Watershed Management Organization within six (6) months
prior to the effective date hereof;
      3.   Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other
kinds of posts or poles unless the installation project results in an acre or
more of land disturbing activities;
      4.   Land disturbing activities involving less than thirty-eight (38)
cubic meters (50 cubic yards) of soil and less than one acre of disturbance
unless those activities are part of a common plan of development or sale that
will ultimately disturb one or more acres;
      5.   Emergency work to protect life, limb, or property.
   C.   Waiver: The city council may waive any requirement of this chapter upon
making a finding that compliance with the requirement will involve an
unnecessary hardship and the waiver of such requirement will not adversely
affect the standards and requirements set forth in this chapter. The city
council may require as a condition of the waiver such dedication or
construction, or agreement to dedicate or construct, as may be necessary to
adequately meet said standards and requirements. (Ord. 2015-01, 2-17-2015; amd.
Ord. 2015-05, 7-7-2015; Ord. 2023-05, 10-3-2023)
10-1-6: INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE:
The following are incorporated into this chapter by reference:
   A.   The Rosemount comprehensive wetland management plan.
   B.   The Rosemount surface water management plan.
   C.   The Rosemount stormwater utility policy.
   D.   The Minnesota wetland conservation act.
   E.   The most current and applicable National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) Permits (Construction Stormwater, Small Municipal
Separate Storm Sewer Systems, Industrial Stormwater, etc.) issued and
administered by the State of Minnesota that are in effect.
   F.   City of Rosemount engineering guidelines.
   G.   City of Rosemount general specifications and standard detail plates.
(Ord. 2015-01, 2-17-2015; amd. Ord. 2023-05, 10-3-2023)
10-1-7: DEVELOPMENT SITE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN APPROVAL PROCEDURES:
   A.   Application: An application for stormwater management plan approval,
along with the proposed stormwater management plan and grading plan, shall be
filed with the city engineer and shall include a statement indicating the
grounds upon which the approval is requested, that the proposed use is
permitted by right or as an exception in the underlying zoning district, and
adequate evidence showing that the proposed use will conform to the standards
set forth in this chapter. Prior to applying for approval of a stormwater
management plan, an applicant may have the stormwater management and grading
plans reviewed by the appropriate departments of the city.
The applicant shall submit five (5) sets of clearly legible blue or black lined
copies of all drawings on bond paper upon request by the City. Required
information shall be submitted to the city engineer and shall be accompanied by
a receipt from the finance department evidencing the payment of all required
fees for processing and approval as set forth in section
10-1-9 of this chapter, and security when required by subsection
10-1-8D of this chapter in the amount to be calculated in accordance with that
subsection.
Stormwater management and grading plan drawings shall be prepared to a scale
appropriate to the site of the project and suitable for the review to be
performed. At a minimum the scale shall be one to six hundred (1:600) (1 inch =
50 feet). Drawing sheets shall be twenty-two by thirty-four inches (22 x 34").
   B.   Stormwater Management Plan: At a minimum, the stormwater management
plan shall contain the following:
      1.   Existing Site Map: A map of existing site conditions showing the
site and immediately adjacent areas within two hundred feet (200'), and
including:
         a.   The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and emails of the
applicant, owner, developer, surveyor, engineer and contact person.
         b.   The section, township and range, north point oriented either up
or to the right, date and scale of drawing and number of sheets.
         c.   Plat names and block, lot and outlot boundaries for adjacent
platted property and full property identification numbers for adjacent
unplatted property.
         d.   Location of the tract by an insert map at a scale sufficient to
clearly identify the location of the property and giving such information as
the names and numbers of adjoining roads, railroads, utilities, subdivisions,
towns and districts or other landmarks.
         e.   Location and indication of demolition, relocation, or abandonment
of existing structures, driveways, septic systems, alternate septic systems and
wells.
         f.   Existing underground and overhead utilities, easements and rights
of way.
         g.   Existing topography with a contour interval appropriate to the
topography of the land but in no case having a contour interval greater than
two feet (2').
         h.   Existing topographic contours extending beyond the site two
hundred feet (200') or enough to completely show the limits of drainage basins
not fully contained within the proposed plat limits.
         i.   A delineation of all streams, rivers, ponds, public waters and
wetlands located on and immediately adjacent to the site, including depth of
water, a statement of general water quality and any classification given to the
water body or wetland by the Minnesota department of natural resources (include
MNDNR number and ordinary high water level), the Minnesota pollution control
agency, the U.S. fish and wildlife service, and/or the United States army corps
of engineers.
         j.   The city's most recent stormwater management plan district number
along with normal and high water levels for ponds.
         k.   Location and dimensions of existing stormwater drainage systems
and natural drainage patterns on and immediately adjacent to the site
delineating in which direction and at what rate stormwater is conveyed from the
site, identifying the receiving stream, river, public water, or wetland, and
setting forth those areas of the unaltered site where stormwater collects.
         l.   A description of the soils of the site, including a map
indicating soil types of areas to be disturbed as well as a soil report
containing information on the suitability of the soils for the type of
development proposed and for the type of sewage disposal proposed and for
stormwater infiltration and describing any remedial steps to be taken by the
developer to render the soils suitable.
         m.   Vegetative cover such as brush, grass and trees, including tree
diameters, and clearly delineating any vegetation proposed for removal.
         n.   The 10-year and 100-year floodplains, flood fringes and
floodways.
      2.   Site Grading Plan: Drawings shall be prepared to a scale appropriate
to the site of the project and suitable for the review to be performed. At a
minimum the scale shall be one to six hundred (1:600) (1 inch = 50 feet).
Drawing sheets shall be twenty-two by thirty-four inches (22 x 34"). A site
grading plan shall include:
         a.   The section, township and range, north point oriented either up
or to the right, date, revision number, scale of drawing and number of sheets.
         b.   Signature and Minnesota license number of the professional land
surveyor or professional engineer under whose supervision the plan was
prepared.
         c.   Proposed septic systems, alternative septic systems and wells.
         d.   Locations and dimensions of all proposed land disturbing
activities and any phasing of those activities.
         e.   Locations and dimensions of all temporary soil or dirt
stockpiles.
         f.   Existing topography with a contour interval appropriate to the
topography of the land but in no case having a contour interval greater than
two feet (2').
         g.   Existing topographic contours extending beyond the site two
hundred feet (200') or enough to completely show the limits of drainage basins
not fully contained within the proposed plat limits.
         h.   Finished grading shown at contours at the same interval as
provided above or as required to clearly indicate the relationship of proposed
changes to existing topography and remaining features.
         i.   All lot corner elevations and bench marks utilized.
         j.   The proposed footprint and intended use of any structures or
driveways to be constructed on the site.
         k.   A delineation of all streams, rivers, ponds, public waters and
wetlands located on and immediately adjacent to the site, including depth of
water, a statement of general water quality and any classification given to the
water body or wetland by the Minnesota department of natural resources (include
MNDNR number and ordinary high water level), the Minnesota pollution control
agency, the U.S. fish and wildlife service, and/or the United States army corps
of engineers.
         l.   The city's most recent stormwater management plan district number
along with pond storage volume and normal and high water levels for ponds.
         m.   Emergency overflow routes from all low points, elevation of high
point along overflow route and directional flow arrows.
         n.   A drainage plan of the developed site delineating 10-year and
100-year design drainage area/watershed and hydrologic/hydraulic calculations
verifying location and capacity of all overland drainage routes.
         o.   Access routes for maintenance to all inlets, outlets, manholes,
and lift stations at ponding areas proposed.
         p.   A clear delineation and tabulation of all areas which shall be
paved or surfaced, including a description of the surfacing material to be
used.
         q.   A landscape plan, drawn to an appropriate scale, including
dimensions and distances and the location, type, size and description of all
proposed landscape materials which will be added to the site as part of the
development.
         r.   Any other information pertinent to the particular project which
in the opinion of the applicant or the city engineer is necessary for the
review of the project.
         s.   Within thirty (30) days after completion of site development as
per the approved grading plan, and prior to the approval of individual building
permits, the developer shall provide the city with an as built grading plan.
      3.   Erosion And Sediment Control Plans: At a minimum, a separate erosion
control plan is required that will accompany the grading plan. No land shall be
disturbed until the plan is approved by the city engineer and conforms to the
standards set forth herein. All plans shall be consistent with national
pollutant discharge elimination permits (NPDES construction general permit and
MS4 permit) requirements, Rosemount engineering guidelines, the Rosemount
comprehensive surface water management plan, Rosemount spec and detail plates,
and the filing or approval requirements of relevant watershed districts,
watershed management organizations, ditch authorities, soil and water
conservation districts, or other regulatory bodies.
         a.   The erosion and sediment control plan shall include the
following:
            (1)   A project description of the nature and purpose of the land
disturbing activity and the amount of grading involved.
            (2)   All existing site conditions, including existing soils,
topography, vegetation (including size and type cover), natural resources and
drainage.
            (3)   All critical erosion areas for areas on the site that have
potential for serious erosion problems.
            (4)   A description of how the site will be stabilized after
construction is completed, including specifications.
            (5)   A schedule of regular inspections and repair of erosion and
sediment control structures.
            (6)   A project schedule describing the projected time line for
completion of all site activities and the sequence of construction of the
development site, including stripping and clearing; rough grading; construction
of utilities, infrastructure, and buildings; and final grading and landscaping.
Sequencing shall identify the expected date on which clearing will begin,
phasing of clearing or grading, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared
areas, areas of clearing, installation of temporary erosion and sediment
control measures, and establishment of permanent vegetation.
            (7)   All erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet
the objectives of this local regulation and state and federal regulations
throughout all phases of construction and after completion of development of
the site. Depending upon the complexity of the project, the drafting of
intermediate plans may be required at the close of each season. All of the
following requirements shall be adhered to during the construction of the site:
               (A)    Stabilize all soils and soil stockpiles within the
shortest feasible period of time, and according to the time lines established
in NPDES permits.
               (B)   Prevent sediment damage to adjacent properties and other
designated areas.
               (C)   Develop land in increments of workable sizes so that
adequate erosion and sediment controls can be provided as construction
progresses.
               (D)   Coordinate erosion and sediment control measures with the
different stages of construction. Install appropriate control measures prior to
development when necessary to control erosion.
               (E)   Engineer the construction of steep slopes.
               (F)    Use of temporary sediment basins is encouraged when
construction projects will impact steep slopes or when highly erodible soils
are present. Temporary sediment basins must be designed according to NPDES
permit requirements.
               (G)   Protect storm sewers and paved roads from the entrance of
sediment.
               (H)   Manage solid and hazardous wastes on site and properly
dispose of wastes.
               (I)   When working in or crossing water bodies, take precautions
to contain sediment.
               (J)   Ensure that a trained person will regularly inspect the
construction site, according to the time lines established in NPDES permits.
               (K)   Maintain all temporary or permanent erosion and sediment
control practices, according to the time lines established in NPDES permits.
               (L)   Establish permanent cover upon completion of the
construction activity.
               (M)   Dispose of temporary erosion and sediment control measures
following final stabilization.
               (N)   Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of
seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and
fertilizer application, and kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary
and permanent vegetative control measures. Required specifications are detailed
in the city of Rosemount general specifications and engineering guidelines.
               (O)   Use methods of dewatering to reduce the discharge of
turbid or sediment laden waters and prevent nuisance conditions.
               (P)   Use methods to manage solid and hazardous wastes, and
limit the exposure of stormwater to any products, materials, and wastes and to
prevent the contamination of stormwater.
      4.   Notwithstanding those items listed for inclusion in the Stormwater
Management Plan above, all projects must show conformance with plans, policies,
regulations, and procedures incorporated by reference in section
10-1-6 of this chapter.
      5.   Stormwater Management For Permanent Facilities: Stormwater control
facilities included as part of the final design for a permanent development
shall be addressed in section
10-1-13 of this chapter. Postconstruction stormwater management BMPs must be
submitted to the city for review and approval before construction activity may
begin.
      6.   Waiver: Any or all of the above plan requirements in this subsection
B may be waived by the city engineer. (Ord. 2015-01, 2-17-2015; amd. Ord. 2023-
05, 10-3-2023)
10-1-8: PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURE:
   A.   Process: Stormwater management plans meeting the requirements of
section
10-1-7 of this chapter shall be submitted to the city engineer for review in
accordance with the standards of section
10-1-9 of this chapter.
   B.   Duration: Approval of a plan submitted under the provisions of this
chapter shall expire one year after the date of approval unless construction
has commenced in accordance with the plan. However, if prior to the expiration
of the approval, the applicant makes a written request to the city engineer for
an extension of time to commence construction setting forth the reasons for the
requested extension, the city engineer may grant one extension of not greater
than one single year. Receipt of any request for an extension shall be
acknowledged by the city engineer within fifteen (15) days. The city engineer
shall make a decision on the extension within thirty (30) days of receipt. Any
plan may be revised in the same manner as originally approved.
   C.   Conditions: A stormwater management plan may be approved subject to
compliance with conditions reasonable and necessary to ensure that the
requirements contained in this chapter are met. Such conditions may, among
other matters, limit the size, kind or character of the proposed development,
require the construction of structures, drainage facilities, storage basins and
other facilities, require replacement of vegetation, establish required
monitoring procedures, require turf is established in specified areas, require
erosion control measures have been removed and their removal area inspected,
and landscaping is completed, stage the work over time, require alteration of
the site design to ensure buffering, and require the conveyance to the city or
other public entity of certain lands or interests therein.
   D.   Security: Prior to approval of any stormwater management plan, the
applicant shall submit an agreement to construct such required physical
improvements, to dedicate property or easements, or to comply with such
conditions as may have been agreed to. Such agreement shall be accompanied by
irrevocable, automatically renewing letter of credit, performance bond or other
improvement security in the amount specified by the current city ordinance for
fee schedule. The security shall cover all costs of engineering and inspection,
site improvements, street sweeping, repairs to erosion control measures, and
maintenance of improvements for such period as specified by the city. Such
security shall be provided prior to the release of the grading permit. The
security shall be released after final stabilization is complete, erosion
control measures have been removed and their removal area inspected. The
agreement shall guarantee completion and compliance with conditions within a
specific time, which time may be extended in accordance with subsection B of
this section.
The adequacy, conditions and acceptability of any agreement and security shall
be determined by the city council or any official of the city as may be
designated by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2015-01, 2-17-2015)
10-1-9: APPROVAL STANDARDS:
No stormwater management plan which fails to meet the standards contained in
this section shall be approved by the city engineer.
   A.   Surface Water Management Plan: See the most recent version of the
city's surface water management plan. All stormwater management plans shall be
consistent with it.
   B.   Site Erosion And Sediment Control: Erosion control measures specified
in grading plans must meet all requirements of section
10-1-12 of this chapter.
   C.   Wetlands: Plans must meet all requirements for wetlands contained in
section
10-1-11 of this chapter.
   D.   Comprehensive Wetland Management Plan: See the most recent version of
the city's comprehensive wetland management plan. All stormwater management
plans shall be consistent with it.
   E.   Stormwater Management Criteria For Permanent Facilities: Plans must
meet all requirements for permanent facilities contained in section
10-1-13 of this chapter. See the most recent version of the city's surface
water management plan. All stormwater management plans shall be consistent with
it.
   F.   Design Standards: See the most recent version of the city's surface
water management plan. All stormwater management plans shall be consistent with
it.
   G.   Steep Slopes: No land disturbing or development activities shall be
allowed on slopes of twenty five percent (25%) or more.
   H.   Retaining Walls: Retaining walls shall not be allowed in any city
drainage, ponding or utility easement.
   I.   Catch Basins: Newly installed and rehabilitated catch basins shall be
provided with a sump area for the collection of coarse grained material as
specified by the city engineer. Such basins shall be cleaned when they are half
filled with material or as resources allow.
   J.   Drain Leaders: All newly constructed and reconstructed buildings will
route drain leaders to pervious areas wherein the runoff can be allowed to
infiltrate. The flow rate of water exiting the leaders shall be controlled so
no erosion occurs in the pervious areas.
   K.   Structures: See the most recent version of the city's surface water
management plan. All stormwater management plans shall be consistent with it.
   L.   Inspection And Maintenance: All stormwater management facilities shall
be designed to minimize the need of maintenance, to provide access for
maintenance purposes and to be structurally sound. All stormwater management
facilities shall have a plan of operation and maintenance that assures
continued effective removal of pollutants carried in stormwater runoff. It
shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain any necessary easements
or other property interests to allow access to the stormwater management
facilities for inspection and maintenance purposes. The city may require a
developer to enter into a contract providing for access to perform maintenance
and inspection to public or private stormwater management facilities.
   M.   Models/Methodologies/Computations: Hydrologic models and design
methodologies used for the determination of runoff and analysis of stormwater
management structures shall be approved by the city engineer. Plans,
specification and computations for stormwater management facilities submitted
for review shall be sealed and signed by a registered professional engineer.
All computations shall appear on the plans submitted for review, unless
otherwise approved by the city engineer.
   N.   Watershed Management Plans/Groundwater Management Plans: Stormwater
management plans shall be consistent with adopted watershed management plans
and groundwater management plans prepared in accordance with Minnesota
statutes, sections 103B.231 and 103B.255, respectively, and as approved by the
Minnesota board of water and soil resources in accordance with state law.
   O.   Easements:
      1.   If a stormwater management plan involves direction of some or all
runoff off of the site, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
obtain from adjacent property owners any necessary easements or other property
interests concerning flowage of water.
      2.   Easements are required for all ponding areas to the basin's 100-year
storm high water level elevation.
      3.   Easements are required for all outlet swales and ditches, and for
overland overflow routes located downstream of basins located on site.
      4.   If the storm sewer is to be installed less than ten feet (10') deep
within private property, the easement shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20')
wide. If the storm sewer is ten feet (10') or greater, the easement shall be
twice as wide as the depth.
      5.   Easements necessary for maintenance vehicle access are required for
all of the above where not directly available on a public road.
   P.   NPDES Permits: All plans shall be consistent with the most recent and
applicable NPDES Permits.
   Q.   Engineering guidelines: All plans shall be consistent with the current
version of the Rosemount engineering guidelines.
   R.   General specifications and standard detail plates: All plans shall be
consistent with the current version of the City of Rosemount general
specifications and standard detail plates.
   S.   Most protective standard: Where any of the approval standards listed
above are in disagreement, the most protective standard shall be required.
(Ord. 2015-01, 2-17-2015; amd. Ord. 2023-05, 10-3-2023)
10-1-10: SURFACE WATER RELATED FEES:
   A.   Stormwater Utility:
      1.   Utility Established: The city does hereby establish the Rosemount
stormwater utility for the purpose of managing city owned stormwater
facilities, the collection of stormwater connection charges, utility user fees
and expenditures necessary to own and operate this utility as expressly allowed
under Minnesota statutes, sections 412.321 through 412.391.
      2.   Operation And Administration: The operation and administration of
the Rosemount stormwater utility will be the responsibility of the utilities
commission as established in title 2, chapter 4 of this code.
      3.   Rules And Regulations: Establishment of operational standards, user
fees and other rules and regulations established for the purpose of operating
this utility are established in the "stormwater utility policy" adopted herein
by reference and may be amended by city council resolution as is deemed
necessary by the council.
      4.   Effect, User Fees: The Rosemount stormwater utility will be
established on April 1, 1992, with the first user fees collected in July 1992.
   B.   Processing And Approval Fee: All applications for stormwater management
plan approval shall be accompanied by a processing and approval fee determined
by the city council. An applicant may also be required to pay a stormwater
trunk area charge and/or stormwater connection charge in order to fund the
development and maintenance of community stormwater management facilities
designed to serve multiple land disturbing and development activities
undertaken by one or more persons, including the applicant.
   C.   Reimbursement For Costs Incurred: Notwithstanding any of the fees
listed above, the City retains the right to recoup any costs incurred in
reviewing, processing, remediating, enforcing, and inspecting any land
disturbing activity, permit, easement, or agreements, including engineering and
legal costs, associated with Title 10 of this Code. The City may require the
deposit of funds equal to estimated city costs prior to the issuance of any
permit, the unused portion of which to be refunded upon project completion or
cancellation and verification of conformance of the project with city
requirements. (Ord. 2015-05, 7-7-2015; amd. Ord. 2023-05, 10-3-2023)
10-1-11: WETLANDS:
   A.   Assessment Report Required: Every applicant for a subdivision approval
or a grading permit to allow wetland disturbing activities must submit a
wetland assessment report to the city engineer. No subdivision approval, or
grading permit to allow wetland disturbing activities shall be issued until
approval of the wetland replacement plan application or a certificate of
exemption has been obtained in strict conformance with the provisions of this
chapter and the Minnesota wetland conservation act. This section applies to all
land, public or private, located within the city.
   B.   Consistency With Comprehensive Wetland Management Plan: Utilization and
development impacts to wetlands shall be consistent with the city's
comprehensive wetland management plan.
   C.   Impacts To Wetland:
      1.   Concentrated runoff discharge into wetlands shall be consistent with
the stormwater management guidelines within the Rosemount comprehensive wetland
management plan.
      2.   A protective buffer strip of natural vegetation of width prescribed
by the Rosemount comprehensive wetland management plan shall surround all
wetlands.
      3.   Wetlands must not be drained or filled, wholly or partially, unless
replaced by restoring or creating wetland areas of at least equal public value.
Replacement must be guided by the principles and standards prescribed by the
Rosemount comprehensive wetland management plan. (Ord. 2015-01, 2-17-2015; amd.
Ord. 2015-05, 7-7-2015; Ord. 2023-05, 10-3-2023)
10-1-12: EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL:
   A.   Design Criteria: At minimum erosion control practices, sediment control
practices, and waterway crossings shall meet the design criteria set forth
below and shall be consistent with city of Rosemount general specifications and
engineering guidelines.
      1.   Cut and fill slopes shall be no greater than four to one (4:1),
except as approved by the city engineer.
      2.   Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment control
devices, shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been installed
and have been stabilized.
      3.   Phasing may be required on all sites based on site specifics, with
the size of each phase to be established at plan review and as approved by the
city engineer/city of Rosemount.
      4.   Proposed erosion control measures may be approved by the city
engineer as part of a grading plan review toward grading or building permit
approval. Erosion control may be specified by the city engineer as part of a
site survey for individual building permits. Erosion control may also be
specified by the city engineer as needed and deemed appropriate during the
construction and postconstruction periods separate from the process described
below.
   B.   Specifications: At a minimum, applicants shall meet the specifications
set forth below and observe the standards established in NPDES construction
general permit requirements and the city's surface water management plan.
      1.   Soil Stabilization: Soil stabilization shall be completed in a time
period as specified by NPDES permit requirements and the city’s general
specifications and standards. The city of Rosemount may require the site to be
reseeded or a nonvegetative option employed.
      2.   Seeding: Seeding shall be in accordance with seeding specifications.
All seeded areas shall be fertilized and temporary cover provided as necessary
for seed retention.
      3.   Special Techniques: Special techniques that meet the design criteria
outlined in Rosemount specs and engineering guidelines shall be in place on
steep slopes or in drainageways and shall be used to ensure stabilization.
Special techniques may include: temporary sediment basins, slope draining and
terracing.
      4.   Soil Stockpiles: Soil stockpiles which shall be inactive for a
period of seven (7) or more days must be stabilized or covered at the end of
each workday. Stockpiles shall include perimeter sediment controls and must not
be placed in natural buffers or surface waters, including stormwater
conveyances.
      5.   Ninety Percent Coverage: The entire site must be stabilized at a
ninety percent (90%) coverage, using a heavy mulch layer or another temporary
cover method that does not require germination to control erosion, at the close
of the construction season.
      6.   Site Development Sediment Controls: Site development sediment
controls practices shall include those identified in the city’s general
specifications and engineering guidelines including, but not limited to:
         a.   Settling basins, sediment traps, or tanks.
         b.   Protection for adjacent properties by the use of a vegetated
buffer strip in combination with perimeter controls.
         c.    Perimeter controls, including machine sliced silt fence or other
city approved BMPs, shall be in place before, during and after grading of the
site. Perimeter controls shall be removed only after final stabilization.
         d.   Designated washout area for concrete and other liquid wastes.
         e.   Designated temporary construction staging area.
      7.   Temporary Sediment Basins: For sites that have more than ten (10)
acres of disturbed soil that drains to a common location (or 5 or more acres
for special or impaired waters), one or more temporary sediment basins shall be
constructed. Use of temporary basins is encouraged when construction projects
will impact steep slopes or when highly erodible soils are present. The basin
shall provide treatment to the runoff before it leaves the construction site or
enters surface waters. The temporary sediment basins must be designed and
constructed as follows:
         a.   Provide live storage for a calculated volume of runoff from a 2-
year, 24-hour storm from each acre drained to the basin. All basins shall
provide at least one thousand eight hundred (1,800) cubic feet of live storage
from each acre drained or more.
         b.   For basins where the calculation in subsection B7a of this
section has not been performed, a temporary sediment basin providing three
thousand six hundred (3,600) cubic feet of live storage from each acre drained
to the basin shall be provided for the entire drainage area of the temporary
basin.
         c.   The outlet structure must be designed to withdraw water from the
surface in order to minimize the discharge of pollutants.
         d.   The basin outlet shall be designed to prevent short circuiting
and the discharge of floating debris.
         e.   Ensure the basin can be completely drawn down to conduct
maintenance activities.
         f.   Include energy dissipation on the outlet of the basin and a
stabilized emergency overflow to prevent failure of pond integrity.
         g.   Be located outside of surface waters or any buffer zone, and be
designed to avoid draining water from wetlands unless appropriate approval from
the U.S. army corps of engineers and the Minnesota department of natural
resources is obtained.
         h.   If installation of a temporary sediment basin is not feasible,
equivalent sediment controls such as smaller sediment basins, and/or sediment
traps, silt fences, vegetative buffer strips, or any appropriate combination of
measures are required for all down slope boundaries of the construction area
and for side slope boundaries where appropriate. Determination of feasibility
shall be documented in the erosion and sediment control plan.
      8.   Individual Construction Site Sediment Controls: Individual
construction site sediment controls shall be installed as specified in the
city’s specs and engineering guidelines and shall include:
         a.   Rock construction entrance (driveway) or other city approved BMP
to prevent sediment track out;
         b.   Perimeter controls, such as silt fence, in place before, during
and after grading of the site. Fencing shall be removed only after proper turf
establishment.
      9.   Waterway And Watercourse Protection: Waterway and watercourse
protection requirements shall include stabilization of the watercourse channel
before, during and after any in-channel work consistent with the city's general
specifications.
         a.   A temporary stream crossing must be installed and approved by the
local government unit and regulating agency if a wet watercourse will be
crossed regularly during construction.
         b.   The watercourse channel shall be stabilized before, during, and
within twenty-four (24) hours after any in-channel work.
         c.   No in-water work shall be allowed in public waters during the
MNDNR'S work exclusion dates.
         d.   Prior to placement of any equipment into any waters, all
equipment must be free of aquatic plants and nonnative animals.
All on site stormwater conveyance channels shall be designed according to the
criteria outlined in this document. Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion
located at the outlets of all pipes and paved channels is required.
      10.   Site Dewatering: Site dewatering shall be conducted pursuant to the
city's general specifications document. Water pumped from the site shall be
treated by temporary sediment basins, grit chambers, sand filters, or other
controls as appropriate to ensure adequate treatment is obtained and that
nuisance conditions will not result from the discharge. Discharges from the
site shall not be released in a manner that causes erosion, scour,
sedimentation or flooding of the site, receiving channels or wetlands.
      11.   Waste And Material Disposal: All waste and unused building
materials (including garbage, debris, cleaning wastes, wastewater, toxic
materials or hazardous materials) shall be properly disposed of off site and
not allowed to be carried by runoff into a receiving water or storm sewer
system.
         a.   Solid Waste: All unused building materials and waste (including,
but not limited to: collected sediment, asphalt and concrete millings, floating
debris, paper, plastic, fabric, etc.) must be disposed of accordingly and shall
comply with disposal requirements set forth by the MPCA.
         b.   Hazardous/Toxic Waste: Paint, gasoline, oil and any hazardous
materials must be properly stored, including secondary containment, to prevent
spills, leaks or other discharges. Access to the storage areas must be
restricted to prevent vandalism. Storage and disposal of hazardous or toxic
substance must be in compliance with the requirements set forth by the MPCA.
         c.   Liquid Waste: All other nonstormwater discharges (including, but
not limited to, concrete truck washout, vehicle washing or maintenance spills)
produced during the construction activity shall not be discharged to any
surface waters.
         d.   External Washing Of Equipment And Vehicles: All external washing
activities shall be limited to a designated area of the site. All runoff must
be contained and wastes from external washing activities must be disposed of
properly. No engine degreasing shall be allowed on the site.
         e.   Wastes Generated By Concrete And Other Washout Operations: All
liquid and solid wastes generated by any concrete or other washout operations
must be contained in a leakproof facility or impermeable liner. Liquid waste
must not come into contact with the ground. Concrete waste must be disposed of
properly and in compliance with applicable MPCA regulations.
      12.   Drain Inlet Protection: All storm drain inlets shall be protected
during construction until permanent cover in the contributing drainage is
established.
      13.   Energy Dissipation: Pipe outlets must have temporary or permanent
energy dissipation within twenty-four (24) hours of connection to a surface
water.
      14.   Tracking: Vehicle tracking BMPs (including, but not limited to:
rock pads, mud mats, slash mulch, concrete or steel wash racks, or similar
systems) must be installed to minimize track out of sediment from the
construction site. If vehicle tracking BMPs are not actively preventing
sediment from being tracked into the street, the applicant must utilize street
sweeping to contain sediment.
      15.   Final Stabilization: Final stabilization is not complete until the
following criteria are met:
         a.   All land disturbing activities must be finished and all soils
shall be stabilized by a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of
seventy percent (70%) or greater of its expected final growth density over the
entire pervious surface area, or other equivalent permanent means necessary to
prevent soil failure under erosive conditions.
         b.   The permanent stormwater management system is constructed, meets
all of the required design parameters and is operating as designed.
         c.   All temporary synthetic and structural erosion prevention and
sediment control BMPs (such as silt fence) have been removed. BMPs designed to
decompose on site may be left in place.
         d.   For residential construction only, individual lots are considered
finally stabilized if the structure(s) are finished and temporary erosion
protection and down gradient perimeter control has been completed and the
homeowner has been informed of the need for, and benefits of, final
stabilization.
         e.   For construction projects on agricultural land the disturbed land
has been returned to its preconstruction agricultural use.
   C.   Inspection:
      1.   Notification: The city engineer, chief building official or
designated agent shall make inspections as hereinafter required and either
shall approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee
wherein the work fails to comply with the erosion and sediment control plan as
approved.
      2.   Procedure: To obtain inspections, the permittee shall notify the
city of Rosemount at least two (2) working days before the following:
         a.   Start of construction.
         b.   Installation of sediment and erosion measures.
         c.   Completion of site clearing.
         d.   Completion of rough grading.
         e.   Completion of final grading.
         f.   Close of the construction season.
         g.   Completion of final landscaping.
         h.   Removal of erosion control measures.
         i.   Final project compliance and acceptance closeout.
      3.   Permittee Inspection: The applicant shall be responsible at all
times for the maintenance and proper operation of all erosion prevention,
sediment control, waste control, and pollution prevention practices.
         a.   Inspections: The permittee or his/her agent shall ensure that a
trained person will regularly inspect the construction site at least once every
seven (7) days until final stabilization, and within twenty-four (24) hours of
a rainfall event of one-half inch (½") or greater in a twenty-four (24) hour
period.
         b.   Recordkeeping: All inspection and maintenance activities
conducted on the site during construction must be recorded in writing and
retained with the erosion and sediment control plan. Records of each inspection
and maintenance activity shall include the following:
            (1)   Date and time of inspection;
            (2)   Name(s) of persons conducting the inspection;
            (3)   Findings of inspections, including recommendations for
corrective actions;
            (4)   Corrective actions taken, including the dates, times and the
name of the party completing the corrective action;
            (5)   Date and the amount of rainfall events that are greater than
one-half inch (½") in a twenty-four (24) hour period; and
            (6)   Documentation of any changes made to the erosion and sediment
control plan.
   D.   Site And BMP Maintenance:
      1.   Responsibilities: Prior to any land disturbing activity, the
permittee or developer shall provide the city engineer with a schedule for
erosion and sediment control inspection and maintenance, including schedules
for street cleaning, and street sweeping. All site and BMP maintenance
activities must comply with the requirements of NPDES permits. The project
shall investigate and comply with the following BMP maintenance requirements:
         a.   Perimeter Controls: All perimeter controls must be repaired,
replaced or supplemented when they become nonfunctional or the sediment reaches
one- half (½) of the height of the BMP. Repairs shall be made by the end of the
next business day after discovery or as soon as field conditions allow access.
         b.   Temporary Sediment Basins: Temporary sedimentation basins must be
drained and the sediment must be removed when the depth of the sediment
collected in the basin reaches one-half (½) the storage volume. Drainage and
removal must be completed within seventy-two (72) hours of discovery or as soon
as field conditions allow access.
         c.   Surface Waters And Conveyance Systems: Surface waters, including
drainage ditches and conveyance systems, must be inspected for visible signs of
sediment being deposited by erosion. The applicant must remove all sediment
deposited in surface waters, including drainageways, catch basins, and other
drainage systems and must restabilize the areas of exposed soil as a result of
sediment removal. The removal and stabilization must take place within seven
(7) days of discovery unless legal, regulatory or physical access constraints
prevent remediation. In the event of an access constraint, the applicant shall
use all reasonable efforts to obtain access. If access is precluded, removal
and stabilization must take place within seven (7) calendar days of obtaining
access. The applicant is responsible for contacting all local, regional, state
and federal authorities and obtaining any required permits prior to conducting
any work.
         d.   Streets And Paved Surfaces: Where vehicle traffic leaves any part
of the site with exposed soils, the exit locations must be inspected for
visible signs of off site sediment tracking onto paved surfaces. Tracked
sediment must be removed from all paved surfaces within and adjacent to the
site as soon as possible or within twenty- four (24) hours of discovery.
         e.   General Maintenance: The applicant shall be responsible for the
operation and maintenance of temporary and permanent water quality management
BMPs, as well as erosion prevention, sediment control, and waste control BMPs
for the duration of the construction work on the site. The applicant remains
responsible until another party has assumed control over all areas of the site
that have not established final stabilization and a notice of termination (NOT)
has been submitted to the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
         f.   Off Site Deposition: If sediment escapes the construction site,
off site accumulations of sediment must be removed in a manner and at a
frequency sufficient to minimize off site impacts.
         g.   Infiltration Areas: All infiltration areas must be inspected to
ensure that no sediment or turbid runoff from ongoing construction activities
is reaching the infiltration area and these areas are protected from compaction
caused by construction equipment driving across the infiltration area.
         h.   Conformance with NPDES Permits: Inspection and maintenance
schedules and thresholds must conform with NPDES Permit standards and
requirements.
      2.   Lapse: If the permittee repeatedly fails to meet or maintain
sediment and erosion control measures per the approved grading, sediment and
erosion control plan, the city may, in its discretion, perform the work or
contract to have the work completed and drawn down on the escrow deposit,
letter of credit or bond to pay any costs.
         a.   The city will attempt to notify the developer in advance of any
proposed action, but failure of the city to do so will not affect the
developer’s and city’s rights or obligations hereunder.
         b.   If the developer does not reimburse the city for any cost the
city incurred beyond that covered by the deposit, for such work within ten (10)
days from the date notice of the amount owed to the city is mailed, the city
may draw on the security to reimburse city for such costs. (Ord. 2015-01, 2-17-
2015; amd. Ord. 2015-05, 7-7-2015; Ord.2023-05, 10-3-2023)
10-1-13: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR PERMANENT FACILITIES:
   A.   Specifications: All postconstruction stormwater management plans must
be submitted to the city engineer prior to the start of construction activity.
At a minimum, applicants shall meet the specifications set forth below and
observe the standards established in NPDES permit requirements, the city’s
surface water management plan, the city’s specs, and the city’s engineering
guidelines.
   B.   Design Criteria:
      1.   Volume Control: Volume control measures are required on projects to
meet the water quality criteria of the city’s surface water management plan and
state administered NPDES Permits.
      2.   Rate Control:
         a.   For newly developing areas, no discharge or infiltration can be
assumed for purposes of establishing the 100-year, 24-hour storm event high
water elevation. For events with longer duration, a maximum peak stormwater
discharge rate will be limited to 0.05 cfs per acre. Redeveloping areas will be
required to meet these standards to the maximum reasonable extent practical.
         b.   In the event that the city will not be providing a regional
system, storage of the runoff from the 100-year, 24-hour storm event is
required on site.
         c.   Landlocked depressions that presently do not have a defined
outlet and do not typically overflow may be allowed a positive overflow to
prevent damage to adjacent properties. Any overflows from landlocked
depressions will comply with the city’s rate control, runoff volume control,
and low floor requirements including storing runoff from the 100-year, 24-hour
storm event for new development and restricting discharge to 0.05 cfs per acre
for longer duration storm events.
         d.   New storm sewer systems shall be designed to accommodate
discharge rates from a 10-year storm event.
      3.   Flood Control: The city requires that for any new or redevelopment,
at least three feet (3') of freeboard between the anticipated critical 100-year
high water elevation and the minimum building opening be maintained. Any
deviation from the three feet (3') freeboard requirement is subject to the
following conditions and may be approved by the city engineer if the following
can be demonstrated:
         a.   That within the two foot (2') freeboard area, stormwater storage
is available which is equal to or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the stormwater
storage currently available in the basin below the 100-year high water
elevation.
         b.   That a twenty five percent (25%) obstruction of the basin outlet
over a twenty-four (24) hour period would not result in more than one foot (1')
of additional bounce in the basin.
         c.   An adequate overflow route from the basin is available that will
provide assurance that one foot (1') of freeboard will be maintained for the
proposed low building opening.
      4.   Design Criteria Of Permanent Facilities: All permanent stormwater
facilities must meet the design criteria as provided in the city’s surface
water management plan.
   C.   Limitations And Restrictions:
      1.   Infiltration BMPs shall be prohibited or otherwise restricted in
those same areas and situations where prohibited or otherwise restricted in
applicable state administered NPDES Permits or regulations.
      2.   For areas where infiltration is prohibited the applicant shall
consider alternative volume reduction BMPs and the water quality volume must be
treated by a wet sedimentation basin, filtration system, regional ponding or
similar method prior to the release of stormwater to surface water.
      3.   For linear projects with lack of right of way, easements or other
permissions from property owners to install treatments systems that are capable
of treating the total water quality volume on site, the project must maximize
treatment through other methods or combination of methods before runoff is
released to nearby surface waters. Alternative treatment options include:
grassed swales, filtration systems, smaller ponds, or grit chambers. In all
circumstances, a reasonable attempt must be made to obtain right of way during
the project planning and all attempts of infeasibility must be recorded.
   D.   Exceptions: The city may authorize lesser volume control for the
following situations:
      1.   If the project meets one of the limitations outlined above; and
      2.   If the owner/operator implements to the maximum extent possible
other volume reduction practices, besides infiltration, on the site but may not
meet the requirements for postconstruction stormwater management.
   E.   Mitigation Provisions:
      1.   Under certain circumstances some construction projects cannot meet
the total suspended solids (TSS) and/or total phosphorus (TP) reduction
requirements for new or redevelopment projects on the site of the original
construction. When this occurs, the owner/operator will be required to identify
alternative locations where TSS and TP treatment standards can be achieved.
Mitigation project locations are chosen in the following order of preference:
         a.   Locations that yield benefits to the same receiving water that
receives runoff from the original construction activity.
         b.   Locations within the same department of natural resource (DNR)
catchment area as the original construction activity.
         c.   Locations in the next adjacent DNR catchment area upstream.
         d.   Locations anywhere within the city of Rosemount.
      2.   Mitigation projects shall also meet the following criteria:
         a.   Mitigation projects shall involve the establishment of new
structural stormwater BMPs or the retrofit of existing structural stormwater
BMPs, or the use of a properly designed regional structural stormwater BMP.
         b.   Previously required routine maintenance of structural stormwater
BMPs cannot be considered mitigation.
         c.   Mitigation projects must be finished within twenty-four (24)
months after the original construction activity begins.
         d.   Monies received for mitigation purposes in lieu of meeting
conditions for postconstruction stormwater management shall be applied to a
public stormwater project and shall comply with this subsection.
         e.   A maintenance agreement specifying the responsible party for
long-term maintenance shall be identified.
   F.   Maintenance Agreement: The applicant shall enter into a maintenance
agreement with the city that documents all responsibilities for operation and
maintenance of private long term stormwater treatment BMPs. Such responsibility
shall be documented in a maintenance plan and executed through a maintenance
agreement. All maintenance agreements must be approved by the city and recorded
at the Dakota County recorder’s office prior to final plan approval. At a
minimum, the maintenance agreement shall describe the inspection and
maintenance obligations:
      1.   The responsible party who is permanently responsible for maintenance
of the structural and nonstructural measures.
      2.   Pass responsibilities for such maintenance to successors in title.
      3.   Allow the city and its representatives the right of entry for the
purposes of inspecting all permanent stormwater management systems.
      4.   Allow the city the right to repair and maintain the facility, and
recoup costs for maintenance, if necessary maintenance is not performed after
proper and reasonable notice to the responsible party of the permanent
stormwater management system.
      5.   Include a maintenance plan that contains, but is not limited to, the
following:
         a.   Identification of all structural permanent stormwater management
systems.
         b.   A schedule for regular inspections, monitoring, and maintenance
for each practice. Monitoring shall verify whether the practice is functioning
as designed and may include, but is not limited to, quality, temperature, and
quantity of runoff.
         c.   Identification of the responsible party for conducting the
inspection, monitoring and maintenance for each practice.
         d.   Include a schedule and format for reporting compliance with the
maintenance agreement to the city.
      6.   The issuance of a permit constitutes a right of entry for the city,
its contractors, and agents to enter upon the construction site. The applicant
shall allow the city, its contractors, agents and any authorized
representatives, upon presentation of credentials, to:
         a.   Enter upon the permitted site for the purpose of obtaining
information, examination of records, conducting investigations or surveys.
         b.   Bring such equipment upon the permitted development as is
necessary to conduct such surveys and investigations.
         c.   Examine and copy any books, papers, records, or memoranda
pertaining to activities or records required to be kept under the terms and
conditions of the permit.
         d.   Inspect the stormwater pollution control measures and BMPs.
         e.   Sample and monitor any items or activities pertaining to
stormwater pollution control measures and BMPs.
         f.   Correct deficiencies in stormwater and erosion and sediment
control measures. (Ord. 2015-01, 2-17-2015; amd. Ord. 2015-05, 7-7-2015; Ord.
2023-05, 10-3-2023)
10-1-14: LAWN FERTILIZER REGULATIONS:
   A.   Use Of Impervious Surfaces: No person shall apply fertilizer to or
deposit grass clippings, leaves, or other vegetative materials on impervious
surfaces, or within stormwater drainage systems, natural drainageways, or
within wetland buffer areas.
   B.   Lawn Fertilizer Content: Except for the first growing season for newly
established turf areas, no person shall apply liquid fertilizer which contains
more than one-half percent (0.5%) by weight of phosphorus, or granular
fertilizer which contains more than three percent (3%) by weight of phosphorus,
unless the single application is less than or equal to one-tenth (0.1) pound of
phosphorus per one thousand (1,000) square feet. Annual application amount
shall not exceed one-half (0.5) pound of phosphorus per one thousand (1,000)
square feet of lawn area.
   C.   Buffer Zone: Fertilizer applications shall not be made adjacent to any
water body or wetland to a distance which is the larger of 16.5 feet or any
buffer width as specified for individual wetlands in the Rosemount
comprehensive wetland management plan. (Ord. 2015-01, 2-17-2015; amd. Ord.
2015-05, 7-7-2015)
10-1-15: PENALTY:
   A.   Notice Of Violation: When the city determines that an activity is not
being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, it shall
issue a written notice of violation to the owner of the property. The notice of
violation shall contain:
      1.   The name and address of the owner or applicant;
      2.   The address when available or a description of the land upon which
the violation is occurring;
      3.   A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
      4.   A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the land
disturbing activity into compliance with this chapter and a time schedule for
the completion of such remedial action; and
      5.   A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed
   B.   Stop Work Order/Revocation Of Permits or Approvals: In the event that
any person holding a permit or approval pursuant to this chapter violates the
terms of the permit or approval or implements land disturbing activities in
such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare,
environment, or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood or
development site so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or
injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the city of
Rosemount may suspend or revoke the permit or approval through the issuance of
a stop work order or the revocation of permit or approval. No development,
utility or street construction, or land disturbing activity will be allowed,
and no building permits will be issued, and no building inspections scheduled
unless the development is in full compliance with the requirements of this
subsection.
   C.   Restoration Of Lands: Any violator may be required to restore land to
its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken
within a reasonable time after notice, the city may take necessary corrective
action, the cost of which may, after notice and opportunity for hearing, be
specially assessed against the property and collected along with the ordinary
taxes by the county.
   D.   Violation And Penalties:
      1.   No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair, or maintain any
grading, excavation, or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in
violation of any terms of this chapter. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and is
subject to the penalty as described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code and each
day during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is
committed, continued, or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense.
      2.   Upon conviction of any such violation, such person, partnership, or
corporation shall be punished by a fine as specified by the city ordinance for
fee schedule for each offense. In addition to any other penalty authorized by
this section, any person, partnership, or corporation convicted of violating
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be required to bear the expense of
such restoration. (Ord. 2015-01, 2-17-2015; amd. Ord. 2015-05, 7-7-2015; Ord.
2023-05, 10-3-2023)
10-1-16: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by an action relating to the enforcement of this chapter,
including the disapproval of a properly filed application for approval,
issuance of a written notice of violation, or an alleged failure to properly
enforce this chapter in regard to a specific application, may appeal the action
to the city. The following conditions apply to all appeals:
   A.   The applicant shall submit the appeal in writing to the city clerk and
include supporting documentation. The city must receive the written appeal
within ten (10) days of the notice of violation.
   B.   City staff shall make a decision on the appeal within fifteen (15)
business days of receipt of a complete appeal application.
   C.   The applicant may appeal the decision of city staff to the city
council. This appeal must be filed with the city clerk within thirty (30) days
of city staff's decision. Subject to any applicable state law, the decision of
the city council is final. (Ord. 2015-01, 2-17-2015; amd. Ord. 2015-05, 7-7-
2015)
10-1-17: OTHER CONTROLS:
In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the
provisions of any other city ordinance adopted by the city council or
regulation adopted by any local government with land use authority in Rosemount
or any state regulation, the more restrictive standard prevails. (Ord. 2015-01,
2-17-2015; amd. Ord. 2015-05, 7-7-2015; Ord. 2023-05, 10-3-2023)
CHAPTER 2
STORMWATER SYSTEM
SECTION:
10-2-1: Purpose; Intent
10-2-2: Definitions
10-2-3: Applicability
10-2-4: Responsibility For Administration
10-2-5: Ultimate Responsibility
10-2-6: Discharge Prohibitions
10-2-7: Suspension Of MS4 Access
10-2-8: Industrial Or Construction Discharges
10-2-9: Monitoring Of Discharges
10-2-10: Pollutants
10-2-11: Watercourse Protection
10-2-12: Notification Of Spills
10-2-13: Enforcement
10-2-14: Appeal Of Notice Of Violation
10-2-15: Enforcement Measures After Appeal
10-2-16: Cost Of Abatement Of The Violation
10-2-17: Legal Action
10-2-18: Compensatory Action
10-2-19: Nuisance
10-2-20: Criminal Prosecution
10-2-1: PURPOSE; INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the city of Rosemount through the regulation of
nonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent
practicable as required by federal and state law. This chapter establishes
methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the
national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit process.
The objectives of this chapter are as follows:
   A.   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user.
   B.   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system.
   C.   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance
and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009; amd. Ord. 2023-05, 10-3-2023)
10-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, all definitions of
Title 10 Chapter 1 of the City Code of Rosemount, Minnesota, are incorporated
herein, and, the following shall mean:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Practices to prevent or reduce the discharge
of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, groundwater, receiving
surface waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs include schedules of
activities, prohibitions, other management practices, also include treatment
practices/requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control site
runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage. On construction sites, BMPs include The most effective and
practicable means of erosion prevention and sediment control, and water quality
management practices that are the most effective and practicable means to
control, prevent, and minimize degradation of surface water, including
avoidance of impacts, construction phasing, minimizing the length of time soil
areas are exposed, prohibitions, pollution prevention through good
housekeeping, and other management practices published by state or designated
area wide planning agencies.
CITY: The City of Rosemount.
CLEAN WATER ACT: The federal water pollution control act (33 USC section 1251
et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: A disturbance to the land that results in a change in
the topography, existing soil cover (both vegetative and nonvegetative), or the
existing soil topography that may result in accelerated stormwater runoff,
leading to soil erosion and movement of sediment into surface waters or
drainage systems. Examples of construction activity may include clearing,
grading, filling and excavating.
CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER OR CSW: Stormwater associated with construction
activity.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, that because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety,
property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE OR ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstormwater
discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted in this chapter.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS: Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, that allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system
including, but not limited to, any conveyances that allow any non-stormwater
discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the
storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor
drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been
previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the city or any other government
agencies with permitting authority or, any drain or conveyance connected from a
commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system that has not been
documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the city or
other government agencies with permitting authority.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined
in 40 CFR, section 122.26(b)(14).
MPCA: The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM OR MS4: A stormwater system or portion
thereof subject to an NPDES MS4 Permit.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES): The program for
issuing, modifying, revoking, reissuing, terminating, monitoring, and enforcing
permits under the United States Clean Water Act, as amended. Applicable federal
regulations include 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. Section 1342 and 40 CFR parts 122,
123, 124 and 450. The NPDES Programs regulating discharges to Waters of the
United States for construction stormwater, industrial stormwater, and municipal
stormwater are administered by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) in
the State of Minnesota.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT OR
NPDES PERMIT: A permit issued by MPCA that authorizes the discharge of
stormwater to Waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on
an individual, group, or general areawide basis. This chapter is primarily
concerned with NPDES Permits for Industrial Activity, Construction Stormwater,
and Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not
composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON: Any individual, organization, firm, corporation, partnership,
franchisee, association or governmental entity.
POLLUTANT: Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; eroded
soil or sediment; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or
abandoned objects, pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous
substances and wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or
structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind, that, because of its
quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics
may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential
hazard to human health, safety, property or the environment, or that may
degrade, impair or pollute ground or surface waters.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
SECONDARY CONTAINMENT OR SECONDARY SPILL CONTAINMENT: Any system, device, or
control measure used to capture spills or leaks of hazardous liquids and
prevent them from migrating from their storage area in order to prevent
pollution to soils and waters.
STORM DRAIN SYSTEM OR STORMWATER SYSTEM: Publicly owned facilities by which
stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any
roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped
storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
humanmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage
structures.
STORMWATER: Surface flows of water generated from precipitation events.
Stormwater includes precipitation runoff, stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff,
and any other surface runoff and drainage.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN: A document that describes the best
management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business
to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to
eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance
systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
WASTEWATER: Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater,
discharged from a facility. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009; amd. Ord.
2023-05, 10-3-2023)
10-2-3: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated
on any developed or undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by the city.
(Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009; amd. Ord. 2023-05, 10-3-2023)
10-2-4: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION:
The City shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this
chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the City may be delegated in
writing by the city administrator to persons or entities acting in the
beneficial interest of or in the employ of the City. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009,
eff. 5-19-2009; amd. Ord. 2023-05, 10-3-2023)
10-2-5: ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY:
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are
minimum standards; therefore this chapter does not intend or imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009,
eff. 5-19-2009)
10-2-6: DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Prohibition of Illegal Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause
to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or surface waters any
materials, including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing
pollutants, other than stormwater. The commencement, conduct, or continuance of
any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited. The following
discharges are allowed:
      1.   Water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape
irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater,
groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater,
foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering
systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs,
noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows,
swimming pools (if dechlorinated to less than 0.1 ppm chlorine), firefighting
activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants.
      2.   Discharges specified in writing by the city as being necessary to
protect public health and safety.
      3.   Dye testing provided a verbal notification has been given to the
City prior to the time of the test.
      4.   Any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit,
waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered
under the authority of the federal environmental protection agency, provided
that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit,
waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that
written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.
      5.   The use of fertilizers, herbicides and pesticides for agricultural
or landscaping purposes when applied for their intended purpose in accordance
with label directions and with all applicable local, state and federal
ordinances, laws and regulations. Spillage or overspray beyond the intended
treatment area of fertilizers, herbicides and pesticides is not an intended
use.
   B.   Prohibition of Illicit Connections:
      1.   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
      2.   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of the
connection.
      3.   A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the
person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection
to continue.
   C.   Proper Storage of Materials: Materials, including pollutants and
hazardous materials, must be stored in a manner such that the potential to
erode, dissolve, infiltrate, or otherwise cause an illicit discharge or
pollution to surface waters and groundwaters is limited. Proper storage
measures shall include the following:
      1.   Easily dissolvable materials, such as salts used for deicing, shall
be covered or stored indoors to prevent contact with precipitation or runoff.
Said storage must be located on impervious surfaces to prevent dissolved
materials from infiltrating into the ground when exposed to water.
      2.   Easily erodible materials, such as soils, shall be stored within
contained areas to reduce the potential for migration of stored substances off
site, into the stormwater system, or into surface waters.
      3.   Hazardous materials must be stored in compliance with State and
Federal Regulations, stored in sealed containers, and secondary containment
must be provided when stored outside.
      4.   Stored materials must be located outside of surfaces waters,
waterways, and areas needed to store, carry, or discharge floodwaters.
   D.   Protective Measures and Best Practices During Materials Transfer: Best
practices must be implemented to reduce risks of illicit discharges, spills,
pollution to surface waters, and pollution to groundwater when transferring
materials to or from storage areas, whether those storage areas be indoors,
outdoors, temporary, or permanent. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009;
amd. Ord. 2023-05, 10-3-2023)
10-2-7: SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS:
   A.   Suspension Due To Illicit Discharges In Emergency Situations: The city
council may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person
when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge
that presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of
the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order
issued in an emergency, the city may take such steps as it deems necessary to
prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to
minimize danger to persons.
   B.   Suspension Due To The Detection Of Illicit Discharge: Any person
discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have their MS4 access
terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The
city will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The
violator may petition the city for reconsideration and a hearing. A person
commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated
pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the city. (Ord. XVI.61,
5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009; amd. Ord. 2023-05, 10-3-2023)
10-2-8: INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES:
Any person subject to an industrial or construction stormwater NPDES permit
shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said
permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city council prior to the
allowing of discharges to the MS4. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009)
10-2-9: MONITORING OF DISCHARGES:
   A.   Applicability: This section applies to all facilities that have
stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including
construction activity.
   B.   Access To Facilities:
      1.   The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject
to regulation under this chapter as often as may be necessary to determine
compliance with this chapter. If a discharger has security measures in force
that require proper identification and clearance before entry into its
premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access
to representatives of the city.
      2.   Facility operators shall allow the city ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying
of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to
discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined
by state and federal law.
      3.   The city shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility
such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city to conduct monitoring
and/or sampling of the facility’s stormwater discharge.
      4.   The city has the right to require the discharger to install
monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure
stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
      5.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall not be replaced.
The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
      6.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the city or other government
agencies with regulatory authority access to a permitted facility is a
violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this chapter. A person who is
the operator of the facility with a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater
associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the
city or other government agencies with regulatory authority reasonable access
to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized
or required by this chapter.
      7.   If the city has been refused access to any part of the premises from
which stormwater is discharged, and the city is able to demonstrate probable
cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there
is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued
hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the
community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court
of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009; amd. Ord.
2023-05, 10-3-2023)
10-2-10: POLLUTANTS:
The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall
provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge
of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system
or surface waters through the use of structural and nonstructural BMPs.
Further, any person responsible for a property or premises that is, or may be,
the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said
person’s expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the
further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system.
Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing
the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent
practicable, shall be deemed compliant with the provisions of this section.
These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as
necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. (Ord. XVI.61,
5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009; amd. Ord. 2023-05, 10-3-2023)
10-2-11: WATERCOURSE PROTECTION:
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so
that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical
integrity of the watercourse. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009)
10-2-12: NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS:
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible
for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a
facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of
materials that are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants
discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S.,
said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of
hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response
agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a
release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the city in person
or by phone or email no later than the next business day. Notifications in
person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice or email addressed and
sent to the city within three (3) business days of the phone or in person
notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or
industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall
also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to
prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3)
years. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009; amd. Ord. 2023-05, 10-3-2023)
10-2-13: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Notice Of Violation: Whenever the city finds that a person has violated
a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the city may
order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such
notice may require, without limitation, the following: the performance of
monitoring, analysis, and reporting; the elimination of illicit connections or
discharges; that violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist; the abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination
hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and the implementation of
source control or treatment BMPs.
      1.   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property
is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise
that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established
deadline, the work will be done by the city or a contractor and the expense
thereof shall be charged to the violator.
      2.   The notice shall state that the determination of violation may be
appealed to the city administrator by filing with the city clerk a written
notice of appeal within seven (7) calendar days of service of the notice of
violation. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009; amd. Ord. 2023-05, 10-3-
2023)
10-2-14: APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the
city. The notice of appeal must be received by the city clerk within seven (7)
calendar days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal
before the city administrator or the city administrator’s designee shall take
place within seven (7) calendar days from the date of receipt of the notice of
appeal. The decision of the city administrator or city administrator’s designee
shall be final. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009; amd. Ord. 2023-05, 10-
3-2023)
10-2-15: ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL:
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth
in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within fifteen (15)
days of the decision of the city administrator or the city administrator’s
designee upholding the decision of the city, then representatives of the city
shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any
and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property.
It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of
any premises to refuse to allow the city or designated contractor to enter upon
the premises for the purposes set forth above.
(Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009; amd. Ord. 2023-05, 10-3-2023)
10-2-16: COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION:
Within thirty (30) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the
property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative
costs. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by
the decision of the municipal authority, the city may levy the charges as a
special assessment against the property, which assessments shall constitute a
lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any
of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city by reason of
such violation. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009; amd. Ord. 2023-05, 10-
3-2023)
10-2-17: LEGAL ACTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has violated and
continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the city may petition for
a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities
which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform
abatement or remediation of the violation, or seek any other available remedy
in law or equity. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009; amd. Ord. 2023-05,
10-3-2023)
10-2-18: COMPENSATORY ACTION:
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this
chapter, the city and violator may agree on alternative compensatory actions,
such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek
cleanup, etc. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009; amd. Ord. 2023-05, 10-3-
2023)
10-2-19: NUISANCE:
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition
caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and
deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's
expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the
cessation of such nuisance may be taken. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-
2009)
10-2-20: CRIMINAL PROSECUTION:
Any person that has violated or continues to violate this chapter shall be
liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be
subject to a criminal penalty in accordance with section
1-4-1 of this code. The city may recover all attorney fees, court costs, and
other expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter, including sampling
and monitoring expenses. (Ord. XVI.61, 5-19-2009, eff. 5-19-2009; amd. Ord.
2023-05, 10-3-2023)
TITLE 11
ZONING REGULATIONS
PREFACE
This Zoning And Subdivision Code of the City of Rosemount, as supplemented,
contains ordinances up to and including ordinance B-318, passed November 19,
2024. Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the
provisions of this code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent
therewith. Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular
provision of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
American Legal Publishing
Cincinnati, Ohio
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Title
11-1-2: Purpose
11-1-3: Effective Date And Authority To Adopt
11-1-4: Severability
11-1-5: Administration
11-1-6: Interpretation
11-1-7: Applicability
11-1-8: Nonconforming Uses, Structures, And Lots
11-1-9: Official Maps
11-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known as the CITY OF ROSEMOUNT ZONING ORDINANCE except as
referred to herein as "this title." (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-1-2: PURPOSE:
   A.   It is the purpose of this title to protect and promote public health,
safety and general welfare, which may be met through the following objectives:
      1.   To assist in the implementation of the city of Rosemount
comprehensive plan upon which this title is based.
      2.   To promote the orderly development and compatibility of residential,
commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational and public uses.
      3.   To promote the orderly transition of rural to urban uses.
      4.   To prevent the premature extension of city utilities and services.
      5.   To prevent overcrowding of the land and structures.
      6.   To prevent congestion in public rights-of-way.
      7.   To protect natural resources in the city and promote reforestation
and the replacement of other replenishable resources.
      8.   To promote agricultural preservation.
      9.   To promote a safe, effective pedestrian and vehicular circulation
system. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-1-3: EFFECTIVE DATE AND AUTHORITY TO ADOPT:
   A.   The effective date of this title is June 5, 2024. This title hereby
supersedes and replaces in its entirety, Title 11 of the Rosemount, Minnesota
Code on the effective date hereof. The provisions of this title shall apply to
all development plans and permits filed on or after the effective date. Plans
on file before the effective date shall be reviewed for compliance with the
Zoning Regulations title effective at the time of filing.
   B.   The authority to adopt this title within the City of Rosemount is
derived from M.S. Chapter 462, including but not limited to M.S. §§ 462.357 and
462.358, as well as other applicable state statutes and rules. Whenever other
applicable city, state, or federal laws or rules referenced in this title have
been amended or superseded, this title shall also be considered amended
accordingly. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-1-4: SEVERABILITY:
   A.   If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this title is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder
of this title shall not be affected thereby.
   B.   If any application of this title to a particular structure, land, or
water is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such judgment shall not be applicable to any other structure,
land, or water not specifically included in said judgment. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-
2024)
11-1-5: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Zoning Administrator:
      1.   This title shall be administered and enforced by the Zoning
Administrator who shall be appointed by the Council. The Zoning Administrator
may delegate specific responsibility to any individual city employee, but shall
remain responsible for all decisions made by those employees. The Zoning
Administrator shall also maintain current and permanent records of this title,
including, but not limited to, conditional uses, variances, amendments, and
appeals. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-1-6: INTERPRETATION:
   A.   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety, morals and general welfare.
   B.   Relationship To Comprehensive Plan:
      1.   The Comprehensive Plan for the City of Rosemount or "comprehensive
plan," including amendments adopted by the City Council, is the guiding policy
document for the city. A primary intent of this title is to implement the
policies, goals and actions of the comprehensive plan while remaining
consistent with all applicable requirements of federal and state laws.
   C.   Conflicting Regulations Or Provisions:
      1.   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
title shall be held to be minimum requirements. Wherever this title imposes a
greater restriction than is imposed or required by other provisions of law or
by other rules or regulations or ordinances, the provisions of this title shall
govern except as otherwise provided in state statutes or rules.
   D.   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions:
      1.   It is not intended by this title to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this title
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this title shall prevail. All
other ordinances inconsistent with this title are hereby repealed to the extent
of the inconsistency only.
   E.   Use Of Graphics, Illustrations, Figures, Photos, And Cross-References:
      1.   Graphics, illustrations, figures, and photos are provided for
illustrative purposes only and shall not be construed as regulations. Where a
conflict may occur between the text and any graphic, illustration, figure, or
photo, the text shall control.
      2.   In some instances, cross-references between titles, chapters,
sections, and subsections are provided that include the title, chapter,
section, or subsection number along with the name of the reference. Where a
conflict may occur between the given cross-reference number and name, the name
shall control.
   F.   Rules Of Construction:
      1.   Clarification on the provisions of this title or questions on the
procedures or applicability of this title should be directed to the community
development department or other city departments as may be appropriate. Further
clarification or interpretation of this title shall be accomplished according
to the procedures of the board of appeals and adjustments as set forth in
section
11-9-7 "Appeals" of this title.
      2.   For additional clarity and consistency in the understanding and
application of this title the following shall apply:
         a.   Use of the masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter
genders unless otherwise specifically noted.
         b.   Grammatical use or references made in the singular shall include
the plural and the plural shall include the singular, unless such use or
reference is otherwise specifically stated.
         c.   Sentence construction or phraseology in the present tense, and
similarly, references in the future tense may include the present.
         d.   The word "shall" is used to mean mandatory; whereas, the word
"may" is permissive and does not imply obligation. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-1-7: APPLICABILITY:
No structure, or part thereof, shall be erected, converted, enlarged,
reconstructed, altered or moved and no structure or land shall be used for any
purpose or in any manner which is not in conformity with the provisions of this
title. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-1-8: NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES, AND LOTS:
   A.   Purpose:
      1.   This section is established in recognition of the existence of uses,
structures, site improvements, and lots which were lawfully established but
which do not currently comply with the provisions of this title or subsequent
amendments. It is further established to specify the requirements,
circumstances, and conditions under which nonconforming uses, structures, site
improvements, and lots will be operated and maintained and to encourage actions
that bring non- conformities into conformity with this title.
   B.   Continuance Of Nonconforming Uses And Structures:
      1.   Any nonconformity, including the lawful use or occupation of land or
structures existing at the time of the adoption hereof, may be continued
through repair, replacement, restoration, maintenance, or improvement but not
through expansion, unless:
         a.   The nonconformity or occupancy is discontinued for a period of
more than one (1) year; or
         b.   Any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by fire or other
peril to the extent of greater than fifty percent (50%) of its market value and
no building permit has been applied for within one hundred eighty (180) days of
when the property is damaged. In this case, the city may impose reasonable
conditions upon a building permit to mitigate any newly created impact on
adjacent property.
      2.   Any subsequent use or occupancy of the land or structures shall be a
conforming use or occupancy.
   C.   Expansion Of Nonconforming Uses And Structures:
      1.   No nonconformity may be added to or enlarged in any manner unless
such additions or enlargements are made so as to bring said use or structure
into conformity with the regulations of the zoning ordinance.
   D.   Conditions:
      1.   The city may, by ordinance, impose upon non-conformities reasonable
regulations to prevent and abate nuisances and to protect the public health,
welfare, or safety.
   E.   Nonconforming Lots Of Record:
      1.   Multiple lots or parcels of record shall be considered a single
undivided parcel if such lots or parcels:
         a.   Are under common ownership;
         b.   Are contiguous; and
         c.   Do not meet the area or dimensional standards for the applicable
zoning district.
      2.   No portion of such single parcels may be used, sold, or subdivided
in a manner that lessens compliance with applicable area or dimensional
standards. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-1-9: OFFICIAL MAPS:
   A.   Purpose: Land that is needed for future street purposes and as sites
for other necessary public facilities and services is frequently diverted to
nonpublic uses which could have been located on other lands without hardship or
inconvenience to the owners. When this happens, public uses of land may be
denied or may be obtained only at prohibitive cost or at the expense of
dislocating the owners and occupants of the land. Identification of an official
map of land needed for future public uses permits both the public and private
property owners to adjust their building plans equitably and conveniently
before investments are made which will make such adjustments difficult to
accomplish. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a uniform procedure
for the proper use of official maps as authorized by the Minnesota municipal
planning act, Minn. Stat. chapter 462.
   B.   Official Map Defined: "Official map" as used in this chapter means a
map adopted in accordance with this chapter showing existing streets, proposed
future streets, and the area needed for widening of existing streets of the
city. An official map may also show the location of existing and future land
and facilities within the city. An official map may cover the entire city or
any portion of the city.
   C.   Initiation Of Proceedings: Proceedings for adoption, amendment, or
repeal of an official map or any part thereof may be initiated by:
      1.   The city's planning department;
      2.   A recommendation of the planning commission; or
      3.   Action by the city council.
   D.   Sketch Maps And Reports: Every proposal or request for an official map
or its amendment or repeal, however initiated, shall be accompanied by a sketch
map or plat showing the lands proposed to be included and the public purpose to
be served.
   E.   Reference To Planning Commission: Except when proceedings have been
initiated by recommendation of the planning commission, every proposed official
map or change in a map shall be referred to the planning commission for advice
and recommendation thereon, and such recommendation shall be submitted to the
city council within forty-five (45) days after reference to the planning
commission along with the report of the commission on the effect of the
proposal on the comprehensive plan of the city. If no recommendation is
received by the council from the planning commission within forty-five (45)
days after reference of the proposal to the commission by the council, the
council may take such action as it may deem proper upon the proposal without
further action by the planning commission.
   F.   Notice And Hearing:
      1.   Notice: Upon receiving the recommendation of the planning commission
or after forty-five (45) days from the submission of the proposal to the
planning commission without a recommendation from the commission, the council
may call a public hearing on the proposal. A notice of the time, place, and
purpose of the hearing and a description of property to be included in the
mapped streets and public grounds shall be published in the official newspaper
at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. At least ten (10) days
prior to the hearing, the clerk shall also mail a copy of the notice to each
owner of land situated within or abutting any street or other public ground
shown on the official map. For purposes of this notice, the owners shall be
determined by the records of the county auditor and the notice shall be
addressed to the last known address as shown by the auditor's records. Failure
to serve any such notice shall not invalidate the proceedings.
      2.   Hearing: At the time and place specified in the notice, the council
shall hear evidence and arguments concerning the proposal. The hearing may be
continued from time to time without further notice. The council may direct the
planning commission to conduct a hearing and following the hearing to report
its recommendation to the council.
   G.   Preparation And Filing of Maps: The official map or maps shall be
prepared in sufficient detail to permit the establishment of future acquisition
lines on the ground. In unplatted areas, a minimum of a centerline survey shall
be made prior to the preparation of the final draft of the official map. The
accuracy of the future acquisition lines shown on the official map shall be
attested to by a licensed land surveyor. After enactment of any ordinance
adopting an official map or amending or repealing a previous official map
ordinance, a certified copy of the official map or section to which the
ordinance relates, together with an attached copy of the ordinance, shall be
filed with the county recorder.
   H.   Effect: After an official map has been adopted and filed, the issuance
of building permits by the city shall be subject to the provisions of this
chapter. The city shall deny every application for a permit to construct a new
building or structure or expand an existing building or structure within any
area designated on the official map for street or public purposes, or outside
of any building line that may have been established upon the existing street.
Whenever any street or highway is widened or improved or any new street is
opened, or any interest in lands for other public purposes is acquired by the
city, the city is not required in such proceedings to pay for any building or
structure placed without a permit or in violation of conditions of a permit
within the limits of the mapped street or outside of any building line that may
have been established upon the existing street or within any area thus
identified for public purposes. The adoption of an official map does not give
the city any right, title, or interest in areas identified for public purposes
thereon, but the adoption of the map does authorize the city to acquire such
interest without paying compensation for buildings or structures erected in
such areas without a permit or in violation of the conditions of a permit.
   I.   Appeals: Whenever a building permit is denied pursuant to this chapter,
the board of appeals and adjustments shall, upon appeal filed with it by the
owner of the land, grant a permit for building in an area designated on the
official map for a street or other public purpose in any case in which the
board finds, upon the evidence and the arguments presented to it: a) that the
entire property of the appellant of which the area designated for public
purposes forms a part cannot yield a reasonable return to the owner unless such
a permit is granted, or b) that balancing the interest of the city in
preserving the integrity of the official map and of the comprehensive city plan
and the interest of the property owner in the use of his property and in the
benefits of ownership, the grant of such permit is required by considerations
of justice and equity. The board of appeals and adjustments shall hold a public
hearing upon the appeal after notice of the hearing has been published in the
official newspaper once at least ten (10) days before the hearing. If the board
authorizes the issuance of a permit, it shall specify the exact location,
ground area, height, and other details as to the extent and character of the
building for which the permit is granted. If the board authorizes issuance of a
permit, the council or other authority, board or commission having jurisdiction
shall have six (6) months from the date of the decision of the board to
institute proceedings to acquire such land or interest therein, and if no such
proceedings are started within that time, the city shall issue the permit if
the application otherwise conforms to local ordinances.
   J.   Adoption Of Maps: Language for adoption of official maps shall be as
follows:
      1.   ADOPTION OF MAP [fill in description]: The map entitled "Official
Map of                             ", a copy of which is attached to Ordinance
No.       and incorporated herein by reference, is hereby adopted and
designated as the Official Map of                             . (Ord. 2024-04,
6-4-2024)
CHAPTER 2
ZONING DISTRICTS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-2-1: Establishment Of Zoning Districts
11-2-2: Zoning Districts Map
11-2-3: Interpretation Of Zoning Districts Map
11-2-4: Zoning Of Annexed Land
11-2-5: General Lot, Building, And Yard Provisions
11-2-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS:
   A.   For the purpose of this title, the city of Rosemount, Minnesota, is
hereby divided into the following base zoning districts:
      1.   A-1, Agricultural Preserve District;
      2.   A-2, Agricultural District;
      3.   RR, Rural Residential District;
      4.   R-1, Low Density Traditional Residential District;
      5.   R-2, Low to Medium Density Residential District;
      6.   R-3, Medium Density Residential District;
      7.   R-4, High Density Residential District;
      8.   MX-1, Downtown Mixed Use District;
      9.   MX-2, Highway Mixed Use District;
      10.   B-1, General Business District;
      11.   B-2, Employment District;
      12.   I-1, General Industrial District;
      13.   I-2, Heavy Industrial District; and
      14.   PI, Public and Institutional District.
   B.   For the purpose of this title, the city of Rosemount, Minnesota, is
hereby divided into the following special zoning districts:
      1.   Floodplain Overlay District;
      2.   Shoreland Overlay District;
      3.   Wetland Overlay District;
      4.   Mississippi River Corridor Critical Area Overlay District; and
      5.   PUD, Planned Unit Development District. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-2-2: ZONING DISTRICTS MAP:
   A.   The boundaries of these districts are hereby defined and established on
a map entitled "zoning map city of Rosemount, Minnesota", dated June 4, 2024,
which map and all explanatory matter thereon is hereby made a part of this
title. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024; amd. Ord. B-318, 11-19-2024)
11-2-3: INTERPRETATION OF ZONING DISTRICTS MAP:
   A.   The district boundaries shall be determined by measurement from and as
shown on the zoning map, and in case of any questions as to the interpretation
of such boundary lines, the Planning Commission shall interpret the map
according to the reasonable intent of this title.
   B.   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any
districts indicated on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
      1.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of
streets or highways shall be construed as following the centerlines of said
streets or highways.
      2.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following lot lines shall be
construed as following such lot lines.
      3.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following city boundary lines
shall be construed as following such boundaries.
      4.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following railroad lines shall
be construed to be midway between the main tracks.
      5.   Boundaries indicated as approximately parallel to the centerlines of
streets or highways shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such
distance therefrom as indicated on the official zoning map. If no distance is
given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the
official zoning map.
      6.   Boundaries following the shoreline of a stream, lake, or other body
of water shall be construed to follow the ordinary high water level (OHWL) and
in the event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the
OHWL.
      7.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of
streams, rivers, canals or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow
such centerlines.
      8.   Where the application of the aforesaid rules leaves a reasonable
doubt as to the boundaries between two (2) districts, the regulations of the
more restrictive district shall govern the entire parcel in question, unless
otherwise determined by the board of appeals and adjustments.
   C.   Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single
ownership at the time of passage of this chapter, the extension of the
regulations for either portion of the lot beyond the district line into the
remaining portion of the lot may be interpreted by the Zoning Administrator
upon request of the owner. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-2-4: ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND:
   A.   Land annexed to the city subsequent to the effective date of this code
shall be temporarily zoned into the R-1 District. Within a period of one (1)
year from the date of annexation, the Planning Commission shall recommend to
the City Council a final zoning map for the annexed territory. The Commission
may recommend such final zoning map at the time of annexation. (Ord. 2024-04,
6-4-2024)
11-2-5: GENERAL LOT, BUILDING, AND YARD PROVISIONS:
   A.   Lot Provisions:
      1.   Lots Of Record:
         a.   No lot of record shall be reduced in size below the district
requirements of this title.
         b.   A lot of record shall be deemed a buildable lot even though the
lot area and/or dimensions are less than those required for the district
provided as follows:
         (1)   It fronts on a public street.
         (2)   Minimum requirements for private or public utility service are
met.
         (3)   Evidence is presented that the lot in question met minimum
requirements for the division of property under ordinance regulations in effect
at the time of the division of property.
      2.   One Building Per Lot: Except for PUD, or a multiple-unit residential
project, not more than one (1) principal building shall be located on a lot.
      3.   Street Access Required: Every building hereafter erected shall be
located on a lot having frontage on a public street as defined herein.
      4.   Sewer And Water, Single-Unit Dwellings: Single-unit dwellings which
are not connected to the municipal sewer system shall be permitted only when
the requirements for private on site sewer systems have been satisfied.
   B.   Yard Provisions:
      1.   Required Yards Or Other Open Space:
         a.   Reduction: If the existing yard or other open space is less than
the minimum required by this title, it shall not be further reduced in area or
dimension.
         b.   Relative To Other Buildings: No required yard or other open space
allocated to a building or dwelling group shall be used to satisfy yard or
other open space minimum requirements for any other building.
      2.   Permitted Yard Encroachments: The following encroachments into
required yards shall be permitted:
         a.   Special Structural Elements: Special structural elements attached
to the principal building such as chimneys, solar collectors, flues, belt
courses, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices, eaves and
gutters provided they do not extend more than two and one-half feet (2½') into
a yard.
         b.   Yard Lights: Yard lights in R districts not closer than five feet
(5') to the front lot line and lights in all districts for illuminating parking
areas, loading areas, or yards for safety and security purposes provided the
direct source of light is not visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent
residential property.
         c.   Decorative Landscaping: Decorative landscaping, trees, shrubs and
other aesthetic or sculptural elements including arbors and trellises within
the front, side, street side and rear yards except within sight triangles
adjacent to intersections on corner lots.
         d.   Accessory Appendages:
         (1)   Terraces, steps and stoops to the front (main) entrance of a
structure may encroach into the required front, street side, or side yards by
not more than fifteen feet (15'). However, in no case shall they be closer than
five feet (5') to a lot line or encroach into a utility easement, whichever is
more restrictive.
         (2)   Balconies, decks, and uncovered porches may encroach into a
required yard area as follows:
            (a)   Street Yards:
            (i)   If the balcony, deck, or uncovered porch is less than two
feet (2') in height above finished grade (not including railings) measured
vertically at the face of the principal structure, it may encroach into the
required street front yard area fifteen feet (15').
            (ii)   Balconies, decks and uncovered porches higher than two feet
(2') ay only encroach into required street front yards by five feet (5').
            (iii)   In no case shall any balcony, deck or uncovered porch be
closer than five feet (5') to a lot line or encroach into a utility easement,
whichever is more restrictive.
            (b)   Rear Yards: Fifteen feet (15') into a required rear yard area
but no closer than fifteen feet (15') to a rear lot line or encroach into a
utility easement, whichever is more restrictive.
            (c)   Side Yards: Five feet (5') into a required side yard area but
no closer than five feet (5') to a lot line or encroach into a utility
easement, whichever is more restrictive.
         (3)   Single-unit homes built prior to January 1, 1980, may have an
open single-story porch that encroaches into the required front yard a distance
not exceeding ten feet (10'), provided they maintain a minimum front yard
setback of twenty feet (20').
            (a)   The ten feet (10') shall include the roofline, support
columns, and steps.
            (b)   The porch area may have a railing, but not a solid wall, that
conforms to the Minnesota state building code standards but shall not exceed
3.5 feet in height.
            (c)   The porch area shall not be enclosed nor screened with mesh,
glass, or other similar material but may have dividers, spindles, or lattice no
higher than 3.5 feet from the base of the porch with no more than fifty percent
(50%) opacity.
         e.   Picnic Shelters, Gazebos, Recreation Equipment, etc.:
         (1)   Picnic shelters, gazebos, pool houses, stairs, fire escapes, and
recreation equipment may be placed only in side or rear yard areas and shall
conform to the requirements of subsection
11-6-7C "Accessory Structure".
         (2)   Recreational equipment such as basketball backstops, hockey
nets, skateboard ramps (less than thirty-six inches (36") in overall height),
bicycle ramps (less than thirty-six inches (36") in overall height), and other
small recreational play equipment associated with residential use may be used
and stored in the driveway area of a residence.
            (a)   No recreational play equipment may be stored or installed in
the right-of-way, any easement, public or private street, cul-de-sac, alley,
path, or sidewalk.
            (b)   Larger recreational equipment such as swimming pools,
trampolines, or sport courts are not exempted.
      3.   Required Side And Rear Yard Enlargement:
         a.   Corner Lots: Where a side yard abuts a street which is adjacent
to the front yard of one (1) or more residential lots on the same block, such
side yards shall meet the front yard setback requirement of the district. The
same yard dimension determined for such a side yard shall apply to structures
in the rear yard.
         b.   Through Lots: Through lots shall provide the required front yard
on both streets.
         c.   Commercial, Industrial, And Public Buildings: For commercial,
industrial, and public buildings exceeding thirty-five feet (35') in height and
located on a lot adjoining an R district, any such building shall be set back
from the interior side or rear lot line abutting said R district a minimum of
one (1) additional foot for each foot of building height in excess of thirty-
five feet (35'). Where there is an intervening alley, one-half (1/2) the alley
right-of-way may be subtracted from this computation.
         d.   Yards Abutting Dissimilar Districts: Rear or side yards for
dissimilar abutting districts shall meet the requirements of the more
restrictive of the two (2) districts.
      4.   Side Yards; Permitted Reduction: No side yard shall be required
between attached housing units.
      5.   Front Yards; Permitted Reduction And Required Expansion:
         a.   Established Front Yards: Where forty percent (40%) or more of the
lots on any block are developed with buildings, the average front yard for the
block shall be computed.
         (1)   Established R District Front Yards: Where the average is less
than the required front yard, the average or twenty feet (20'), whichever is
greater, shall be the required front yard. Where the average is greater than
the required front yard, the average shall be the required front yard.
         (2)   Established C District Front Yards: The average front yard shall
be the required front yard.
      6.   Residential principal structures shall be set back a minimum of
thirty feet (30') from any easement boundary intended for or containing high
voltage transmission lines.
      7.   No accessory or principal structure shall be constructed within any
easement.
      8.   Visibility At Intersections:
         a.   A minimum sight triangle shall be established on each corner lot
at every street intersection through which motorists shall have reasonable
unobstructed view.
         b.   The minimum sight triangle shall be defined as a triangle located
at the corner of intersecting streets. The adjacent sides shall be located
along the street right of way line (and adjacent property lines) of the
intersecting streets and shall be twenty-five feet (25') in length. The third
side shall be a straight line joining the end points of the adjacent sides.
         c.   The city shall have the authority to order the removal of vision
obstructions located within the minimum sight triangle.
   C.   Outdoor Storage: Except as specifically authorized by this title, all
equipment, merchandise, materials, supplies, unlicensed vehicles, junk
vehicles, trash and junk, and finished and unfinished products shall be stored
within structures as defined herein. This provision does not apply to
clothesline poles, lawn furniture, picnic tables and playground equipment as
associated with residential use. Construction materials may be stored outdoors
only during construction, and such materials must be for use in construction on
the property on which they are stored.
   D.   Building Provisions:
      1.   Height Regulations:
         a.   Permitted Exceptions: Except as specifically provided in the B-2,
I-1, or I-2 districts, the following structural appurtenances shall be
permitted to a height not to exceed twenty-five feet (25') in addition to the
maximum height permitted for the district, provided they do not impair the
solar access of buildings on adjoining properties and are not used for human
occupancy or commercial enterprise:
         (1)   Ornamentation such as church spires, belfries, bell towers,
cupolas, domes, monuments and flagpoles.
         (2)   Mechanical appurtenances such as chimneys, smokestacks, elevator
and stairwell penthouses, antennas, transmission towers and other necessary
structures.
      2.   Earth Sheltered Structures: Earth sheltered structures will be
permitted on the basis of site conditions, which are conducive to such
construction, or in areas where changes to existing site conditions are
complementary to the site and adjacent properties and the existing character of
property and structures in the area.
      3.   Temporary Dwellings:
         a.   The use and occupancy of a tent, RV, or other temporary dwelling
for the purpose of living quarters is not permitted in any district.
         b.   Temporary Family Healthcare Dwellings: Pursuant to authority
granted by Minn. Stat. § 462.3593, subdivision 9, the city of Rosemount opts
out of the requirements of Minn. Stat. § 462.3593, which defines and regulates
temporary family healthcare dwellings.
      4.   Underground Electrical Services:
         a.   Electric, phone, and cable distribution facilities serving any
new building or structure served by municipal facilities shall be located
underground.
         b.   Poles, wires, or other aboveground distribution facilities may
only be temporarily installed during site construction or repair of the
underground system.
         c.   No changes in the grade or contours of land above or adjacent to
these facilities, once installed, shall be made without the approved written
consent of the City Engineer and the utility company providing such services.
(Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
CHAPTER 3
AGRICULTURAL AND RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
11-3-1: Purpose Statements
11-3-2: Uses
11-3-3: Lot Dimensions
11-3-4: Site Dimensions
11-3-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS:
The following statements specify the purposes of the zoning districts
established to regulate the areas of the City considered appropriate for
agricultural and residential uses:
   A.   A-1 Agricultural Preserve District: This district is expressly
established to allow landowners to comply with the requirements of the
Metropolitan Area Agricultural Preserves Act, Minnesota Statutes, chapter 473H.
   B.   A-2 Agricultural District: The purpose of the Agricultural District is
to encourage the long-term continuation of agricultural and related uses in the
city in areas which are both suitable for agriculture and are not planned for
urban development.
   C.   RR Rural Residential District: The purpose of the Rural Residential
District is to provide for a large lot rural residential lifestyle which is
separate from and not in conflict with commercial agricultural activities.
Within this district, public sewer and water systems are not available.
   D.   R-1 Low Density Traditional Residential District: The purpose of the
Low Density Traditional Residential District is to provide for the preservation
of existing neighborhoods within the metropolitan urban service area which are
primarily made up of detached single-unit residential dwellings. This district
is intended to apply predominantly to areas of existing single-unit
development.
   E.   R-2 Low to Medium Density Residential District: The purpose of the Low
to Medium Density Residential District is to accommodate a mixture of attached
and detached single-unit dwellings and smaller multiple-unit dwellings within
the metropolitan urban service area. Developments within this district are
intended to provide full urban infrastructure with a focus on pedestrian and
vehicular connectivity, access, and open spaces.
   F.   R-3 Medium Density Residential District: The purpose of the Medium
Density Residential District is to accommodate a variety of medium density
attached housing types including townhouses, apartments, and senior housing
within the metropolitan urban service area. This district is intended to be
located within close walking or driving distance of areas of greater
concentrations of commercial, recreational, employment, and public activity. It
is intended that this district provide a blend of housing, recreation, and open
space opportunities.
   G.   R-4 High Density Residential District: The purpose of the High Density
Residential District is to support high density attached housing types such as
apartments and senior housing within the metropolitan urban service area. This
district is intended to be located near or within areas of greater
concentrations of commercial, recreational, employment, and public activity.
Developments within this district should be walkable and should provide
convenient access to goods, services, and amenities. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-3-2: USES:
   A.   Tables 3.1 and 3.2 list land uses and indicates whether they are
permitted, permitted with standards, conditional, interim, or prohibited. The
tables also include references to whether additional use-specific standards are
applicable to each use.
   B.   The following definitions shall be referenced when using Tables 3.1 and
3.2:
      1.   Permitted Use: A "P" indicates that a use is allowed by right,
subject to compliance with all other applicable provisions of this code.
      2.   Permitted With Standards Use: A "PS" indicates that a use is allowed
when standards identified in chapter 6 "Use-Specific Standards" are met. Uses
permitted with standards are also subject to all other applicable requirements
of this chapter. Any request to vary from the standards set forth for a
permitted with standards use shall be processed as a variance.
      3.   Conditional Use: A "C" indicates that a use is allowed only if a
conditional use permit is issued by the city after compliance with the
procedure and requirements set forth in section 11-9-3 "Conditional Use
Permit."
      4.   Interim Use: An "I" indicates that a use may be allowed for a
limited period of time if an interim use permit is issued by the city after
compliance with the procedure and requirements set forth in section 11-9-
4 "Interim Use Permit."
      5.   Prohibited Use: A blank cell in the use table indicates that the
land use is prohibited in that zoning district.
   C.   In the event a proposed use is not listed in the use table, the Zoning
Administrator is authorized to classify the proposed use into an existing use
type as set forth in Tables 3.1 and 3.2 that the Zoning Administrator
determines most closely fits the proposed use.
      1.   If found to be consistent with a listed use, the proposed use shall
be treated the same as the listed use.
      2.   If no similar use determination is made by the Zoning Administrator,
the proposed use is prohibited. In such case, the City Council on its own
initiative may amend this chapter to allow the proposed use or an interested
party may request an amendment to this chapter in accordance with the procedure
and requirement set forth in section
11-9-2 "Zoning Code Amendment.
Table 3.1 Principal Use Table
Use Type Agricultural Districts Residential Districts   Use Standards Reference
         A-1 A- 2               R R R- 1 R- 2 R- 3 R- 4
                   Agricultural Districts Residential Districts   Use Standards
Use Type           A-1 A- 2               R R R- 1 R- 2 R- 3 R- 4 Reference

Residential
Household Living
Dwelling, single-  PS  PS                 PS  PS   PS           See
unit dwelling                                                     11-6-1
Dwelling,          PS  PS                 PS  PS   PS           See
manufactured home                                                 11-6-1
Dwelling, twinhome                                 PS        
Dwelling, two- to                              PS   PS        
four-unit
Dwelling, attached                                                See
townhouse or                                   PS   PS   PS   11-6-1
rowhouse
Dwelling,                                          PS   PS   See
apartment                                                         11-6-1
Dwelling,                                                         See
apartment mixed                                        PS   11-6-1
use
Dwelling,                                  PS   PS   PS   PS   See
courtyard cottage                                                 11-6-1
Manufactured home                              C    C    C    See
park                                                              11-6-1
Group Living
Assisted living                                    PS   PS   See
facility                                                          11-6-1
Continuing care                                    PS   PS   See
senior facility                                                   11-6-1
Long-term or                                                      See
transitional care                                  PS   PS   11-6-1
facility
Residential care
facility, licensed P   P                  P   P    P             
in- home (6 or
fewer persons)
Residential care
facility, licensed                             P    P    P     
in- home (7-16
persons)
Public, Social, & Institutional
Day care center,                                                  See
12 or fewer        P   P                  P   P    P            11-6-2
persons
Day care center,                               P    P    P    See
13- 16 persons                                                    11-6-2
Place of worship                        C   C    C    C    C    See
                                                                  11-6-2
Sacred community                        PS  PS   PS   PS   PS   See
                                                                  11-6-2
School, elementary                      C   C    C    C    C     
School, middle                          C   C    C    C    C     
Commercial
Food, Beverage, & Entertainment
Commercial event      C                                     See
center                                                            11-6-3
Commercial
recreation            C                                      
facility, indoor
Commercial                                                        See
recreation            C                                     11-6-3
facility, outdoor
Retail Sales & Services
Animal boarding,                                                  See
kennel, or daycare    C                  C                   11-6-3
center
Commercial animal     C                  C                   See
breeding                                                          11-6-3
Industrial
Brewery, farm                                                     See
winery, or            C                                     11-6-4
distillery
Microbrewery or       C                                     See
microdistillery                                                   11-6-4
Small brewery         C                                     See
                                                                  11-6-4
Large-scale           I                                     See
mineral extraction                                                11-6-4
Small-scale           I                                     See
mineral extraction                                                11-6-4
Agriculture, Open Space, & Natural Resources
Agriculture        P   P                                      
Agriculture
research and       P   P                                      
testing facility
Commercial
greenhouse or         P                  C                    
nursery
Commercial horse      P                  PS                  See
stable                                                            11-6-5
Community solar                                                   See
garden or solar    I   I                                     11-6-5
farm
Nature preserve/   P   P                                      
conservation area
Park or playground    P                  P   P    P    P    P     
Public recreation     P                  P   P    P    P    P     
facility
Wildlife           P   P                                      
recreation area
Utilities & Transportation
Essential service  PS  PS                 PS  PS   PS   PS   PS   See
facility                                                          11-6-6
Small wireless                                                    See
facility within       C                  C   C    C    C    C    11-6-6
the ROW
 
Table 3.2 Accessory Use Table
Use Type Agricultural Districts Residential Districts   Use Standards Reference
         A-1 A- 2               R R R- 1 R- 2 R- 3 R- 4
                   Agricultural Districts Residential Districts   Use Standards
Use Type           A-1 A- 2               R R R- 1 R- 2 R- 3 R- 4 Reference

Accessory
agriculture        P   P                                      
building
Accessory          P   P                  P                    
agriculture
Accessory dwelling                                                See
unit, internal or     PS                 PS  PS   PS           11-6-7
attached
Accessory          PS  PS                 PS  PS   PS   PS   PS   See
structure                                                         11-6-7
Agricultural       P   P                                      
product stand
Agriculture
associated with
breweries,         P   P                                      
microdistilleries,
and wineries
AM radio antenna,
supporting tower,                                                 See
and related           C                                     11-6-7
accessory
structures
Cemetery                                PS  PS   PS   PS   PS   See
                                                                  11-6-2
Construction-                                                     See
related temporary     PS                 PS  PS   PS   PS   PS   11-6-7
use
Day care, group    PS  PS                 PS  PS   PS           See
family                                                            11-6-7
Garage sale        PS  PS                 PS  PS   PS   PS   PS   See
                                                                  11-6-7
Greenhouse         P   P                  P   P    P             
Home occupation    PS  PS                 PS  PS   PS   PS       See
                                                                  11-6-7
Keeping of         PS  PS                 PS  PS   PS   PS   PS   See
animals, domestic                                                 11-6-7
Keeping of                                                        See
animals, non-      PS  PS                 PS                  11-6-7
domestic
Keeping of bees    PS  PS                 PS  PS               See
                                                                  11-6-7
Keeping of         PS  PS                 PS  PS               See
chickens                                                          11-6-7
Mobile food unit   PS  PS                 PS  PS   PS   PS   PS   See
                                                                  11-6-7
Off-street parking
or loading                                     P    P    P     
facility
Recreational       PS  PS                 PS  PS   PS   PS   PS   See
amenity, private                                                  11-6-8
Recreation vehicle    PS                 PS  PS   PS           See
parking storage                                                   8-2-5
Residential                             PS  PS   PS   PS   PS   See
swimming pool                                                     5-3-1
Sacred community                        PS  PS   PS   PS   PS   See
                                                                  11-6-8
Sales office,                           PS  PS   PS   PS   PS   See
temporary                                                         11-6-8
Satellite dish     PS  PS                 PS  PS   PS   PS   PS   See
                                                                  11-6-8
Short-term            PS                 PS  PS   PS   PS       See
vacation rental                                                   11-6-8
Small-scale solar                                                 See
energy system,        PS                 PS  PS   PS   PS   PS   11-6-8
ground-mounted
Small-scale solar                                                 See
energy system,     PS  PS                 PS  PS   PS   PS   PS   11-6-8
roof- mounted
Uses accessory to                                                 See
large-scale           I                                     11-6-8
mineral extraction
Uses accessory to                                                 See
small-scale           I                                     11-6-8
mineral extraction
 
(Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024; amd. Ord. B-315, 9-17-2024)
11-3-3: LOT DIMENSIONS:
   A.   All lot dimension standards listed in this Section are subject to the
exemptions listed in section
11-2-5 "General Lot, Building, and Yard Provisions.”
   B.   Table 3.3 establishes the minimum lot area and lot width requirements
for the A-1, A-2, RR, R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 zoning districts.
Table 3.3. Agricultural and Residential Lot Dimensions
District Use Types Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.) Minimum Lot Width (ft.)
District Use Types             Minimum Lot Area (sq.  Minimum Lot Width (ft.)
                               ft.)
A-1      All uses              40 acres               300
A-2      All uses              2.5 acres              300
RR       All uses              2.5 acres platted      200 platted
                               5 acres unplatted      300 unplatted
         Dwelling, single-unit 8,500                  65
         detached
R-1      Dwelling, courtyard   17,500 per development 140 per development
         cottage
         All other uses        20,000                 120
         Dwelling, single-unit 7,500                  60
         detached
         Dwelling, twinhome    6,250 [12,500 total]   50 [100 total]
         Dwelling, 2-unit      12,500                 100
         (duplex)
R-2      Dwelling, 3-4 unit    15,000                 120
         Dwelling, attached    2,500 per unit         20 per unit
         townhouse or rowhouse
         Dwelling, courtyard   15,000 per development 120 per development
         cottage
         All other uses        20,000                 120
         Dwelling, twinhome    6,250 [12,500]         50 [100 total]
         Dwelling, 2-unit      12,500                 100
         (duplex)
         Dwelling, 3-4 unit    15,000                 120
R-3      Dwelling, attached    2,500 per unit         20 per unit
         townhouse or rowhouse
         Dwelling, courtyard   15,000 per development 120 per development
         cottage
         Dwelling, apartment   22,500                 150
         All other uses        20,000                 120
         Dwelling, courtyard   15,000                 120
         cottage
R-4      Dwelling, attached    2,500 per unit         20 per unit
         townhouse or rowhouse
         Dwelling, apartment   22,500                 150
         All other uses        20,000                 120
 
(Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-3-4: SITE DIMENSIONS:
   A.   All site dimension standards listed in this Section are also subject to
the supplementary yard and height regulations listed in Chapter 2, General
Zoning Requirements.
   B.   Table 3.4 establishes the minimum site dimension standards for
principal structures in the A-1, A-2, RR, R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 zoning
districts. Setbacks for any use not listed shall be the most restrictive of the
district.
   Table 3.4. Agricultural and Residential Site Dimensions - Principal
Structures
         Minimum Yard Setbacks (feet) Maximum Building
District Front Side Rear              Height (feet)    Maximum Lot Coverage
         Minimum Yard Setbacks (feet)     Maximum Building
District Front Side                  Rear Height (feet)    Maximum Lot Coverage

A-1      50'   30'                   30'  50'              None
A-2      50'   30'                   30'  50'              None
RR       40'   30'                   30'  35'              30%
R-1      25'   7.5'1                 30'  35'              35%
                                                           40% single unit
               7.5' single- and two-                       detached
R-2      25'   unit                  30'  35'              70% single unit
               30' multi- unit                             attached
                                                           30% 2-unit
R-3      25'   30'                   30'  35'              75%
R-4      25'   30'                   30'  4 stories not to 75%
                                          exceed 48'
1 Parcels in the R-1 district platted prior to 1979 shall meet the following
minimum setbacks: 5' for a single-story structure and 7.5' for a 2-story
structure.
 
   C.   Table 3.5 establishes the minimum site dimension standards for
accessory structures in the A-1, A-2, RR, R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 zoning
districts. Setbacks for any use not listed shall be the most restrictive of the
district.
Table 3.5. Agricultural and Residential Site Dimensions - Accessory Structures
District Minimum Yard Setbacks (feet) Maximum Building Height (feet)
         Front Side Rear
         Minimum Yard Setbacks (feet)             Maximum Building Height
District Front Side Rear                          (feet)

A-1      50    30   30                            75
A-2      50    30   30                            75
RR       40    30   30                            35
                    Structures 200 sf or less: 5'
R-1      30    7.5  Structures greater than 200   18
                    sf: 30'
                    Structures 200 sf or less: 5'
R-2      30    7.5  Structures greater than 200   18
                    sf: 30'
R-3      30    10   10                            18
R-4      40    10   10                            18
 
   D.   Principal structure setbacks for residential lots shall be increased on
the side adjacent to freeways, arterial and collector streets, and railroad
rights-of-way or easements in order to provide space for earthen berms, buffer
yards, or planting strips as shown in Table 3.6 below.
Table 3.6. Increased Setbacks
 
Street Adjacent To             Increased Setbacks for Principal Structures
Collector street1              10 ft.
Minor arterial highway1        20 ft.
Principal arterial (freeways)1 30 ft.
1 As designated by the transportation element of the comprehensive plan.
 
(Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024; amd. Ord. B-317, 11-19-2024)
CHAPTER 4
NON-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
11-4-1: Purpose Statements
11-4-2: Uses
11-4-3: Lot Dimensions
11-4-4: Site Dimensions
11-4-5: District Standards
11-4-1: PURPOSE STATEMENTS:
The following statements specify the purposes of the zoning districts
established to regulate the areas of the City considered appropriate for non-
residential uses:
   A.   MX-1 Downtown Mixed Use District: The purpose of the Downtown Mixed Use
District is to provide for the establishment of a diversified commercial,
civic, and lifestyle center. This district should contain a mix of cultural,
civic, entertainment, residential, retail, service, office, and public uses.
Consideration for pedestrian and bicycle users related to access, landscaping,
amenities, and architectural design shall be integrated.
   B.   MX-2 Highway Mixed Use District: The purpose of the Highway Mixed Use
District is to allow for a horizontal or vertical mix of residential and
commercial uses at specific nodes along County Road 42 in conformance with the
Highway 42 Commercial Site Concepts developed in 2021. High volumes of traffic
and access to CR 42 are important for the uses in this district.
   C.   B-1 General Business District: The purpose of the General Business
District is to accommodate a broad range of commercial and retail uses and
services which serve the local community. This district is intended to be
located at important neighborhood intersections or along major community
roadways.
   D.   B-2 Employment District: The purpose of the Employment District is to
provide a suitable environment for employment centers, business headquarters,
offices and professional uses, warehousing, light industrial uses, and
associated complementary uses with a focus on quality site design. Uses are
primarily confined within buildings with limited outdoor usage or storage.
   E.   I-1 General Industrial District: The purpose of the General Industrial
District is to provide for the establishment of both light and medium
industrial uses, including manufacturing, warehousing, and repair uses. General
industrial uses are conducted primarily within buildings, but may include
limited exterior operation and storage.
   F.   I-2 Heavy Industrial District: The purpose of the Heavy Industrial
District is to provide for the establishment of heavy industrial uses which may
include significant exterior operation or storage of equipment and materials.
As a result of operation, heavy industrial uses may generate byproducts such as
noise, odors, smoke, and vibration, which may have nuisance impacts on
surrounding properties. As a result, these uses require larger land areas and
are not compatible with residential uses or high concentrations of people.
   G.   PI Public and Institutional District: The purpose of the Public and
Institutional District is to accommodate major public and institutional uses of
a governmental, educational, assembly, and recreational nature that serve the
entire community. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-4-2: USES:
   A.   Tables 4.1 and 4.2 list land uses and indicates whether they are
permitted, permitted with standards, conditional, interim, or prohibited. The
tables also include references to whether additional use-specific standards are
applicable to each use.
   B.   The following definitions shall be referenced when using Tables 4.1 and
4.2:
      1.   Permitted Use: A "P" indicates that a use is allowed by right,
subject to compliance with all other applicable provisions of this code.
      2.   Permitted With Standards Use: A "PS" indicates that a use is allowed
when standards identified in chapter 6 "Use-Specific Standards" are met. Uses
permitted with standards are also subject to all other applicable requirements
of this chapter. Any request to vary from the standards set forth for a
permitted with standards use shall be processed as a variance.
      3.   Conditional Use: A "C" indicates that a use is allowed only if a
conditional use permit is issued by the city after compliance with the
procedure and requirements set forth in section
11-9-3 "Conditional Use Permit."
      4.   Interim Use: An "I" indicates that a use may be allowed for a
limited period of time if an interim use permit is issued by the city after
compliance with the procedure and requirements set forth in section
11-9-4 "Interim Use Permit."
      5.   Prohibited Use: A blank cell in the use table indicates that the
land use is prohibited in that zoning district.
   C.   In the event a proposed use is not listed in the use table, the Zoning
Administrator is authorized to classify the proposed use into an existing use
type as set forth in Tables 4.1 and 4.2 that the Zoning Administrator
determines most closely fits the proposed use.
      1.   If found to be consistent with a listed use, the proposed use shall
be treated the same as the listed use.
      2.   If no similar use determination is made by the Zoning Administrator,
the proposed use is prohibited. In such case, the City Council on its own
initiative may amend this chapter to allow the proposed use or an interested
party may request an amendment to this chapter in accordance with the procedure
and requirement set forth in section 11-9-2 "Zoning Code Amendment."
Table 4.1 Principal Use Table
 
Use Type Mixed Use   Commercial Industrial Public Use Standards Reference
         MX- 1 MX- 2 B-1 B-2    I-1 I-2    PI
                       Mixed Use   Commercial Industrial Public Use Standards
Use Type               MX- 1 MX- 2 B-1 B-2    I-1 I-2    PI     Reference

Residential
Household Living
Dwelling, attached     PS    PS                            See
townhouse or rowhouse                                           11-6-1
Dwelling, apartment    PS    PS                            See
                                                                11-6-1
Dwelling, apartment    PS    PS                            See
mixed use                                                       11-6-1
Dwelling, live/work    C     C                              
Dwelling, courtyard         PS                            See
cottage                                                         11-6-1
Manufacture d home     C     C                             See
park                                                            11-6-1
Group Living
Assisted living        C     PS                            See
facility                                                        11-6-1
Long-term or                                                    See
transitional care      C     PS                            11-6-1
facility
Continuing care senior C     PS                            See
facility                                                        11-6-1
Residential care
facility, licensed in- P     P                              
home (7-16 persons)
Lodging
Hotel                  P     P     P   C                      
Motel                       P     P   C                      
Public, Social, & Institutional
Cemetery                                           C      See
                                                                11-6-2
Day care center, 13-16 P     P                             See
persons                                                         11-6-2
Day care center, more  C     PS    P   C                     See
than 16 persons                                                 11-6-2
Educational services   P     P     P                  P       
Funeral home                     C                        See
                                                                11-6-2
Hospital                            P               P       
Medical or dental      P     P     P   P                      
clinic or office
Municipal social,
cultural, or           P     P                       P       
recreational facility
Place of worship       P     P        C               P      See
                                                                11-6-2
Public assembly        P     P                       P       
Public or governmental                             P       
services
Sacred community       PS    PS       PS              PS     See
                                                                11-6-2
School, elementary                                 P       
School, middle                                     P       
School, secondary                                  P       
School, post-                       P               P       
secondary
Commercial
Food, Beverage, & Entertainment
Adult establishmen t                      PS              See
                                                                11-6-3
Bar                    P     P     P                         
Brewpub                P     P     P                         
Restaurant             P     P     P                         
Specialty food or      P     P     P                         
beverage shop
Commercial recreation  P     P     P   P                      
facility, indoor
Commercial recreation       PS    PS  PS              P      See
facility, outdoor                                               11-6-3
Health and athletic    P     P     P                         
club facility
Retail Sales & Services
Animal boarding                     C      C               See
                                                                11-6-3
Animal/ veterinary     PS    PS    PS  PS     PS              See
clinic or hospital                                              11-6-3
Automobile fuel             C     C         C               See
station                                                         11-6-3
Automotive repair and            C   C      P   P            See
service, major                                                  11-6-3
Automotive repair and       C     P   P      P               See
service, minor                                                  11-6-3
Car wash                    PS    P         C               See
                                                                11-6-3
Commercial center           P     P                         
General repair,
excluding automotive             P   P      P                
repair
Landscape and                             PS              See
horticultural service                                           11-6-3
Off-site service                 P   P                      
business
Retail or service with P     P                              
residential above
Standalone retail      P     P     P                         
business, large
Standalone retail      P     P     P                         
business, small
Standalone service     P     P     P   P                      
business
Tobacco store or smoke           C                         
shop
Vehicle sales or                 C   C                     See
rental                                                          11-6-3
Business & Technical Services
Art studio             P     P     P   P                      
Business or            P     P     P   P                      
professional office
Production studio,
including motion                    P      P                
picture, recording,
television, and radio
Showroom                         P   P                      
Testing or research                 P      P                
laboratory use
Industrial
Brewery, farm winery,               PS     PS               
or distillery
Data center                         P      P   P             
Microbrewer y or       PS    PS    PS  PS     PS               
microdistillery
Small brewery               C     C   P      P               See
                                                                11-6-4
Combined heat and                            C            See
power plant                                                     11-6-4
Commercial bakery                C   C                      
Composting                                   I             
Construction                              P   P             
contractor yard
Construction                                                    See
demolition waste                             I            11-6-4
facility
Large-scale mineral                          I            See
extraction                                                      11-6-4
Large-scale mineral                                             See
extraction, ancillary                        I            11-6-4
uses
Manufacturing, custom  C     C     C   P      P               See
                                                                11-6-4
Manufacturing, heavy                         PS           See
                                                                11-6-4
Manufacturing, light                P      P   P             
Manufacturing or
storage of combustible                       P             
or explosive materials
Manufacturing,
storage, or
distribution of                              P             
chemicals or
fertilizer
Nonhazardous                                                    See
industrial waste                             I            11-6-4
containment facility
Recycling operation                          C            See
                                                                11-6-4
Scrap or salvage yard                        C             
Self-service storage                C      C               See
facility                                                        11-6-4
Small-scale mineral                          I            See
extraction                                                      11-6-4
Storage and sale of
machinery and                       C      P   P             
equipment
Warehouse and                       P      P                
distribution facility
Waste processing                             I             
facility
Waste transfer station                       I             
Wholesale trade                     P      P                
establishmen t
Agriculture, Open Space, & Natural Resources
Community solar garden                    I   I      I      See
or solar farm                                                   11-6-5
Nature preserve/                                   P       
conservation area
Park or playground     P     P     P                  P       
Public recreation      P     P     P                  P       
facility
Wildlife recreation                                P       
area
Utilities & Transportation
Commercial use antenna                    PS  PS           See
and/or tower                                                    11-6-6
Essential service      PS    PS    PS  PS     PS  PS     PS     See
facility                                                        11-6-6
Public parking or      P                            P       
loading facility
Small wireless                                                  See
facility within the    PS         PS  PS     PS  PS     PS     11-6-6
ROW
Transit station        P     P     P   P               P       
Transmission facility
greater than 1/4 mile            C                         
in length
Truck stop                                C   C            See
                                                                11-6-6
Truck terminal                            PS  PS           See
                                                                11-6-6
 
   Table 4.2 Accessory Use Table
                       Mixed Use   Commercial Industrial Public Use Standards
Use Type               MX- 1 MX- 2 B-1 B-2    I-1 I-2    PI     Reference

Accessory agricultural P                                   
building
Accessory agriculture               P                      
Accessory retail                    PS     PS              See
                                                                11-6-7
Accessory structure                 PS     PS  PS     PS     See
                                                                11-6-7
Agriculture associated
with breweries,                     P      P   P             
microdistilleries, and
wineries
Barge terminal                               P             
Car wash, full service      PS    PS        PS              See
                                                                11-6-3
Car wash, self service      PS    PS        PS              See
                                                                11-6-3
Cemetery               PS    PS                      P      See
                                                                11-6-2
Community garden                                   C       
Construction- related  PS    PS    PS  PS     PS  PS     PS     See
temporary use                                                   11-6-7
Day care center                     P                      
Drive-through facility PS    PS    PS                       See
                                                                11-6-7
Greenhouse                                         P       
Indoor bulk material
storage accessory to a                       P             
permitted or
conditional use
Keeping of animals,    PS    PS                            See
domestic                                                        11-6-7
Mobile food unit       PS    PS    PS  PS     PS  PS     PS     See
                                                                11-6-7
Office uses accessory
to a permitted or                   P      P   P      P       
conditional use
Off-street parking or  P     P     P   P      P   P      P       
loading facility
Outdoor dining         PS    PS    PS                       See
                                                                11-6-8
Outdoor display or     PS    PS    PS  PS     PS  PS           See
sales                                                           11-6-8
Outdoor industrial                        PS  PS           See
equipment                                                       11-6-8
Outdoor storage                     C      PS  PS           See
                                                                11-6-8
Overnight sleeping
facilities for                      P      P   P             
security personnel
Recreational amenity,  PS    PS       PS     PS  PS           See
private                                                         11-6-8
Residential swimming   PS    PS                            See
pool                                                            5-3-1
Sacred community       PS    PS       PS              PS     See
                                                                11-6-8
Sales office,          PS    PS                            See
temporary                                                       11-6-8
Satellite dish         PS    PS    PS  PS     PS  PS     PS     See
                                                                11-6-8
Small-scale solar                                               See
energy system, ground-                    PS  PS     PS     11-6-8
mounted
Small-scale solar                                               See
energy system, roof-   PS    PS    PS  PS     PS  PS     PS     11-6-8
mounted
Spent bauxite disposal                       I            See
facility                                                        11-6-8
Transient merchant     PS    PS    PS                 PS     See
sales lot                                                       11-6-8
Uses accessory to                                               See
large-scale mineral                          I            11-6-8
extraction
Uses accessory to                                               See
small-scale mineral                          I            11-6-8
extraction
 
(Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024; amd. Ord. B-315, 9-17-2024)
11-4-3: LOT DIMENSIONS:
   A.   All lot dimension standards listed in this Section are subject to the
exemptions listed in section 11-2-5 "General Lot, Building, and Yard
Provisions."
   B.   Table 4.3 establishes the minimum lot area and lot width requirements
for the MX-1, MX-2, B-1, B-2, I-1, I-2, and PI zoning districts.
Table 4.3. Non-Residential Lot Dimensions
District Use Types Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.) Minimum Lot Width (ft.)
District Use Types             Minimum Lot Area (sq. Minimum Lot Width (ft.)
                               ft.)
         Dwelling, attached    2,500 per unit        20 per unit
MX-1     townhouse or rowhouse
         Dwelling, apartment   22,500                150
         All other uses        None                  None
         Dwelling, attached    2,500 per unit        20 per unit
MX-2     townhouse or rowhouse
         Dwelling, apartment   22,500                150
         All other uses        20,000                150
B-1      All uses              20,000                120
B-2      All uses              1 acre                120
I-1      All uses              5 acres               None
I-2      All uses              25 acres              None
PI       All uses              None                  None
 
(Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-4-4: SITE DIMENSIONS:
   A.   All site dimension standards listed in this Section are also subject to
the supplementary yard and height regulations listed in Chapter 2, General
Zoning Requirements.
   B.   Table 4.4 establishes the minimum site dimension standards for
principal structures for the MX-1, MX-2, B-1, B-2, I-1, I-2, and PI zoning
districts. Setbacks for any use not listed shall be the most restrictive of the
district.
Table 4.4. Non-Residential Site Dimensions
         Minimum Setbacks (ft.) Maximum Building Height
District Front Side Rear        (ft.)                    Maximum Lot Coverage
         Minimum Setbacks (ft.) Maximum Building Height
District Front Side  Rear       (ft.)                    Maximum Lot Coverage

MX-1     None1 None1 None1      4 stories not to exceed  90%
                                48'
MX-2     30'   10'   10'        35'                      75%
B-1      30'   10'   10'        35'                      75%
B-2      30'   10'   10'        50'                      75%
I-1      75'   50'   50'        50'                      70%
I-22     150'  150'  150'       75'                      70%
PI       30'   30'   30'        50'                      70%
1   A 10 foot buffer yard is required adjacent to any residential district.
2   Minimum building size of 10% of property will be a standard in the I-
1 district.
 
   C.   Table 4.5 establishes the minimum site dimension standards for
accessory structures for the MX-1, MX-2, B-1, B-2, I-1, I-2, and PI zoning
districts. Setbacks for any use not listed shall be the most restrictive of the
district.
   Table 4.5. Non-Residential Site Dimensions
District Minimum Setbacks (ft.) Maximum Building Height (ft.)
         Front Side Rear
District Minimum Setbacks (ft.)                  Maximum Building Height (ft.)
         Front Side Rear
MX-1     0     0    0                            18
MX-2     30    10   10                           25
B-1      30    10   10                           25
B-2      30    10   10                           18
I-1      75    50   50                           75
         Structures less than or equal to 35 ft.
I-2      in height: 75                           75
         Structures up to 50 ft. in height: 150
         Structures over 50 ft. in height: 300
PI       30    10   10                           25
 
(Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024; amd. Ord. B-317, 11-19-2024)
11-4-5: DISTRICT STANDARDS:
   A.   MX-1 Downtown Mixed Use District:
      1.   The outdoor overnight parking of trailers within city-approved
customer parking is prohibited. The term “trailer” shall include any vehicle
that is not self-propelled that requires another motorized vehicle to propel it
and requires its own license from the state department of motor vehicles.
   B.   MX-2 Highway Mixed Use District:
      1.   Residential uses shall be prohibited along street frontages within
five hundred (500) feet of the intersection of Highway 42 and any collector or
arterial road as designated in the Comprehensive Plan.
      2.   For each development site within the MX-2 District, no more than
twenty-five percent (25%) of the net buildable area shall be used solely for
residential uses. Net buildable area excludes wetlands, drainage and utility
easements, rights-of-way, and steep slopes.
         a.   Within each contiguous MX-2 District area, the total area allowed
for residential-only uses may be transferred between development sites with a
signed agreement between all involved property owners. No more than twenty-five
percent (25%) of each contiguous MX-2 District area is allowed to be
residential-only uses.
   C.   B-2 Employment And I-1 General Industrial Districts:
      1.   When a permitted, accessory, interim, or conditional use abuts any
of the items listed in the table below, the applicable increased minimum yard
setback shall apply:
Table 4.5. Increased Setbacks
 
Item                   Increased Minimum Setback
                       Parking and Circulation Structure
Principal arterial ROW 40 ft.                  75 ft.
Minor arterial Row     35 ft.                  60 ft.
Collector ROW          30 ft.                  40 ft.
Railroad               10 ft.                  30 ft.
Residential or         30 ft. or 2x building
institutional uses/    height                  30 ft. or 2x building height
districts
 
      2.   Minimum Building Size: Ten percent (10%) of the subject property,
excluding protective wetlands and bluff impact zones.
   D.   I-2 Heavy Industrial District:
      1.   The minimum district size for the I-2 District is twenty-five (25)
acres.
      2.   All principal and accessory uses allowed within the I-2 District,
except those with specific exemptions, shall comply with the development
standards outlined in this chapter for the I-1 General Industrial District. The
City Council may choose to waive some or all of these development standards for
nonexempt uses after review. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024; amd. Ord. B-317, 11-19-
2024)
CHAPTER 5
SPECIAL/OVERLAY DISTRICTS
SECTION:
11-5-1: Floodplain Overlay District
11-5-2: Shoreland Overlay District
11-5-3: Wetland Overlay District
11-5-4: Mississippi River Corridor Critical Area Overlay District
11-5-5: Planned Unit Development (PUD) District
11-5-1: FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT:
   A.   Statutory Authorization And Purpose:
      1.   Statutory Authorization: This floodplain ordinance is adopted
pursuant to the authorization and policies contained in Minnesota Statutes,
Chapter 103F; Minnesota Rules, parts 6120.5000 - 6120.6200; the rules and
regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) in 44 CFR § 59 to
80; and the planning and zoning enabling legislation in Minnesota Statutes,
Chapter 462.
      2.   Purpose:
         a.   This section regulates development in the flood hazard areas of
the City of Rosemount. These flood hazard areas are subject to periodic
inundation, which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare by minimizing these losses and disruptions.
         b.   This chapter is adopted in the public interest to promote sound
land use practices, and floodplains are a land resource to be developed in a
manner which will result in minimum loss of life and threat to health, and
reduction of private and public economic loss caused by flooding.
         c.   This chapter is adopted to maintain eligibility in the National
Flood Insurance Program.
         d.   This chapter is also intended to preserve the natural
characteristics and functions of watercourses and floodplains in order to
moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil
erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational
opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic
development.
      3.   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: It is not intended by this
chapter to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or
private agreements. The standards in this chapter take precedence over any less
restrictive, conflicting local laws, ordinances, or codes. All other ordinances
inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the
inconsistency only.
      4.   Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: This chapter does not imply
that areas outside the floodplain districts or land uses permitted within such
districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. Not all flood risk is
mapped. Larger floods do occur and the flood height may be increased by man-
made or natural causes, such as ice jams or bridge openings restricted by
debris. This chapter does not create liability on the part of the City of
Rosemount or its officers or employees for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
hereunder.
      5.   Severability: If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this
chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of law, the
remainder of this chapter shall not be affected and shall remain in full force.
      6.   Definitions: Unless specifically defined in section
11-10-6 Floodplain Definitions, words or phrases used in this chapter must be
interpreted according to common usage and so as to give this chapter its most
reasonable application.
   B.   Jurisdictions And Districts:
      1.   Lands To Which Chapter Applies: This chapter applies to all lands
under the jurisdiction of the City of Rosemount within the Floodplain, shown as
Zone AE on the Flood Insurance Rate Map panels referenced in subsection B.2
below.
         a.   The standards imposed in this overlay district are in addition to
any other requirements. In case of a conflict, the more restrictive standards
will apply.
         b.   Where a conflict exists between the floodplain limits illustrated
on the official floodplain maps and actual field conditions (as illustrated in
Figure 5.1), the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) shall be the governing factor in
locating the outer boundaries of the one-percent annual chance floodplain.
   Figure 5.1: The mapped floodplain may not always align with on-the-ground
contourelevations
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4b51a377144822298e340f2016f76ebbfa73789c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1675.jpg]
         c.    Perso ns conte sting the location of the district boun daries
will be given a reaso nable opportunity to present their case to the city and
to submit technical evidence.
      2.   Incorporation Of Maps By Reference: The following maps together with
all attached material are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part
of the official zoning map and this chapter. The attached material includes the
Flood Insurance Study(s) for Dakota County, Minnesota, and Incorporated Areas,
dated March 16, 2016, and the Flood Insurance Rate map panels enumerated below,
dated December 2, 2011, all prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency. These materials are on file at City Hall.
      27037C0119E
      27037C0138E
      27037C0208E
      27037C0209E
      27037C0228E
      27037C0229E
      27037C0233E
      27027C0253E
      3.   Annexations: The Flood Insurance Rate Map panels referenced in
subsection B.2 above may include floodplain areas that lie outside of the
corporate boundaries of the City of Rosemount at the time of adoption of this
chapter. If any of these floodplain land areas are annexed into the City of
Rosemount after the date of adoption of this chapter, the newly annexed
floodplain lands will be subject to the provisions of this chapter immediately
upon the date of annexation. Annexations into panels not referenced in
subsection B.2 require ordinance amendment in accordance with subsection G
below.
      4.   Municipal Boundary Adjustments And Townships: The Flood Insurance
Rate Map panels referenced in subsection B.2 apply countywide. If at any point
any lands come under the jurisdiction of another local government, the
following shall apply:
         a.   City adjustments of corporate boundaries, including but not
limited to annexations and detachments, shall shift floodplain administrative
authority of all affected lands immediately upon the date of the boundary
adjustment occurring. Cities retain jurisdiction for all incorporated lands,
and the County retains jurisdiction under this chapter on all unincorporated
lands, except as provided under subsection B.4.b below or through some form of
administrative agreement.
         b.   Townships wishing to adopt official controls under Minn. Stat. §
394.33 may only obtain zoning authority for floodplain controls when they have
adopted an ordinance that is approved by the Department of Natural Resources
and has formally enrolled in the NFIP. Until this occurs, the county shall
retain jurisdiction under this chapter on all unincorporated lands. In the
event that a township returns zoning authority, the county shall resume that
authority.
   C.   Permitted Activities And Standards In The Floodplain District:
      1.   Permitted Activities: A permit must be obtained from the Zoning
Administrator to verify compliance with all applicable standards outlined in
this chapter prior to the following uses or activities:
         a.   Any addition, modification, rehabilitation, repair, or alteration
to a nonconforming structure as specified in subsection D below. Normal
maintenance and repair also requires a permit if such work, separately or in
conjunction with other planned work, constitutes a substantial improvement as
defined in section
11-10-6 of this title.
         b.   Any use that requires fill, excavation, storage of materials, or
placement of anything that may cause a potential obstruction, as well as any
other form of development as defined in section
11-10-6 of this title.
      2.   Activities Not Requiring A Permit: Certain uses or activities may be
exempt from obtaining a permit, such as planting a garden, farming, or other
obviously insignificant activities such as putting up a mailbox or flagpole.
Farm fences, as defined in section
11-10-6 of this title, are not considered to be an obstruction, and as such, do
not require a permit. A local permit is not required if a public waters work
permit has been obtained from the Department of Natural Resources, unless a
significant area above the ordinary high water level is also to be disturbed.
The continuation of existing uses, when the associated activities do not
encroach further on the regulatory floodplain or trigger associated standards
in this title, do not require a permit.
      3.   Minimum Development Standards:
         a.   All development must:
         (1)   Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
         (2)   Be constructed with materials and equipment resistant to flood
damage;
         (3)   Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damage;
         (4)   Be reasonably safe from flooding and consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
         (5)   Be assured to provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to
flood hazards;
         (6)   Not be detrimental to uses in adjoining areas; and
         (7)   Not adversely affect the efficiency or restrict the flood
carrying capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any tributary
watercourse or drainage system.
         b.   Buildings And Structures: No new structures, such as buildings or
accessory structures may be permitted in the regulatory floodplain.
Modifications and alterations of nonconforming structures is subject to the
standards in subsection D below.
         c.   Subdivisions: All new lots must be able to accommodate for a
building site with a natural grade outside of the floodplain. All subdivisions
must have vehicular access both to the subdivision and to the individual
building sites no lower than two feet (2') below the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation (RFPE).
         d.   Encroachment Analysis: Development in the following areas
requires hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed by a professional
engineer, or using other standard engineering practices (e.g. projects that
restore the site to the previous cross-sectional area).
         (1)   In a floodway, development may not result in any of the
following during the one-percent (1%) annual chance flood: cause a stage
increase of 0.00 feet or greater, obstruct flood flows, or increase velocities.
         (2)   In areas where a floodway has not been delineated, development
may not allow stage increases more than one-half (0.5) foot at any point during
the one-percent (1%) chance flood. This evaluation must include the cumulative
effects of previous encroachments. A lesser water surface elevation increase
than one-half (0.5) foot is required if, due to the water surface level
increase, increased flood damages would potentially result.
         e.   Fences not meeting the definition of farm fences are not
permitted.
         f.   Transportation Facilities: Railroad tracks, roads, and bridges
must be elevated to the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation (RFPE) where such
facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area, or where
failure or interruption would result in danger to public health or safety.
Minor or auxiliary roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation
where failure or interruption of transportation services would not endanger the
public health or safety. All public transportation facilities should be
designed to minimize increases in flood elevations.
         g.   Public Utilities: All utilities such as gas, electrical, sewer,
and water supply systems to be located in the floodplain must be elevated and/
or floodproofed to the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation (RFPE), be located
and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage, and be designed to
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into flood waters. All public utilities should be designed to minimize
increases in flood elevations. New solid waste management facilities, as
defined in Minnesota Rules, part 7035.0300, are prohibited. Water supply
systems are subject to the provisions in Minnesota Rules, part 4725.4350.
         h.   Potential Pollutants: Materials that, in time of flooding, are
buoyant, flammable, explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal, or plant
life, as well as those likely to cause pollution of the waters, such as sewage;
sand; rock; wrecked and discarded equipment; dredged spoil; municipal,
agricultural or industrial waste; and other wastes as further defined in Minn.
Stat. § 115.01, are prohibited.
         i.   Land Alterations: In areas within twenty-five feet (25') of the
ordinary high water level, land alterations shall be restricted to:
         (1)   The minimum required to accommodate beach and access areas, not
to exceed a volume greater than ten (10) cubic yards; and
         (2)   The minimum required to accommodate for public utilities, roads,
railroad tracks, bridges, and shoreline stabilization projects to correct an
identified erosion problem, as verified by a qualified resource agency or the
zoning administrator.
         j.   Recreational vehicles must be travel ready, meeting the following
criteria:
         (1)   The vehicle must be fully licensed.
         (2)   The vehicle must be ready for highway use, meaning on wheels or
the internal jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities.
         (3)   No permanent structural type additions may be attached to the
vehicle.
         k.   Private On-site Water Supply, Individual Sewage Treatment
Systems, and other Service Facilities shall be subject to applicable provisions
detailed in subsection C.3.g above. Replacement of on-site sewage treatment
systems are to be constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from
them during times of flooding, shall not be located in a designated floodway,
and are subject to the provisions in Minnesota Rules, parts 7080.2270. No new
private service facilities may be permitted in the regulatory floodplain.
   D.   Nonconformities:
      1.   Continuance Of Nonconformities: A use, structure, or occupancy of
land which was lawful before the passage or amendment of this title, but which
is not in conformity with the provisions of this title, may be continued
subject to the following conditions:
         a.   Within the floodway, or where the floodway has not been
delineated, any expansion or enlargement of uses or structures is prohibited.
         b.   Any addition, modification, rehabilitation, repair, or alteration
shall be in conformance with the provisions of this title, shall not increase
the flood damage potential or increase the degree of obstruction to flood
flows, and where applicable, must be protected to the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation (RFPE).
         c.   If any nonconforming structure is determined to be substantially
damaged or substantially improved based on the procedures in subsection D.3
below, it may not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of
this section.
         d.   If any nonconforming use, or any use of a nonconforming
structure, is discontinued for more than one (1) year, any future use of the
premises must conform to this section.
      2.   Standards For Modifications And Alterations Of Nonconforming
Structures: In addition to the standards identified in C.3, the following
standards and procedures apply to additions, modifications, rehabilitations,
repairs, alterations, or maintenance of nonconforming structures:
         a.   All structures, including manufactured homes, must be elevated on
fill so that the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement)
is at or above the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation (RFPE). The finished
fill elevation shall be at or above the elevation associated with the base
flood plus any stage increases that result from designation of a floodway. Fill
must extend at the same elevation at least fifteen feet (15') beyond the
outside limits of the structure. Elevations must be certified by a registered
professional engineer, land surveyor or other qualified person designated by
the Zoning Administrator.
         b.   Electrical, heating, ventilation, ductwork, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities are designed and/or located
so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components
during conditions of flooding.
      3.   Substantial Improvement And Substantial Damage Determinations: Prior
to issuing any permits for additions, modifications, rehabilitations, repairs,
alterations, or maintenance to nonconforming structures, the Zoning
Administrator is required to determine if such work constitutes substantial
improvement or repair of a substantially damaged structure. A determination
must be made in accordance with the following procedures:
         a.   Estimate the market value of the structure. In the case of
repairs, the market value of the structure shall be the market value before the
damage occurred and before any restoration or repairs are made.
         b.   Estimate the cost of the project. The property owner shall
accommodate for inspection, and furnish other documentation needed by the
zoning administrator to evaluate costs.
         (1)   Improvement costs shall be comprised of the market rate of all
materials and labor, as well as the costs of all ordinary maintenance and
upkeep carried out over the past one (1) year.
         (2)   Costs to repair damages shall be comprised of the market rate of
all materials and labor required to restore a building to its pre-damaged
condition regardless of the work proposed, as well as associated improvement
costs if structure is being restored beyond its pre-damaged condition.
         c.   Compare the cost of the improvement, repairs, or combination
thereof to the estimated market value of the structure, and determine whether
the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of a
substantially damaged structure, as defined in section
11-10-6 of this title.
         d.   Based on this determination, the Zoning Administrator shall
prepare a determination letter and notify the property owner accordingly.
Structures determined to be substantially damaged or substantially improved may
not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this section.
   E.   Administration:
      1.   Duties: A Zoning Administrator or other official must administer and
enforce this section.
         a.   Permit Application Requirements: Permit applications must be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator. The permit application must include the
following, as applicable:
         (1)   A site plan showing all existing or proposed buildings,
structures, service facilities, potential obstructions, and pertinent design
features having an influence on the permit.
         (2)   Location and detail of grading, fill, or storage of materials.
         (3)   Copies of any required local, state or federal permits or
approvals.
         (4)   Other relevant information requested by the Zoning Administrator
as necessary to properly evaluate the permit application.
         b.   Recordkeeping: The Zoning Administrator must maintain applicable
records in perpetuity documenting:
         (1)   Encroachment analysis, as detailed in section C.3.d above.
         (2)   Final elevations, as applicable, detailing the elevation to
which structures and improvements to structures are constructed or
floodproofed. Elevations shall be determined by an engineer, architect,
surveyor or other qualified individual, as approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
         (3)   Substantial damage and substantial improvement determinations,
as detailed in section D.3, including the cost of improvements, repairs, and
market value.
         (4)   All variance actions, including justification for their
issuance, and must report such variances as requested by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
      2.   Variances:
         a.   An application for a variance to the provisions of this section
will be processed and reviewed in accordance with Minn. Stat. § 462.357, Subd.
6(2) and this title.
         b.   Variances must not be issued within any designated regulatory
floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
         c.   Variances from the provisions in this section may only be issued
by a community upon:
         (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
         d.   Variances from the provisions in this ordinance may only be
issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
         e.   Variances must be consistent with the general purpose of these
standards and the intent of applicable provisions in state and federal law.
         f.   Though variances may be used to modify permissible methods of
flood protection, no variance shall permit a lesser degree of flood protection
than the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation (RFPE).
         g.   The Zoning Administrator must notify the applicant for a variance
that:
         (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up
to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars
($100.00) of insurance coverage; and
         (2)   Such construction below the base or regional flood level
increases risks to life and property. Such notification must be maintained with
a record of all variance actions.
      3.   Notifications For Watercourse Alterations: Before authorizing any
alteration or relocation of a river or stream, the Zoning Administrator must
notify adjacent communities. If the applicant has applied for a permit to work
in public waters pursuant to Minn, Stat. § 103G.245, this will suffice as
adequate notice. A copy of the notification must also be submitted to FEMA.
      4.   Notification to FEMA When Physical Changes Increase Or Decrease Base
Flood Elevations: Where physical changes affecting flooding conditions may
increase or decrease the water surface elevation of the base flood, the City of
Rosemount must notify FEMA of the changes in order to obtain a Letter of Map
Revision (LOMR), by submitting a copy of the relevant technical or scientific
data as soon as practicable, but no later than six (6) months after the date
such supporting information becomes available. Within areas where the floodway
has not been delineated, a map revision is only required if development results
in stage increases greater than 0.5 feet.
      5.   Notifications To The Department Of Natural Resources:
         a.   All notices of public hearings to consider variances or
conditional uses under this section must be sent via electronic mail to the
Department of Natural Resources respective area hydrologist at least ten (10)
days before the hearings. Notices of hearings to consider subdivisions/plats
must include copies of the subdivision/plat.
         b.   A copy of all decisions granting variances and conditional uses
under this section must be sent via electronic mail to the Department of
Natural Resources respective area hydrologist within ten (10) days of final
action.
   F.   Penalties And Enforcement:
      1.   Uses In Violation Of The Section: Every structure, fill, deposit, or
other use placed or maintained in the floodplain in violation of this section
shall be considered a public nuisance.
      2.   Civil Remedies: The creation of a public nuisance may be enjoined
and the maintenance of a public nuisance under this section may be abated by an
action brought by the City of Rosemount or the Department of Natural Resources.
      3.   Enforcement: Violations of the provisions of this section
constitutes a misdemeanor and is punishable as defined by law. The Zoning
Administrator may utilize the full array of enforcement actions available to it
including but not limited to prosecution and fines, injunctions, after-the-fact
permits, orders for corrective measures or a request to the National Flood
Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance. The City of Rosemount must act
in good faith to enforce these official controls and to correct ordinance
violations to the extent possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in
the National Flood Insurance Program.
   G.   Amendments:
      1.   Ordinance Amendments: Any revisions to the floodplain maps by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency or annexations of new map panels require an
ordinance amendment to update the map references in subsection B.2 above.
      2.   Required Approval: All amendments to this section must be submitted
to the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) for review and approval prior to
adoption, for compliance with state and federal rules and requirements. The
floodplain ordinance shall not be considered valid until approved. (Ord. 2024-
04, 6-4-2024)
11-5-2: SHORELAND OVERLAY DISTRICT:
   A.   Statutory Authorization And Policy:
      1.   Statutory Authorization: This shoreland ordinance is adopted
pursuant to the authorization and policies contained in Minnesota Statutes,
Chapter 103F, Minnesota Rules, Parts 6120.2500 - 6120.3900, and the planning
and zoning enabling legislation in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 462.
      2.   Policy: The Legislature of Minnesota has delegated responsibility to
local governments of the state to regulate the subdivision, use and development
of the shorelands of public waters and thus preserve and enhance the quality of
surface waters, conserve the economic and natural environmental values of
shorelands, and provide for the wise use of waters and related land resources.
This responsibility is hereby recognized by the City of Rosemount.
   B.   General Provisions And Definitions:
      1.   Jurisdiction: The provisions of this section apply to the shorelands
of the public water bodies as classified in subsection D.1 below, and to the
shorelands of public water bodies greater than ten (10) acres in unincorporated
areas in which the city has, by ordinance, extended the application of its
zoning regulations as provided by Minnesota Statute, Chapter 462.357 Subd 1.
Pursuant to Minnesota Rules, Parts 6120.2500 - 6120.3900, no lake, pond, or
flowage less than ten (10) acres in size in municipalities or twenty-five (25)
acres in size in unincorporated areas need be regulated in a local government's
shoreland regulations. A body of water created by a private user where there
was no previous shoreland may, at the discretion of the governing body, be
exempt from this section.
      2.   Enforcement: The Zoning Administrator is responsible for the
administration and enforcement of this section. Any violation of the provisions
of this section or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including
violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants
of variances or conditional uses constitutes a misdemeanor and is punishable as
defined by law. Violations of this section can occur regardless of whether or
not a permit is required for a regulated activity listed in subsection C.2
below.
      3.   Severability: If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this
section is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this section shall not be affected thereby.
      4.   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: It is not intended by this
section to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or
deed restrictions. However, where this section imposes greater restrictions,
the provisions of this section shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent
with this osection are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
      5.   Definitions: Unless specifically defined in section
11-10-5 Shoreland Definitions, words or phrases used in this section shall be
interpreted to give them the same meaning they have in common usage and to give
this section its most reasonable application. For the purpose of this section,
the words "must" and "shall" are mandatory and not permissive. All distances,
unless otherwise specified, are measured horizontally.
   C.   Administration:
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to identify administrative
provisions to ensure the ordinance is administered consistent with its purpose.
      2.   Permits:
         a.   A permit is required for the construction of buildings or
building additions (including construction of decks and signs), the
installation and/or alteration of sewage treatment systems, and those grading
and filling activities not exempted by subsection H.3 below.
         b.   A certificate of compliance, consistent with Minnesota Rules
Chapter 7082.0700 Subp. 3, is required whenever a permit or variance of any
type is required for any improvement on or use of the property. A sewage
treatment system shall be considered compliant if the only deficiency is the
system's improper setback from the ordinary high water level.
      3.   Application Materials: Application for permits and other zoning
applications such as variances shall be made to the Zoning Administrator on the
forms provided. The application shall include the necessary information so that
the Zoning Administrator can evaluate how the application complies with the
provisions of this section.
      4.   Certificate Of Zoning Compliance: The Zoning Administrator shall
issue a certificate of zoning compliance for each activity requiring a permit
as specified in subsection C.2 above. This certificate will specify that the
use of land conforms to the requirements of this section. Any use, arrangement,
or construction at variance with that authorized by permit shall be deemed a
violation of this section and shall be punishable as provided in subsection
B.2.
      5.   Variances: Variances may only be granted in accordance with §
462.357 and are subject to the following:
         a.   A variance may not circumvent the general purposes and intent of
this section; and
         b.   For properties with existing sewage treatment systems, a
certificate of compliance, consistent with Minnesota Rules Chapter 7082.0700
Subp. 3, is required for variance approval. A sewage treatment system shall be
considered compliant if the only deficiency is the system's improper setback
from the ordinary high water level.
      6.   Conditional Uses: All conditional uses in the shoreland area are
subject to a thorough evaluation of the waterbody and the topographic,
vegetation, and soil conditions to ensure:
         a.   The prevention of soil erosion or other possible pollution of
public waters, both during and after construction;
         b.   The visibility of structures and other facilities as viewed from
public waters is limited;
         c.   There is adequate water supply and on-site sewage treatment; and
         d.   The types, uses, and numbers of watercraft that the project will
generate are compatible in relation to the suitability of public waters to
safely accommodate these watercrafts.
      7.   Mitigation:
         a.   In evaluating all variances, conditional uses, zoning and
building permit applications, the zoning authority shall require the property
owner to address the following conditions, when related to and proportional to
the impact, to meet the purpose of this section, to protect adjacent
properties, and the public interest:
         (1)   Advanced storm water runoff management treatment;
         (2)   Reducing impervious surfaces;
         (3)   Increasing setbacks from the ordinary high water level;
         (4)   Restoration of wetlands;
         (5)   Limiting vegetation removal and/or riparian vegetation
restoration;
         (6)   Provisions for the location, design, and use of structures,
sewage treatment systems, water supply systems, watercraft launching and
docking areas, and parking areas; and
         (7)   Other conditions the zoning authority deems necessary.
         b.   In evaluating plans to construct sewage treatment systems, roads,
driveways, structures, or other improvements on steep slopes, conditions to
prevent erosion and to preserve existing vegetation screening of structures,
vehicles, and other facilities as viewed from the surface of public waters
assuming summer, leaf-on vegetation shall be attached to permits.
      8.   Nonconformities:
         a.   All legally established nonconformities as of the date of this
section may continue, but will be managed according to § 462.357 Subd. 1e and
other regulations of this community for alterations and additions; repair after
damage; discontinuance of use; and intensification of use.
         b.   All additions or expansions to the outside dimensions of an
existing nonconforming structure must meet the setback, height, lowest floor
elevations, and other requirements of subsections E to H. Any deviation from
these requirements must be authorized by a variance.
      9.   Notifications To The Department Of Natural Resources:
         a.   All amendments to this shoreland section must be submitted to the
Department of Natural Resources for review and approval for compliance with the
statewide shoreland management rules.
         b.   All notices of public hearings to consider variances, ordinance
amendments, or conditional uses under shoreland management controls must be
sent to the commissioner or the commissioner's designated representative at
least ten (10) days before the hearings. Notices of hearings to consider
proposed subdivisions/plats must include copies of the subdivision/plat.
         c.   All approved ordinance amendments and subdivisions/plats, and
final decisions approving variances or conditional uses under local shoreland
management controls must be sent to the commissioner or the commissioner's
designated representative and postmarked within ten (10) days of final action.
When a variance is approved after the Department of Natural Resources has
formally recommended denial in the hearing record, the notification of the
approved variance shall also include the summary of the public record/testimony
and the findings of facts and conclusions which supported the issuance of the
variance.
         d.   Any request to change the shoreland management classification of
public waters within the City of Rosemount must be sent to the commissioner or
the commissioner's designated representative for approval, and must include a
resolution and supporting data as required by Minnesota Rules, part 6120.3000,
subp.4.
         e.   Any request to reduce the boundaries of shorelands of public
waters within the City of Rosemount must be sent to the commissioner or the
commissioner's designated representative for approval and must include a
resolution and supporting data. The boundaries of shorelands may be reduced
when the shoreland of water bodies with different classifications overlap. In
these cases, the topographic divide between the water bodies shall be used for
adjusting the boundaries.
      10.   Mandatory EAW: An Environmental Assessment Worksheet consistent
with Minnesota Rules, Chapter 4410 must be prepared for projects meeting the
thresholds of Minnesota Rules, part 4410.4300, Subparts 19a, 20a, 25, 27, 28,
29, and 36a.
   D.   Shoreland Classification System And Land Uses:
      1.   Shoreland Classification System:
         a.   Purpose: To ensure that shoreland development on the public
waters of Rosemount is regulated consistent with the classifications assigned
by the commissioner under Minnesota Rules, part 6120.3300.
         b.   Lakes are classified as follows:
         (1)   General development (GD);
 
General Development Lake Name DNR Public Waters I.D. #
No lakes currently classified as GD within the city
 
      (2)   Recreational development (GD);
 
Recreational Development Lake Name DNR Public Waters I.D. #
Keegan Lake                        19001100
 
      (3)   Natural environment (NE).
 
Natural Environment Lake Name DNR Public Waters I.D. #
Unnamed                       19000800
Unnamed                       19001200
Unnamed                       19018200
Unnamed                       19018500
Unnamed                       19031100
Unnamed                       19032000
 
      c.   Rivers and streams are classified as follows:
      (1)   Transition:
 
Transition River Name Legal Description
Mississippi River      
 
      d.   All public rivers and streams shown on the Public Waters Inventory
Map for Dakota County, a copy of which is adopted by reference, not given a
classification in subsection D.1.c above shall be considered "Tributary."
   2.   Land Uses:
      a.   Purpose: To identify land uses that are compatible with the
protection and preservation of shoreline resources in order to conserve the
economic and environmental values of shoreland and sustain water quality.
      b.   Shoreland district land uses listed in subsections D.2.c and D.2.d
are regulated as:
      (1)   Permitted Uses (P): These uses are allowed, provided all standards
in this section are followed;
      (2)   Conditional Uses (C): These uses are allowed through a conditional
use permit. The use must be evaluated according to the criteria in subsection
C.6 above and any additional conditions listed in this section; and
      (3)   Not Permitted Uses (N): These uses are prohibited.
      c.   Land uses for lake classifications:
Land Uses General Development Recreational Development Natural Environment
Land Uses               General Development Recreational Natural Environment
                                            Development
Single residential      P                   P            P
Duplex, triplex, quad   P                   P            C
residential
Residential PUD         C                   C            C
Water-dependent
(resorts are also       C                   C            C
Commercial PUDs)
Commercial              P                   P            C
Commercial PUD
(Expansion of PUD
involving up to six (6)
additional units or
sites allowed as a      C                   C            C
permitted use provided
the provisions of
subsection J are
satisfied.)
Solar power facilities  C                   C            C
(principal land use)
Parks & historic sites  C                   C            C
Public, semipublic      P                   P            C
Industrial              C                   C            N
Agricultural: cropland  P                   P            P
and pasture
Agricultural feedlots:  N                   N            N
New
Agricultural feedlots:
expansion or resumption C                   C            C
of existing
Forest management       P                   P            P
Forest land conversion  C                   C            C
Extractive use          C                   C            C
Mining of metallic      P                   P            P
minerals and peat
 
         d.   Land uses for river and stream classifications:
Land Uses Remote Forested Transition Agriculture Urban Tributary
Land Uses                Remote Forested Transition Agriculture Urban Tributary
Single residential       P      P        P          P           P     P
Duplex, triplex, quad    C      P        P          P           P     P
residential
Residential PUD          C      C        C          C           C     C
Water- dependent
commercial- Accessory to C      C        C          C           C     C
residential PUD
Commercial               C      C        C          C           P     P
Commercial PUD -
expansion of PUD
involving up to six (6)
additional units or
sites allowed as a       C      C        C          C           C     C
permitted use provided
the provisions of
subsection J are
satisfied
Solar power facilities   C      C        C          C           C     C
(principal land use)
Parks & historic sites   C      C        C          C           C     C
Public, semipublic       C      C        C          C           P     P
Industrial               N      C        N          N           C     C
Agricultural: cropland   P      P        P          P           P     P
and pasture
Agricultural feedlots:   N      N        N          N           N     N
New
Agricultural feedlots:
Expansion or resumption  C      C        C          C           C     C
of existing
Forest management        P      P        P          P           P     P
Forest land conversion   C      C        C          C           C     C
Extractive use           C      C        C          C           C     C
Mining of metallic       P      P        P          P           P     P
minerals and peat
 
   E.   Special Land Use Provisions:
      1.   Commercial, Industrial, Public, And Semipublic Use Standards:
         a.   Water-dependent uses may be located on parcels or lots with
frontage on public waters provided that:
         (1)   The use complies with provisions of subsection G;
         (2)   The use is designed to incorporate topographic and vegetative
screening of parking areas and structures;
         (3)   Uses that require short-term watercraft mooring for patrons must
centralize these facilities and design them to avoid obstructions of navigation
and to be the minimum size necessary to meet the need; and
         (4)   Uses that depend on patrons arriving by watercraft may use signs
and lighting, provided that:
            (a)   Signs placed in or on public waters must only convey
directional information or safety messages and may only be placed by a public
authority or under a permit issued by the county sheriff; and
            (b)   Signs placed within the shore impact zone are:
               (i)   No higher than ten feet (10') above the ground, and no
greater than thirty two (32) square feet in size; and
               (ii)   If illuminated by artificial lights, the lights must be
shielded or directed to prevent illumination across public waters; and
            (c)   Other lighting may be located within the shore impact zone or
over public waters if it is used to illuminate potential safety hazards and is
shielded or otherwise directed to prevent direct illumination across public
waters. This does not preclude use of navigational lights.
         b.   Commercial, industrial, public, and semi-public uses that are not
water-dependent must be located on lots or parcels without public waters
frontage, or, if located on lots or parcels with public waters frontage, must
either be set back double the ordinary high water level setback or be
substantially screened from view from the water by vegetation or topography,
assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
      2.   Agriculture Use Standards:
         a.   Buffers:
         (1)   The shore impact zone for parcels with permitted agricultural
land uses is equal to a line parallel to and fifty feet (50') from the ordinary
high water level.
         (2)   General cultivation farming, grazing, nurseries, horticulture,
truck farming, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting are permitted uses if
steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones are maintained in perennial
vegetation or operated under an approved conservation plan with the field
office technical guides of the local soil and water conservation district or
the Natural Resource Conservation Service, and as approved by the local soil
and water conservation district.
         b.   New animal feedlots are not allowed in shoreland. Modifications
or expansions to existing feedlots or resumption of old feedlots are
conditional uses and must meet the following standards:
         (1)   Feedlots must be designed consistent with Minnesota Rules,
Chapter 7020;
         (2)   Feedlots must not further encroach into the existing ordinary
high water level setback or the bluff impact zone and must not expand to a
capacity of one thousand (1,000) animal units or more; and
         (3)   Old feedlots not currently in operation may resume operation
consistent with Minn. Stat. § 116.0711.
      3.   Forest Management Standards:
         a.   The harvesting of timber and associated reforestation must be
conducted consistent with the applicable provisions of the Sustaining Minnesota
Forest Resources: Voluntary Site-Level Forest Management Guidelines for
Landowners, Loggers and Resource Managers.
         b.   Intensive vegetation clearing for forest land conversion to
another use is a conditional use subject to an erosion control and
sedimentation plan developed and approved by the soil and water conservation
district.
      4.   Extractive Use Standards: Extractive uses are conditional uses and
must meet the following standards:
         a.   Site Development And Restoration Plan: A site development and
restoration plan must be developed, approved, and followed over the course of
operation. The plan must:
         (1)   Address dust, noise, possible pollutant discharges, hours and
duration of operation, and anticipated vegetation and topographic alterations;
         (2)   Identify actions to be taken during operation to mitigate
adverse environmental impacts, particularly erosion; and
         (3)   Clearly explain how the site will be rehabilitated after
extractive activities end.
         b.   Setbacks For Processing Machinery: Processing machinery must meet
structure setback standards from ordinary high water levels and from bluffs.
      5.   Metallic And Peat Mining Standards: Mining of metallic minerals and
peat is a permitted use provided the provisions of Minn. Stat. §§ 93.44 to
93.51, are satisfied.
   F.   Dimensional And General Performance Standards:
      1.   Purpose: To establish dimensional and performance standards that
protect shoreland resources from impacts of development.
      2.   Lot Area And Width Standards: After the effective date of this
section, all new lots must meet the minimum lot area and lot width requirements
in subsections F.2.e and F.2.f, subject to the following standards:
         a.   Only lands above the ordinary high water level can be used to
meet lot area and width standards;
         b.   Lot width standards must be met at both the ordinary high water
level and at the building line;
         c.   The sewer lot area dimensions can only be used if publicly owned
sewer system service is available to the property;
         d.   Residential subdivisions with dwelling unit densities exceeding
those subsections F.2.e and F.2.f are allowed only if designed and approved as
residential PUDs under subsection J of this section; and
         e.   Lake Minimum Lot Area And Width Standards:
         (1)   General Development Lake - No Sewer:
 
Lot Type Riparian Lot Area  Riparian Lot Width  Nonriparian Lot Nonriparian Lot
         (sf)               (ft)                Area (sf)       Width (ft)
Single   20,000             100                 40,000          150
Duplex   40,000             180                 80,000          265
Triplex  60,000             260                 120,000         375
Quad     80,000             340                 160,000         490
 
         (2)   General Development Lake - Sewer:
 
Lot Type Riparian Lot Area  Riparian Lot Width  Nonriparian Lot Nonriparian Lot
         (sf)               (ft)                Area (sf)       Width (ft)
Single   15,000             75                  10,000          75
Duplex   26,000             135                 17,500          135
Triplex  38,000             255                 25,000          190
Quad     49,000             255                 32,500          245
 
         (3)   Recreational Development Lake - No Sewer:
 
Lot Type Riparian Lot Area  Riparian Lot Width  Nonriparian Lot Nonriparian Lot
         (sf)               (ft)                Area (sf)       Width (ft)
Single   40,000             150                 40,000          150
Duplex   80,000             225                 80,000          265
Triplex  120,000            300                 120,000         375
Quad     160,000            375                 160,000         490
 
         (4)   Recreational Development Lake - Sewer:
 
Lot Type Riparian Lot Area  Riparian Lot Width  Nonriparian Lot Nonriparian Lot
         (sf)               (ft)                Area (sf)       Width (ft)
Single   20,000             75                  15,000          75
Duplex   35,000             135                 26,000          135
Triplex  50,000             195                 38,000          190
Quad     65,000             255                 49,000          245
 
         (5)   Natural Environment Lake - No Sewer:
 
Lot Type Riparian Lot Area  Riparian Lot Width  Nonriparian Lot Nonriparian Lot
         (sf)               (ft)                Area (sf)       Width (ft)
Single   80,000             200                 80,000          200
Duplex   120,000            300                 160,000         400
Triplex  160,000            400                 240,000         600
Quad     200,000            500                 320,000         800
 
         (6)   Natural Environment Lake - Sewer:
 
Lot Type Riparian Lot Area  Riparian Lot Width  Nonriparian Lot Nonriparian Lot
         (sf)               (ft)                Area (sf)       Width (ft)
Single   40,000             125                 20,000          125
Duplex   70,000             225                 35,000          220
Triplex  100,000            325                 52,000          315
Quad     130,000            425                 65,000          410
 
         f.   River/Stream Minimum Lot Width Standards: There are no minimum
lot area requirements for rivers and streams. The lot width standards in feet
are:
 
                                                 Urban &      Urban & Tributary
Lot Type Remo te Forested Transition Agriculture Tributary No Sewer
                                                 Sewer
Single   300     200      250        150         100          75
Duple x  450     300      375        225         150          115
Triple x 600     400      500        300         200          150
Quad     750     500      625        375         250          190
 
      3.   Special Residential Lot Provisions:
         a.   Subdivisions of duplexes, triplexes, and quads are conditional
uses on Natural Environment Lakes and must also meet the following standards:
         (1)   Each building must be set back at least two hundred (200) feet
from the ordinary high water level;
         (2)   Each building must have common sewage treatment and water
systems in one location and serve all dwelling units in the building;
         (3)   Watercraft docking facilities for each lot must be centralized
in one location and serve all dwelling units in the building; and
         (4)   No more than twenty-five percent (25%) of a lake's shoreline can
be in duplex, triplex, or quad developments.
         b.   One guest cottage may be allowed on lots meeting or exceeding the
duplex lot area and width dimensions presented in. Subsections F.2.e and F.2.f,
provided the following standards are met:
         (1)   For lots exceeding the minimum lot dimensions of duplex lots,
the guest cottage must be located within an area equal to the smallest duplex-
sized lot that could be created including the principal dwelling unit;
         (2)   A guest cottage must not cover more than seven hundred (700)
square feet of land surface and must not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height;
and
         (3)   A guest cottage must be located or designed to reduce its
visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation,
topography, increased setbacks or color, assuming summer leaf-on conditions.
         c.   Controlled access lots are permissible if created as part of a
subdivision and in compliance with the following standards:
         (1)   The lot must meet the area and width requirements for
residential lots, and be suitable for the intended uses of controlled access
lots as provided in item D;
         (2)   If docking, mooring, or over-water storage of more than six (6)
watercraft is to be allowed at a controlled access lot, then the width of the
lot (keeping the same lot depth) must be increased by a percentage of the
requirements for riparian residential lots for each watercraft beyond six, (6)
consistent with the following table:
 
Ratio of lake size to shore length  Required percent increase in frontage
(acres/mile)
Less than 100                       25%
100 - 200                           20%
201 - 300                           15%
301 - 400                           10%
Greater than 400                    5%
 
         (3)   The lot must be jointly owned by all purchasers of lots in the
subdivision or by all purchasers of nonriparian lots in the subdivision who are
provided riparian access rights on the access lot; and
         (4)   Covenants or other equally effective legal instruments must be
developed that:
            (a)   Specify which lot owners have authority to use the access
lot;
            (b)   Identify what activities are allowed. The activities may
include watercraft launching, loading, storage, beaching, mooring, docking,
swimming, sunbathing, or picnicking;
            (c)   Limit the total number of vehicles allowed to be parked and
the total number of watercraft allowed to be continuously moored, docked, or
stored over water;
            (d)   Require centralization of all common facilities and
activities in the most suitable locations on the lot to minimize topographic
and vegetation alterations; and
            (e)   Require all parking areas, storage buildings, and other
facilities to be screened by vegetation or topography as much as practical from
view from the public water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
      4.   Placement, Height, And Design Of Structures:
         a.   OHWL Setback For Structures And Sewage Treatment Systems: When
more than one setback applies to a site, structures and facilities must be
located to meet all setbacks, and comply with the following OHWL setback
provisions:
 
Waterbody             Structures with No Structures with Sewer Sewage Treatment
Classification        Sewer                                    Systems
Natural Environment   150                150                   150
Lakes
Recreational          100                75                    75
Development Lakes
General Development   75                 50                    50
Lakes
Remote Rivers         200                200                   150
Forested and          150                150                   100
Transition Rivers
Agriculture, Urban, & 100                50                    75
Tributary Rivers
 
         (1)   OHWL Setbacks: Structures and sewage treatment systems must meet
setbacks from the Ordinary High Water Level (OHWL), except that one water-
oriented accessory structure or facility, designed in accordance with
subsection G.3 below, may be set back a minimum distance of ten feet (10') from
the OHWL:
         (2)   Setback Averaging: Where structures exist on the adjoining lots
on both sides of a proposed building site, structure setbacks may be altered
without a variance to conform to the adjoining setbacks from the OHWL, provided
the proposed structure is not located in a shore impact zone or in a bluff
impact zone (see Figure 7);
 
Figure 5.2. Structure Setback Averaging
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4b51a377144822298e340f2016f76ebbfa73789c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1677.jpg]
         (3)    Setbacks Of Decks: Deck additions may be allowed without a
variance to a structure not meeting the required setback from the ordinary high
water level if all of the following criteria are met:
            (a)   The structure existed on the date the structure setbacks were
established;
            (b)   A thorough evaluation of the property and structure reveals
no reasonable location for a deck meeting or exceeding the existing ordinary
high water level setback of the structure;
            (c)   The deck encroachment toward the ordinary high water level
does not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the existing setback of the structure
from the ordinary high water level or is no closer than thirty feet (30') from
the OHWL, whichever is more restrictive; and
            (d)   The deck is constructed primarily of wood, and is not roofed
or screened (see Figure 8).
   Figure 5.3. Deck Encroach ment
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4b51a377144822298e340f2016f76ebbfa73789c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1679.jpg]
         (4 )   Add itional Structure Setbacks: Structures must also meet the
following setbacks, regardless of the waterbod y classificat ion:
 
Setback from:                                                     Setback (Ft)
Top of bluff                                                      30
Unplatted cemetery                                                50
Right-of-way line of federal, state, or county highway            50
Right-of-way line of town road, public street, or other roads not 20
classified
 
         (5)   Bluff Impact Zones: Structures and accessory facilities, except
stairways and landings, must not be placed within bluff impact zones.
         b.   Height Of Structures: All structures in residential districts in
cities, except churches and nonresidential agricultural structures, must not
exceed twenty-five feet (25') in height.
         c.   Lowest Floor Elevation:
         (1)   Determining Elevations: Structures must be placed at an
elevation consistent with the applicable floodplain regulatory elevations.
Where these elevations are not known, the lowest floor, including basement,
must be placed or flood-proofed at an elevation determined using the following
methodology:
            (a)   For lakes, by placing the lowest floor at a level at least
three feet (3') above the highest known water level, or three feet (3') above
the ordinary high water level, whichever is higher (see Figure 9);
            (b)   For rivers and streams, by placing the lowest floor at least
three feet (3') above the highest known flood elevation. If highest known flood
elevation is not available, by placing the lowest floor at least three feet
(3') above the ordinary high water level (see Figure 9), or by conducting a
technical evaluation to establish a flood protection elevation. Technical
evaluations must be done by a qualified engineer or hydrologist consistent with
Minnesota Rules, parts 6120.5000 to 6120.6200.
         (2)   Methods For Placement:
            (a)   In addition to the lowest floor, all service utilities must
be elevated or water- tight to the elevation determined in part A.
            (b)   If the structure is floodproofed, then it must be built to
resist hydrostatic pressure through elevation methods such as blocks, pilings,
filled stem walls, elevated concrete pad, internally flooded enclosed areas, or
through other accepted engineering practices consistent with FEMA technical
bulletins 1, 2 and 3.
   Figure 5.4 Lowest Floor Elevation
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4b51a377144822298e340f2016f76ebbfa73789c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1681.jpg]
         d.   Significant Historic Sites: No structure may be placed on a
significant historic site in a manner that affects the values of the site
unless adequate information about the site has been removed and documented in a
public repository.
      5.   Water Supply And Sewage Treatment:
         a.   Water Supply: Any public or private supply of water for domestic
purposes must meet or exceed standards for water quality of the Minnesota
Department of Health and the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
         b.   Sewage Treatment: Any premises used for human occupancy must be
connected to a publicly-owned sewer system, where available or comply with
Minnesota Rules, Chapters 7080 - 7081.
   G.   Performance Standards For Public And Private Facilities:
      1.   Placement And Design Of Roads, Driveways, And Parking Areas: These
facilities must be designed to take advantage of natural vegetation and
topography to achieve maximum screening as viewed from public waters. They must
be constructed to minimize and control erosion to public waters consistent with
the field office technical guides of the local SWCD and comply with the
following standards:
         a.   Roads, driveways, and parking areas must meet structure setbacks
and must not be placed within bluff and shore impact zones, when other
reasonable and feasible placement alternatives exist. If no alternatives exist,
they may be placed within these areas, and must be designed to minimize adverse
impacts;
         b.   Watercraft access ramps, approach roads, and access-related
parking areas may be placed within shore impact zones provided the vegetative
screening and erosion control conditions of this subpart are met; and
         c.   For public roads, driveways and parking areas, documentation must
be provided by a qualified individual that they are designed and constructed to
minimize and control erosion to public waters consistent with the field office
technical guides of the local soil and water conservation district, or other
applicable technical materials.
      2.   Stairways, Lifts, And Landings: Stairways and lifts are the
preferred alternative to major topographic alterations for achieving access up
and down bluffs and steep slopes to shore areas. Stairways, lifts, and landings
must meet the following design requirements:
         a.   Stairways and lifts must not exceed four feet (4') in width on
residential lots. Wider stairways may be used for commercial properties, public
recreational uses, and planned unit developments;
         b.   Landings for stairways and lifts on residential lots must not
exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area. Landings larger than thirty-two
(32) square feet may be used for commercial properties, public-space
recreational uses, and planned unit developments;
         c.   Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, lifts, or
landings;
         d.   Stairways, lifts, and landings may be either constructed above
the ground on posts or pilings, or placed into the ground, provided they are
designed and built in a manner that ensures control of soil erosion;
         e.   Stairways, lifts, and landings must be located in the most
visually inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from the surface of the
public water assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever practical; and
         f.   Facilities such as ramps, lifts, or mobility paths for physically
handicapped persons are also allowed for achieving access to shore areas, if
they are consistent with the dimensional and performance standards of sub items
G.2.a to G.2.e and the requirements of Minnesota Rules, Chapter 1341.
      3.   Water-oriented Accessory Structures Or Facilities: Each residential
lot may have one water-oriented accessory structure or facility if it complies
with the following provisions:
         a.   The structure or facility must not exceed ten feet (10') in
height, exclusive of safety rails, and cannot occupy an area greater than two
hundred fifty (250) square feet. The structure or facility may include detached
decks not exceeding eight feet (8') above grade at any point;
         b.   The structure or facility is not in the Bluff Impact Zone;
         c.   The setback of the structure or facility from the ordinary high
water level must be at least ten feet (10');
         d.   The structure is not a boathouse or boat storage structure as
defined under Minn. Stat. § 103G.245;
         e.   The structure or facility must be treated to reduce visibility as
viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography,
increased setbacks or color, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions;
         f.   The roof may be used as an open-air deck with safety rails, but
must not be enclosed or used as a storage area;
         g.   The structure or facility must not be designed or used for human
habitation and must not contain water supply or sewage treatment facilities;
         h.   As an alternative for general development and recreational
development waterbodies, water-oriented accessory structures used solely for
storage of watercraft and boating-related equipment may occupy an area up to
four hundred (400) square feet provided the maximum width of the structure is
twenty feet (20') as measured parallel to the shoreline; and
         (1)   Water-oriented accessory structures may have the lowest floor
placed lower than the elevation specified in subsection F.4.c if the structure
is designed to accommodate internal flooding, constructed of flood-resistant
materials to the elevation, electrical and mechanical equipment is placed above
the elevation and, if long duration flooding is anticipated, the structure is
built to withstand ice action and wind-driven waves and debris.
      4.   Fences: Fences between principal structures and the waterbody are
allowed if fences are:
         a.   Not higher than six feet (6').
         b.   Not located within the SIZ and BIZ, except for farm fences.
         c.   Not located in the regulatory floodplain, except for farm fences.
      5.   Lighting: Within the OHWL setback:
         a.   Lighting shall be fully shielded and directed away from the
water.
         b.   Uplighting viewable from the water is prohibited.
   H.   Vegetation And Land Alterations:
      1.   Purpose: Alterations of vegetation and topography are regulated to
prevent erosion into public waters, fix nutrients, preserve shoreland
aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent bank slumping, sustain water
quality, and protect fish and wildlife habitat.
      2.   Vegetation Management:
         a.   Removal or alteration of vegetation must comply with the
provisions of this subsection except for:
         (1)   Vegetation alteration necessary for the construction of
structures and sewage treatment systems under validly issued permits for these
facilities;
         (2)   The construction of public roads and parking areas if consistent
with subsection G.1 above;
         (3)   Forest management uses consistent with subsection E.3 above; and
         b.   Agricultural uses consistent with subsection E.2 above.
         c.   Intensive vegetation clearing in the shore and bluff impact zones
and on steep slopes is prohibited. Intensive clearing outside of these areas is
allowed if consistent with the forest management standards in subsection E.3
above.
         d.   Limited clearing and trimming of trees and shrubs in the shore
and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes, is allowed to provide a view to the
water from the principal dwelling and to accommodate the placement of stairways
and landings, picnic areas, access paths, livestock watering areas, beach and
watercraft access areas, and permitted water-oriented accessory structures or
facilities, provided that:
         (1)   Vegetation be maintained to screen structures, vehicles, or
other facilities as viewed from the water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions;
and
         (2)   Existing shading of water surfaces along rivers is preserved.
         e.   Removal of trees, limbs, or branches that are dead, diseased,
dying, or pose safety hazards is allowed without a permit.
         f.   Fertilizer and pesticide runoff into surface waters must be
minimized through use of vegetation, topography or both.
      3.   Grading And Filling:
         a.   Grading and filling activities must comply with the provisions of
this subsection except for the construction of public roads and parking areas
if consistent with subsection G.1 above.
         b.   Permit Requirements:
         (1)   Grading, filling and excavations necessary for the construction
of structures and sewage treatment systems if part of an approved permit, do
not require a separate grading and filling permit. However, the standards in
subsection H.3.c below must be incorporated into the permit.
         (2)   For all other work, a grading and filling permit is required
for:
         (3)   The movement of more than ten (10) cubic yards of material on
steep slopes or within shore or bluff impact zones; and
         (4)   The movement of more than fifty (50) cubic yards of material
outside of steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones.
         (5)   Placement of natural rock rip rap, including associated grading
of the shoreline and placement of a filter blanket is permitted if:
         (6)   The finished slope does not exceed three feet horizontal to one-
foot vertical;
         (7)   The landward extent of the riprap is within ten feet (10') of
the ordinary high water level; and
         (8)   The height of the riprap above the ordinary high water level
does not exceed three feet (3') (see Figure 10).
   Figure 5.5. Riprap Guidelines
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4b51a377144822298e340f2016f76ebbfa73789c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1683.jpg]
         c.   Grading, filling and excavation activities must meet the
following standards:
         (1)   Grading or filling of any wetland must meet or exceed the
wetland protection standards under Minnesota Rules, Chapter 8420 and any other
permits, reviews, or approvals by other local state, or federal agencies such
as watershed districts, the DNR or US Army Corps of Engineers;
         (2)   Land alterations must be designed and implemented to minimize
the amount of erosion and sediment from entering surface waters during and
after construction consistently by:
            (a)   Limiting the amount and time of bare ground exposure;
            (b)   Using temporary ground covers such as mulches or similar
materials;
            (c)   Establishing permanent vegetation cover as soon as possible;
            (d)   Using sediment traps, vegetated buffer strips or other
appropriate techniques;
            (e)   Stabilizing altered areas to acceptable erosion control
standards consistent with the field office technical guides of the soil and
water conservation district;
            (f)   Not placing fill or excavated material in a manner that
creates unstable slopes. Plans to place fill or excavated material on steep
slopes must be reviewed by qualified professionals for continued slope
stability and must not create finished slopes of thirty percent (30%) or
greater;
            (g)   Fill or excavated material must not be placed in bluff impact
zones;
            (h)   Any alterations below the ordinary high water level of public
waters must first be authorized by the commissioner under Minn. Stat. § 103G;
and
            (i)   Alterations of topography are only allowed if they are
accessory to permitted or conditional uses and do not adversely affect adjacent
or nearby properties.
         d.   Connections to public waters. Excavations to connect boat slips,
canals, lagoons, and harbors to public waters require a public waters permit
and must comply with Minnesota Rules, Chapter 6115.
      4.   Stormwater Management:
         a.   General Standards:
         (1)   When possible, existing natural drainageways, and vegetated soil
surfaces must be used to convey, store, filter, and retain stormwater runoff
before discharge to public waters.
         (2)   Development must be planned and conducted in a manner that will
minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities, erosion potential,
and reduce and delay runoff volumes. Disturbed areas must be stabilized as soon
as possible and appropriate facilities or methods used to retain sediment on
the site.
         (3)   When development density, topography, soils, and vegetation are
not sufficient to adequately handle stormwater runoff, constructed facilities
such as settling basins, skimming devices, dikes, waterways, ponds and
infiltration may be used. Preference must be given to surface drainage,
vegetation, and infiltration rather than buried pipes and man-made materials
and facilities.
         b.   Specific Standards:
         (1)   Impervious surfaces of lots must not exceed twenty-five percent
(25%) of the lot area.
         (2)   When constructed facilities are used for stormwater management,
documentation must be provided by a qualified individual that they are designed
and installed consistent with the field office technical guide of the local
soil and water conservation district or the Minnesota Stormwater Manual, as
applicable.
         (3)   New constructed stormwater outfalls to public waters must be
consistent with Minnesota Rules, part 6115.0231.
   I.   Subdivision/Platting Provisions:
      1.   Purpose: To ensure that new development minimizes impacts to
shoreland resources and is safe and functional.
      2.   Land Suitability: Each lot created through subdivision, including
planned unit developments authorized under subsection J below, must be suitable
in its natural state for the proposed use with minimal alteration. A
suitability analysis must be conducted for each proposed subdivision, including
planned unit developments, to determine if the subdivision is suitable in its
natural state for the proposed use with minimal alteration and whether any
feature of the land is likely to be harmful to the health, safety, or welfare
of future residents of the proposed subdivision or of the community.
      3.   Consistency With Other Controls: Subdivisions and each lot in a
subdivision shall meet all official controls so that a variance is not needed
later to use the lots for their intended purpose.
      4.   Water And Sewer Design Standards:
         a.   A potable water supply and a sewage treatment system consistent
with Minnesota Rules, Chapters 7080 - 7081 must be provided for every lot.
         b.   Each lot must include at least two (2) soil treatment and
dispersal areas that support systems described in Minnesota Rules, parts
7080.2200 to 7080.223 or site conditions described in part 7081.0270, subparts
3 to 7, as applicable.
         c.   Lots that would require use of holding tanks are prohibited.
      5.   Information Requirements:
         a.   Topographic contours at ten-foot intervals or less from United
States Geological Survey maps or more current sources, showing limiting site
characteristics;
         b.   The surface water features required in Minn. Stat. § 505.021,
Subd. 1, to be shown on plats, obtained from United States Geological Survey
quadrangle topographic maps or more current sources;
         c.   Adequate soils information to determine suitability for building
and sewage treatment capabilities for every lot from the most current existing
sources or from field investigations such as soil borings, percolation tests,
or other methods;
         d.   Information regarding adequacy of domestic water supply; extent
of anticipated vegetation and topographic alterations; near-shore aquatic
conditions, including depths, types of bottom sediments, and aquatic
vegetation; and proposed methods for controlling stormwater runoff and erosion,
both during and after construction activities;
         e.   Location of 100-year flood plain areas and floodway districts
from existing adopted maps or data; and
         f.   A line or contour representing the ordinary high water level, the
"toe" and the "top" of bluffs, and the minimum building setback distances from
the top of the bluff and the lake or stream.
      6.   Dedications: When a land or easement dedication is a condition of
subdivision approval, the approval must provide easements over natural drainage
or ponding areas for management of stormwater and significant wetlands.
      7.   Platting: All subdivisions that create five (5) or more lots or
parcels that are two and a half (2-1/2) acres or less in size shall be
processed as a plat in accordance with Minn. Stat. Chapters 462.358 Subd. 3a
(cities) and 505. No permit for construction of buildings or sewage treatment
systems shall be issued for lots created after the adoption of this article
unless the lot was previously approved as part of a formal subdivision.
      8.   Controlled Access Lots: Controlled access lots within a subdivision
must meet or exceed the lot size criteria in subsection F.3.c above.
   J.   Planned Unit Developments (PUDs):
      1.   Purpose: To protect and enhance the natural and scenic qualities of
shoreland areas during and after development and redevelopment of high density
residential and commercial uses.
      2.   Types of PUDs Permissible: Planned unit developments (PUDs) are
allowed for new projects on undeveloped land, redevelopment of previously built
sites, or conversions of existing buildings and land. Deviation from the
minimum lot size standards of subsection F.2 above is allowed if the standards
in this Section are met.
      3.   Processing of PUDs: Planned unit developments must be processed as a
conditional use. An expansion to an existing commercial PUD involving six (6)
or less new dwelling units or sites since the date this article was adopted is
permissible as a permitted use provided the total project density does not
exceed the allowable densities calculated in the project density evaluation
procedures in subsection J.5 below. Approval cannot occur until all applicable
environmental reviews are complete.
      4.   Application For A PUD: The applicant for a PUD must submit the
following documents prior to final action on the application request:
         a.   Site plan and/or plat showing:
         (1)   Locations of property boundaries;
         (2)   Surface water features;
         (3)   Existing and proposed structures and other facilities;
         (4)   Land alterations;
         (5)   Sewage treatment and water supply systems (where public systems
will not be provided);
         (6)   Topographic contours at ten-foot intervals or less; and
         (7)   Identification of buildings and portions of the project that are
residential, commercial, or a combination of the two (2) (if project combines
commercial and residential elements).
         b.   A property owner's association agreement (for residential PUD's)
with mandatory membership, and consistent with Section J.6 below.
         c.   Deed restrictions, covenants, permanent easements or other
instruments that:
         (1)   Address future vegetative and topographic alterations,
construction of additional buildings, beaching of watercraft, and construction
of commercial buildings in residential PUDs; and
         (2)   Ensure the long-term preservation and maintenance of open space
in accordance with the criteria and analysis specified in subsection J.6 below.
         d.   A master plan/site plan describing the project and showing floor
plans for all commercial structures.
         e.   Additional documents necessary to explain how the PUD will be
designed and will function.
      5.   Density Determination: Proposed new or expansions to existing
planned unit developments must be evaluated using the following procedures.
         a.   Step 1. Identify Density Analysis Tiers: Divide the project
parcel into tiers by drawing one (1) or more lines parallel to the ordinary
high water level at the following intervals, proceeding landward:
 
Waterbody Classification                    No Sewer (ft) Sewer (ft)
General Development Lakes - 1st tier        200           200
General Development Lakes - all other tiers 267           200
Recreational Development Lakes              267           267
Natural Environment Lakes                   400           320
All Rivers                                  300           300
 
         b.   Step 2. Calculate Suitable Area For Development: Calculate the
suitable area within each tier by excluding all wetlands, bluffs, or land below
the ordinary high water level of public waters.
         c.   Step 3. Determine Base Density:
         (1)   For residential PUDs, divide the suitable area within each tier
by the minimum single residential lot area for lakes to determine the allowable
number of dwelling units, or base density, for each tier. For rivers, if a
minimum lot area is not specified, divide the tier width or river frontage by
the minimum single residential lot width.
         (2)   For commercial PUDs:
            (a)   Determine the average area for each dwelling unit or dwelling
site within each tier. Include both existing and proposed dwelling units and
sites in the calculation.
               (i)   For dwelling units, determine the average inside living
floor area of dwelling units in each tier. Do not include decks, patios,
garages, or porches and basements, unless they are habitable space.
               (ii)   For dwelling sites (campgrounds), determine the area of
each dwelling site as follows:
               For manufactured homes, use the area of the manufactured home,
if known, otherwise use one thousand (1,000) sf. For recreational vehicles,
campers or tents, use four hundred (400) sf.
            (b)   Select the appropriate floor area/dwelling site area ratio
from the following table for the floor area or dwelling site area determined in
subsection J.5.c.(2)(a) below.
                    General Development General Development
                    Lakes w/Sewer - all Lakes w/No Sewer -
Inside Living Floor tiers General       all other tiers
Area or Dwelling    Development Lakes   Recreational        Natural Environment
Site Area (sf)      w/No Sewer - 1st    Development Lakes   Lakes Remote Rivers
                    tier Agricultural,  Forested and
                    Urban and Tributary Transition Rivers
                    Rivers
                    General Development General Development
                    Lakes w/Sewer - all Lakes w/No Sewer -
Inside Living Floor tiers General       all other tiers
Area or Dwelling    Development Lakes   Recreational        Natural Environment
Site Area (sf)      w/No Sewer - 1st    Development Lakes   Lakes Remote Rivers
                    tier Agricultural,  Forested and
                    Urban and Tributary Transition Rivers
                    Rivers
200                 .040                .020                .010
300                 .048                .020                .010
400                 .056                .028                .014
500                 .065                .032                .016
600                 .072                .038                .019
700                 .082                .042                .021
800                 .091                .046                .023
900                 .099                .050                .025
1,000               .108                .054                .027
1,100               .116                .058                .029
1,300               .133                .068                .034
1,400               .142                .072                .036
1,500               .150                .075                .038
 
            (c)   Multiply the suitable area within each tier determined in
subsection J.5.b by the floor area or dwelling site area ratio to yield the
total floor area or dwelling site area for each tier to be used for dwelling
units or dwelling sites.
            (d)   Divide the total floor area or dwelling site area for each
tier calculated in subsection J.5.c.(2)(c) by the average inside living floor
area for dwelling units or dwelling site area determined in J.5.c.(2)(a) This
yields the allowable number of dwelling units or dwelling sites, or base
density, for each tier.
         (3)   Allowable densities may be transferred from any tier to any
other tier further from the waterbody, but must not be transferred to any tier
closer to the waterbody.
         (4)   All PUDs with densities at or below the base density must meet
the design standards in subsection J.6
         d.   Step 4. Determine If The Site Can Accommodate Increased Density:
         (1)   The following increases to the dwelling unit or dwelling site
base densities determined in subsection J.5.c are allowed if the design
criteria in subsection J.6 below are satisfied as well as the standards in
subsection J.5.d, item ii:
 
Shoreland Tier Maximum Density Increase Within Each Tier (Percent)
1st            50
2nd            100
3rd            200
4th            200
5th            200
 
         (2)   Structure setbacks from the ordinary high water level:
            (a)   Are increased to at least fifty percent (50%) greater than
the minimum setback; or
            (b)   The impact on the waterbody is reduced an equivalent amount
through vegetative management, topography, or additional acceptable means and
the setback is at least twenty-five percent (25%) greater than the minimum
setback.
      6.   Design Criteria: All PUDs must meet the following design criteria.
         a.   General Design Standards:
         (1)   All residential planned unit developments must contain at least
five (5) dwelling units or sites.
         (2)   On-site water supply and sewage treatment systems must be
centralized and meet the standards in subsection F.5 above. Sewage treatment
systems must meet the setback standards of subsection F.4.a.(1) above.
         (3)   Dwelling units or dwelling sites must be clustered into one (1)
or more groups and located on suitable areas of the development.
         (4)   Dwelling units or dwelling sites must be designed and located to
meet the dimensional standards in subsections F.4.a, F.4.b, and F.4.c:
         (5)   Shore recreation facilities:
            (a)   Must be centralized and located in areas suitable for them
based on a suitability analysis.
            (b)   The number of spaces provided for continuous beaching,
mooring, or docking of watercraft must not exceed one for each allowable
dwelling unit or site in the first tier (notwithstanding existing mooring sites
in an existing commercially used harbor).
            (c)   Launching ramp facilities, including a small dock for loading
and unloading equipment, may be provided for use by occupants of dwelling units
or sites located in other tiers.
         (6)   Structures, parking areas, and other facilities must be treated
to reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by
vegetation, topography, increased setbacks, color, or other means acceptable to
the local unit of government, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions. Vegetative
and topographic screening must be preserved, if existing, or may be required to
be provided.
         (7)   Accessory structures and facilities, except water oriented
accessory structures, must meet the required structure setback and must be
centralized.
         (8)   Water-oriented accessory structures and facilities may be
allowed if they meet or exceed design standards contained in subsection G.3
above and are centralized.
         b.   Open Space Requirements:
         (1)   Open space must constitute at least fifty percent (50%) of the
total project area and must include:
            (a)   Areas with physical characteristics unsuitable for
development in their natural state;
            (b)   Areas containing significant historic sites or unplatted
cemeteries;
            (c)   Portions of the shore impact zone preserved in its natural or
existing state as follows:
            (i)   For existing residential PUD's, at least fifty percent (50%)
of the shore impact zone.
            (ii)   For new residential PUDs, at least seventy percent (70%) of
the shore impact zone.
            (iii)   For all commercial PUD's, at least fifty percent (50%) of
the shore impact zone.
         (2)   Open space may include:
            (a)   Outdoor recreational facilities for use by owners of dwelling
units or sites, by guests staying in commercial dwelling units or sites, and by
the general public;
            (b)   Subsurface sewage treatment systems if the use of the space
is restricted to avoid adverse impacts on the systems; and
            (c)   Non-public water wetlands.
         (3)   Open space shall not include:
            (a)   Dwelling sites;
            (b)   Dwelling units or structures, except water-oriented accessory
structures or facilities;
            (c)   Road rights-of-way or land covered by road surfaces and
parking areas;
            (d)   Land below the OHWL of public waters; and
            (e)   Commercial facilities or uses.
         c.   Open Space Maintenance And Administration Requirements:
         (1)   Open Space Preservation: The appearance of open space areas,
including topography, vegetation, and allowable uses, must be preserved and
maintained by use of deed restrictions, covenants, permanent easements, public
dedication, or other equally effective and permanent means. The instruments
must prohibit:
            (a)   Commercial uses (for residential PUD's);
            (b)   Vegetation and topographic alterations other than routine
maintenance;
            (c)   Construction of additional buildings or storage of vehicles
and other materials; and
            (d)   Uncontrolled beaching of watercraft.
         (2)   Development Organization And Functioning: Unless an equally
effective alternative community framework is established, all residential
planned unit developments must use an owners association with the following
features:
            (a)   Membership must be mandatory for each dwelling unit or
dwelling site owner and any successive owner;
            (b)   Each member must pay a pro rata share of the association's
expenses, and unpaid assessments can become liens on units or dwelling sites;
            (c)   Assessments must be adjustable to accommodate changing
conditions; and
            (d)   The association must be responsible for insurance, taxes, and
maintenance of all commonly owned property and facilities.
         d.   Erosion Control And Stormwater Management:
         (1)   Erosion control plans must be developed and must be consistent
with the provisions of subsection H.3 above. Erosion control plans approved by
a soil and water conservation district may be required if project size and site
physical characteristics warrant.
         (2)   Stormwater management facilities must be designed and
constructed to manage expected quantities and qualities of stormwater runoff.
            (a)   For commercial PUDs, impervious surfaces within any tier must
not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the tier area.
      7.   Conversions: Local governments may allow existing resorts or other
land uses and facilities to be converted to residential PUDs if all of the
following standards are met:
         a.   Proposed conversions must be evaluated using the same procedures
for residential PUDs involving new construction. Inconsistencies between
existing features of the development and these standards must be identified;
         b.   Deficiencies involving water supply and sewage treatment,
structure color, impervious coverage, open space, and shore recreation
facilities must be corrected as part of the conversion or as specified in the
conditional use permit;
         c.   Shore and bluff impact zone deficiencies must be evaluated and
reasonable improvements made as part of the conversion. These improvements must
include, where applicable, the following:
         (1)   Removal of extraneous buildings, docks, or other facilities that
no longer need to be located in shore or bluff impact zones;
         (2)   Remedial measures to correct erosion, improve vegetative cover
and improve screening of buildings and other facilities as viewed from the
water; and
         (3)   Conditions attached to existing dwelling units located in shore
or bluff impact zones that preclude exterior expansions in any dimension or
substantial alterations. The conditions must also provide for future relocation
of dwelling units, where feasible, to other locations, meeting all setback and
elevation requirements when they are rebuilt or replaced.
         d.   Existing dwelling unit or dwelling site densities that exceed
standards in subsection J.5 above may be allowed to continue but must not be
allowed to be increased, either at the time of conversion or in the future.
Efforts must be made during the conversion to limit impacts of high densities
by requiring seasonal use, improving vegetative screening, centralizing shore
recreation facilities, installing new sewage treatment systems, or other means.
(Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-5-3: WETLAND OVERLAY DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: It is the intent of these wetland overlay
regulations to impose restrictions in addition to the those required by the
underlying zoning for the protection of wetlands as defined by the United
States Army Corps of Engineers' Wetland Delineation Manual 1987 or Minnesota
Rule 8420 with the following implementation purposes:
      1.   To implement the Rosemount Comprehensive Wetland Management Plan.
      2.   To achieve no net loss in the quantity, quality, and biological
diversity of existing wetlands.
      3.   To increase the quantity, quality, and biological diversity of
wetlands by restoring or enhancing diminished or drained wetlands.
      4.   To avoid direct or indirect impacts from activities that destroy or
diminish the quantity, quality, and biological diversity of wetlands.
      5.   To replace wetland values where avoidance of activity is not
feasible and prudent.
   B.   Application Required: Any property proposing an activity that is
regulated as described within Section IV. Wetland Regulations of the
Comprehensive Wetland Management Plan shall submit an application to the city
through the Joint Application Form for Activities Affecting Water Resources in
Minnesota available through the Board of Soil and Water Resources. This
application shall be subject to the requirements of this section, the
Comprehensive Wetland Management Plan, and Minnesota Rule 8420.
   C.   Wetland Applications: Wetland related applications shall be submitted
to the City of Rosemount as per the Comprehensive Wetland Management Plan and
Minnesota Rule 8420.
   1.   Wetland Boundary Or Type Application: When an application subject to
chapter 7 "Development Standards" of this title or title 12 "Subdivision
Regulations" is submitted to the city, the applicant shall submit a wetland
delineation to determine the wetland boundary and type. The delineation will
include the following information:
         a.   Level 1 delineation completed in compliance with the most recent
US Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) Guidance for Offsite Hydrology/Wetland
Determinations.
         b.   If a Level 1 delineation indicts the likelihood of a wetland, the
applicant shall prepare and submit a Level 2 delineation in compliance with the
most recent USACE Manual for Delineating Wetlands in Conjunction with the
Midwest Supplement.
         c.   Delineations shall be subject to field verification by city
staff, the Technical Evaluation Panel (TEP), and/or USACE.
      2.   No Loss And Exemption Applications: The Wetland Conservation Act
(WCA) No Loss and Exemption standards are covered in Minnesota Rules
8420.0410-.0420. Applications for No Loss or Exemption determinations shall
follow the procedures and requirements of Minnesota Rules 8420. Wet areas
created by human activity ("incidental wetlands") as specified in Minnesota
Rules 8420.0105 not intended to produce wetland shall not be regulated by this
section. Wetlands that are exempt per the WCA shall not be regulated by the
policies within this section. However, buffer zones and restoration of
disturbed areas in conformance with this section may be required if the project
is part of an overall land development plan.
      3.   Sequencing Application: An applicant proposing to impact wetlands
must submit an application that demonstrates adherence to the Sequencing
Standards outlined in Minnesota Rules 8420.0520. The applicant may submit a
sequencing evaluation with the wetland replacement plan application or apply
for a preliminary sequencing decision from the city, as per Minnesota Rules
8420.0325, as amended.
      4.   Replacement Plan Application:
         a.   Concurrently with a sequencing application requesting a
determination that wetland impacts are unavoidable, a replacement plan
application shall be submitted for the activities requiring compensatory
mitigation, including:
         (1)   Filling or draining of any wetland;
         (2)   Excavating in the permanently or semi-permanently flooded areas
of a type 3, 4, or 5 wetland;
         (3)   Excavation that results in conversion to non-wetland.
         b.   Wetland impacts that occur due to road improvement projects that
address safety issues and are not undertaken solely to accommodate additional
traffic capacity by the city or county as the local road authority may be
eligible to be replaced by BWSR through the Local Government Wetland
Replacement Program (LGRWRP).
         c.   The lost functions and values of the wetland impacted must be
replaced in conformance with the Comprehensive Wetland Management Plan Section
IX: Wetland Replacement.
   D.   Local Government Unit Decision Authority: Wetland applications
decisions shall be determined as follows:
      1.   City staff has the administrative authority to approve wetland
boundary, wetland type, no loss, and exemption applications.
      2.   City staff has the administrative authority to approve sequencing
and replacement plans that impact less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet
of wetlands.
      3.   City staff may request the City Council review and approve any
applications listed in provisions 1 and 2 of this subsection.
      4.   The City Council shall approve all sequencing and replacement plans
that impact ten thousand (10,000) square feet or greater of wetlands.
   E.   Appeals Of Wetland Application Decisions: Appeals of decisions of
applications submitted under subsection C above made by the city will follow
the appeal process in accordance with Minnesota Rules 8420.
   F.   Wetland Buffers:
      1.   Buffer Establishment:
         a.   Application: Any property in which an application has been
required under subsection B above and has been determined to have a wetland
shall submit a Buffer Zone Establishment and Management Plan for review and
approval by the city engineer. The Plan shall be reviewed and approved subject
to the standards described in the Comprehensive Wetland Management Plan
Subsections VIII.B.2. and X.B.
         b.   Continued Maintenance: The maintenance and vegetation performance
of the buffer shall be subject to the standards of subsection IX.A of the
Comprehensive Wetland Management Plan: Wetland Monitoring. Once established,
activities in buffer zones that are not associated with the approved Plan that
disturb the roots or influence the growth of the vegetation, such as grading,
mowing, landscaping and planting, fertilizing, spraying (herbicides), and
seeding or sodding are prohibited. Herbicides and controlled burns or other
management practices used to control noxious weeds or invasive species will be
allowed only with permission from the city engineer. Enhancement of the buffer
zone through installation of additional native plantings is allowed and
encouraged.
      2.   Buffer Zone Widths by Wetland Classification:
         a.   Preserve: Seventy five (75) Feet.
         b.   Manage 1: Fifty (50) Feet.
         c.   Manage 2: Thirty (30) Feet.
         d.   Manage 3:
         (1)   Non-Agricultural Area: Fifteen (15) Feet.
         (2)   Agricultural Area: None.
      3.   Buffer Averaging: Comprehensive Wetland Management Plan subsection
VIII.B.1. describes functions of buffer zones. A property owner may request an
adjustment to the buffer zone widths regulation in subsection F above through
buffer averaging to determine an alternate buffer width approved by the city
engineer subject to the following standards:
         a.   The buffer averaging improves the buffer zone function.
         b.   The buffer zone prioritization review described with the
Comprehensive Wetland Management Plan subsection VIII.B.1.
      4.   Structural Setback From Buffer Zone: Thirty (30) Feet.
      5.   Conservation Easements: Buffer zones will be contained within a
conservation easement that includes both the wetland and the buffer zone.
      6.   Buffer Zone Monuments: The installation of monuments which mark the
outer edge of the wetland buffer zones. All markers and their placement shall
be per city specification or approved by the city engineer.
   G.   Stormwater Pre-Treatment: To alleviate the sediment and nutrient
loading of wetlands, storm water pretreatment shall be required based on
wetland classification as follows:
      1.   Preserve: Sediment and nutrient pretreatment required, consider
diversion if possible.
      2.   Manage 1: Sediment and nutrient pretreatment required.
      3.   Manage 2: Sediment pretreatment required.
      4.   Manage 3: Pretreatment to NPDES standards (per Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency rules) is required if these standards apply to the project.
   H.   Enforcement: WCA enforcement shall be in conformance with Minnesota
Rules 8240.
   I.   Lots In Existence Before July 21, 1998: The city first adopted the
Comprehensive Wetland Management Plan on July 21, 1998. A lot which is part of
a subdivision or plat, an auditor's subdivision or a registered land survey; or
a parcel of land not so platted, for which a deed has been recorded in the
Dakota County recorder's office prior to July 21, 1998 shall not be required to
meet the standards of subsections 11-5-3, C, D, and F. For the lots that
existed before the July 21, 1998, the following standards shall be required:
      1.   Buffer Zone: Fifteen (15) Feet.
      2.   Structural Setback from Buffer Zone: Fifteen (15) Feet.
      3.   Buffer Maintenance: Activities that disturb the roots or influence
the growth of the vegetation, such as grading, mowing, landscaping and
planting, fertilizing, spraying (herbicides), and seeding or sodding are
prohibited. Herbicides and controlled burns or other management practices used
to control noxious weeds or invasive species will be allowed only with
permission from the city engineer. Enhancement of the buffer zone through
installation of additional native plantings is allowed and encouraged. (Ord.
2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-5-4: MISSISSIPPI RIVER CORRIDOR CRITICAL AREA OVERLAY DISTRICT:
   A.   Authority, Intent, And Purpose:
      1.   Statutory Authorization: This Mississippi River Corridor Critical
Area (MRCCA), section 11-5-4 is adopted pursuant to the authorization and
policies contained in Minn. Stat., Chapter 116G, Minnesota Rules, parts
6106.0010 - 6106.0180, and the planning and zoning enabling legislation in
Minn. Stat., Chapter 462 and 473.
      2.   Policy: The Legislature of Minnesota has delegated responsibility to
local governments of the state to regulate the subdivision, use and development
of designated critical areas and thus preserve and enhance the quality of
important historic, cultural, aesthetic values, and natural systems and provide
for the wise use of these areas.
   B.   General Provisions:
      1.   Jurisdiction: The provisions of this section apply to land within
the river corridor boundary as described in the State Register, volume 43,
pages 508 to 519 and shown on the zoning map.
      2.   Enforcement: The Zoning Administrator is responsible for the
administration and enforcement of this section. Any violation of its provisions
or failure to comply with any of its requirements including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or
conditional uses constitutes a misdemeanor and is punishable as defined by law.
Violations of this section can occur regardless of whether or not a permit is
required for a regulated activity listed in subsection D.2.
      3.   Severability: If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this
section is judged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this section shall not be affected thereby.
      4.   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: It is not intended by this
section to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or
deed restrictions. However, where this section imposes greater restrictions,
the provisions of this section shall prevail. All other provisions inconsistent
with this section are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
      5.   Underlying Zoning: Uses and standards of underlying zoning districts
apply except where standards of this overlay district are more restrictive.
      6.   Definitions: Unless specifically defined in section
11-10-6 Mississippi River Corridor Critical Area (MRCCA) Definitions, words or
phrases used in this section shall be interpreted to give them the same meaning
they have in common usage and to give this section its most reasonable
application. For the purpose of this section, the words "must" and "shall" are
mandatory and not permissive. All distances, unless otherwise specified, are
measured horizontally.
   C.   Administration:
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of this subsection is to identify
administrative provisions to ensure this section is administered consistent
with its purpose.
      2.   Permits: A permit is required for the construction of buildings or
building additions (including construction of decks and signs), the
installation and/or alteration of sewage treatment systems, vegetation removal
consistent with subsection J and land alterations consistent with subsection K.
      3.   Variances: Variances to the requirements under this section may only
be granted in accordance with Minn. Stat. § 462.357 and must consider the
potential impacts of variances on primary conservation areas, public river
corridor views, and other resources identified in the MRCCA plan. In reviewing
the variance application, the Zoning Administrator shall:
         a.   Evaluate the impacts to these resources. If negative impacts are
found, require conditions to mitigate the impacts that are related to and
proportional to the impacts, consistent with subsection D.5 below; and
         b.   Make written findings that the variance is consistent with the
purpose of this section as follows:
         (1)   The extent, location and intensity of the variance will be in
substantial compliance with the MRCCA Plan;
         (2)   The variance is consistent with the character and management
purpose of the MRCCA district in which it is located;
         (3)   The variance will not be detrimental to PCAs and PRCVs nor will
it contribute to negative incremental impacts to PCAs and PRCVs when considered
in the context of past, present and reasonable future actions; and
         (4)   The variance will not negatively impact the scenic and
environmentally sensitive areas of the Mississippi River Corridor, including:
floodplains, wetlands, bluffs, steep slopes, natural drainage ways, significant
vegetation and wildlife habitat.
      4.   Conditional And Interim Use Permits: All conditional and interim
uses, required under this section, must comply with Minn. Stat. § 462.3595 and
must consider the potential impacts on primary conservation areas, public river
corridor views, and other resources identified in the MRCCA plan. In reviewing
the application, the City Council shall:
         a.   Evaluate the impacts to these resources and if negative impacts
are found, require conditions to mitigate the impacts that are related to and
proportional to the impacts, consistent with subsection D.5 below; and
         b.   Make written findings that the conditional use is consistent with
the purpose of this section as follows:
         (1)   The extent, location and intensity of the conditional use will
be in substantial compliance with the MRCCA Plan;
         (2)   The conditional use is consistent with the character and
management purpose of the MRCCA district in which it is located;
         (3)   The conditional use will not be detrimental to PCAs and PRCVs
nor will it contribute to negative incremental impacts to PCAs and PRCVs when
considered in the context of past, present and reasonable future actions; and
         (4)   The conditional use will not negatively impact the scenic and
environmentally sensitive areas of the Mississippi River Corridor, including:
floodplains, wetlands, bluffs, steep slopes, natural drainage ways, significant
vegetation and wildlife habitat.
      5.   Conditions Of Approval: The City Council shall evaluate the impacts
to PCAs, PRCVs, and other resources identified in the MRCCA Plan, and if
negative impacts are found, require conditions to mitigate the impacts that are
related to and proportional to the impacts. Mitigation may include:
         a.   Restoration of vegetation identified as "vegetation restoration
priorities" identified in the MRCCA plan;
         b.   Preservation of existing vegetation;
         c.   Stormwater runoff management;
         d.   Reducing impervious surface;
         e.   Increasing structure setbacks;
         f.   Wetland and drainage route restoration and/or preservation;
         g.   Limiting the height of structures;
         h.   Modifying structure design to limit visual impacts on PRCVs; and
         i.   Other conservation measures.
      6.   Application Materials: Applications for permits and discretionary
actions required under this section must submit the following information
unless the Zoning Administrator determines that the information is not needed.
         a.   A detailed project description; and
         b.   Scaled maps and plans, dimensional renderings, maintenance
agreements, and other materials that identify and describe:
         (1)   Primary conservation areas;
         (2)   Public river corridor views;
         (3)   Buildable area;
         (4)   Existing and proposed topography and drainage patterns;
         (5)   Proposed storm water and erosion and sediment control practices;
         (6)   Existing and proposed vegetation to be removed and established;
         (7)   Ordinary high water level, blufflines, and all required
setbacks;
         (8)   Existing and proposed structures;
         (9)   Existing and proposed impervious surfaces; and
         (10)   Existing and proposed subsurface sewage treatment systems.
      7.   Nonconformities:
         a.   All legally established nonconformities as of the date of this
chapter may continue consistent with Minn. Stat. § 462.357, Subd. 1e.
         b.   New structures erected in conformance with the setback averaging
provisions of subsection G.3.d below are conforming structures.
         c.   Site alterations and expansion of site alterations that were
legally made prior to the effective date of this chapter are conforming. Site
alterations include vegetation, erosion control, storm water control measures,
and other nonstructural site improvements.
         d.   Legally nonconforming principal structures that do not meet the
setback requirements of subsection G.3 below may be expanded laterally provided
that:
         (1)   The expansion does not extend into the shore or bluff impact
zone or further into the required setback than the building line of the
existing principal structure (See Figure 5.6); and
         (2)   The expanded structure's scale and bulk is consistent with that
of the original structure and existing surrounding development.
   Figure 5. 6. Expansion of Nonconforming Structure
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4b51a377144822298e340f2016f76ebbfa73789c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1689.jpg]
 
      8.   Notifications:
         a.   Amendments to this section and to the MRCCA plan must be
submitted to the Commissioner as provided in Minnesota Rules, part 6106.0070,
Subp. 3, Items B - I.
         b.   Notice of public hearings for discretionary actions, including
conditional and interim use permits, variances, appeals, rezonings, preliminary
plats, final subdivision plats, master plans, and PUDs, must be sent to the
following entities at least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing:
         (1)   The Commissioner in a format prescribed by the DNR;
         (2)   National Park Service; and
         (3)   Where building heights exceed the height limits specified in
subsection G.2 below as part of the conditional use or variance process,
adjoining local governments within the MRCCA, including those with overlapping
jurisdiction and those across the river.
         c.   Notice of final decisions for actions in subsection D.8.b above,
including findings of fact, must be sent to the Commissioner, the National Park
Service, and adjoining local governments within the MRCCA within ten (10) days
of the final decision.
         d.   Requests to amend district boundaries must follow the provisions
in Minnesota Rules, part 6106.0100, Subp. 9, Item C.
      9.   Accommodating Disabilities: Reasonable accommodations for ramps or
other facilities to provide persons with disabilities access to the persons'
property, as required by the federal Americans with Disabilities Act and the
federal Fair Housing Act and as provided by Minnesota Rules, chapter 1341,
must:
         a.   Comply with subsections G to M; or
         b.   If subsections G to M cannot be complied with, ramps or other
facilities are allowed with an administrative permit provided:
         (1)   The permit terminates on either a specific date or upon
occurrence of a particular event related to the person requiring accommodation;
and
         (2)   Upon expiration of the permit, the ramp or other facilities must
be removed.
   D.   MRCCA Districts:
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of this subsection is to establish districts
under which building height and structure placement are regulated to protect
and enhance the Mississippi River's resources and features consistent with the
natural and built character of each district.
      2.   District Description And Management Purpose: The MRCCA within the
city is divided into the following MRCCA Districts:
         a.   Rural And Open Space (ROS):
         (1)   Description: The ROS District is characterized by rural and low-
density development patterns and land uses, and includes land that is riparian
or visible from the river, as well as large, undeveloped tracts of high
ecological and scenic value, floodplain, and undeveloped islands. Many primary
conservation areas exist in the district.
         (2)   Management Purpose: The ROS District must be managed to sustain
and restore the rural and natural character of the corridor and to protect and
enhance habitat, parks and open space, public river corridor views, and scenic,
natural, and historic areas.
         b.   Separated From River (SR):
         (1)   Description: The SR District is characterized by its physical
and visual distance from the Mississippi River. The district includes land
separated from the river by distance, topography, development, or a
transportation corridor. The land in this district is not readily visible from
the Mississippi River.
         (2)   Management Purpose: The SR district provides flexibility in
managing development without negatively affecting the key resources and
features of the river corridor. Minimizing negative impacts to primary
conservation areas and minimizing erosion and flow of untreated storm water
into the Mississippi River are priorities in the district.
         c.   Urban Mixed (UM):
         (1)   Description: The UM District includes large areas of highly
urbanized mixed use that are a part of the urban fabric of the river corridor,
including institutional, commercial, industrial, and residential areas and
parks and open space.
         (2)   Management Purpose: The UM District must be managed in a manner
that allows for future growth and potential transition of intensely developed
areas that does not negatively affect public river corridor views and that
protects bluffs and floodplains. Restoring and enhancing bluff and shoreline
habitat, minimizing erosion and flow of untreated storm water into the river,
and providing public access to and public views of the river are priorities in
the district.
      3.   MRCCA District Map: The locations and boundaries of the MRCCA
districts established by this section are shown on the official zoning map
which is incorporated herein by reference. The district boundary lines are
intended to follow the centerlines of rivers and streams, highways, streets,
lot lines, and municipal boundaries, unless a boundary line is otherwise
indicated on the map. Where district boundaries cross unsubdivided property,
the district boundary line is determined by use of dimensions or the scale
appearing on the map.
   E.   Special Land Use Provisions:
      1.   Purpose: To identify development standards and considerations for
land uses that have potential to negatively impact primary conservation areas
and public river corridor views.
      2.   Underlying Zoning: Uses within the MRCCA are generally determined by
underlying zoning, with additional provisions for the following land uses:
         a.   Agricultural Use: Perennial ground cover is required within fifty
(50) feet of the ordinary high water level and within the bluff impact zone.
         b.   Feedlots: New animal feedlots and manure storage areas are
prohibited. Existing animal feedlots and manure storage areas must conform with
Minnesota Rules, chapter 7020.
         c.   Forestry: Tree harvesting and biomass harvesting within
woodlands, and associated reforestation, must be consistent with recommended
practices in Conserving Wooded Areas in Developing Communities: Best Management
Practices in Minnesota.
         d.   Nonmetallic Mining: Nonmetallic mining requires a conditional use
permit or interim use permit issued by the local government, subject to the
following:
         (1)   New nonmetallic mining is prohibited within the shore impact
zone and bluff impact zone and within the required structure setback from the
bluffline and OHWL;
         (2)   Processing machinery must be located consistent with setback
standards for structures as provided in subsection G3 below;
         (3)   Only one barge loading area, which must be limited to the
minimum size practicable, is permitted for each mining operation;
         (4)   New and, where practicable, existing nonmetallic mining
operations must not be readily visible and must be screened by establishing and
maintaining natural vegetation. The unscreened boundaries of nonmetallic mining
areas are limited to only the barge loading area;
         (5)   A site management plan must be developed by the operator and
approved by the local government before new nonmetallic mining commences.
Operations must be consistent with the site plan throughout the duration of
operations at the site. The site management plan must:
            (a)   Describe how the site will be developed over time with an
emphasis on minimizing environmental risk to public waters;
            (b)   Explain where staged reclamation may occur at certain points
during the life of the site;
            (c)   Address dust, noise, storm water management, possible
pollutant discharges, days and hours of operation, and duration of operations;
and
            (d)   Describe any anticipated vegetation and topographic
alterations outside the pit, and reclamation plans consistent with the stated
end use for the land; and
         (6)   Existing and new nonmetallic mining operations must submit land
reclamation plans to the local government compatible with the purposes of this
chapter.
         e.   River-Dependent Uses: River-dependent uses must comply with the
following design standards:
         (1)   Structures and parking areas, except shoreline facilities and
private roads and conveyances serving river-dependent uses as provided in
subsection M below, must meet the dimensional and performance standards in this
section, must be designed so that they are not readily visible, and must be
screened by establishing and maintaining natural vegetation;
         (2)   Shoreline facilities must comply with Minnesota Rules, chapter
6115 and must:
            (a)   Be designed in a compact fashion so as to minimize the
shoreline area affected; and
            (b)   Minimize the surface area of land occupied in relation to the
number of watercraft or barges to be served; and
         (3)   Dredging and placement of dredged material are subject to
existing federal and state permit requirements and agreements.
         f.   Wireless Communication Towers: Wireless communication towers
require a conditional or interim use permit and are subject to the following
design standards:
         (1)   The applicant must demonstrate that functional coverage cannot
be provided through co-location, a tower at a lower height, or a tower at a
location outside of the MRCCA;
         (2)   The tower must not be located in a bluff or shore impact zone;
and
         (3)   Placement of the tower must minimize impacts on public river
corridor views.
         (4)   Comply with the general design standards in subsection I.2
below.
   F.   Structure Height And Placement And Lot Size:
      1.   Purpose: To establish standards that protect primary conservation
areas and public river corridor views from development impacts and ensure that
new development is sited consistent with the purpose of the MRCCA.
      2.   Structure Height: Structures and facilities must comply with the
following standards unless identified as exempt in subsection M below.
         a.   Structures and facilities must comply with the following
standards unless identified as exempt in subsection M below.
         (1)   ROS District: Thirty-five (35) feet.
         (2)   SR District: Height is determined by underlying zoning, provided
the allowed height is consistent with that of the mature treeline, where
present, and existing surrounding development, as viewed from the OWHL of the
opposite shore.
         (3)   UM District: Sixty-five (65) feet, provided tiering of
structures away from the Mississippi River and from blufflines is given
priority, with lower structure heights closer to the river and blufflines, and
that structure design and placement minimize interference with public river
corridor views. Structures over sixty-five (65) feet are allowed as a
conditional use according to Section 6.23.
         b.   Height is measured on the side of the structure facing the
Mississippi River.
         c.   In addition to the conditional use permit requirements of
subsection D.4 above, criteria for considering whether to grant a conditional
use permit for structures exceeding the height limits must include:
         (1)   Assessment of the visual impact of the proposed structure on
public river corridor views, including views from other communities;
         (2)   Determination that the proposed structure meets the required
bluff and OHWL setbacks;
         (3)   Identification and application of techniques to minimize the
perceived bulk of the proposed structure, such as:
            (a)   Placing the long axis of the building perpendicular to the
river;
            (b)   Stepping back of portions of the façade;
            (c)   Lowering the roof pitch or use of a flat roof;
            (d)   Using building materials or mitigation techniques that will
blend in with the natural surroundings such as green roofs, green walls, or
other green and brown building materials;
            (e)   Narrowing the profile of upper floors of the building; or
            (f)   Increasing the setbacks of the building from the Mississippi
River or blufflines;
         (4)   Identification of techniques for preservation of those view
corridors identified in the MRCCA Plan; and
         (5)   Opportunities for creation or enhancement of public river
corridor views.
      3.   Structure and impervious surface placement.
         a.   Structures and impervious surface must not be placed in the shore
or bluff impact zones unless identified as an exemption in subsection M below.
         b.   Structures, impervious surfaces, and facilities must comply with
the following OHWL setback provisions unless identified as exempt in subsection
M below.
         (1)   ROS District: Two hundred (200) feet from the Mississippi River
and one hundred fifty (150) feet from the Minnesota and Vermillion Rivers.
         (2)   SR District: Seventy-five (75) feet from the Vermillion River.
         (3)   UM District: Fifty (50) feet from the Mississippi River.
         c.   Structures, impervious surfaces, and facilities must comply with
the following bluffline setback provisions unless identified as exempt in
Section 12.0:
         (1)   ROS District: One hundred (100) feet.
         (2)   SR District: Forty (40) feet.
         (3)   UM District: Forty (40) feet.
         d.   Where principal structures exist on the adjoining lots on both
sides of a proposed building site, the minimum setback may be altered to
conform to the average of the adjoining setbacks, if the new structure's scale
and bulk riverward or bluffward of the setbacks required under subsections
G.3.b and G.3.c above are consistent with adjoining development. See Figure
5.7.
Figure 5. 7. Structure Setback Averaging
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4b51a377144822298e340f2016f76ebbfa73789c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1763.jpg]
         e.   Subsurface sewage treatment systems, including the septic tank
and absorption area, must be located at least seventy-five (75) feet from the
ordinary high water level of the Mississippi River and all other public waters.
      4.   Lot Size And Buildable Area:
         a.   The width of lots abutting the Mississippi River in the ROS
District must be at least two hundred (200) feet, unless alternative design
methods are used that provide greater protection of the riparian area.
         b.   All new lots must have adequate buildable area to comply with the
setback requirements of subsections G.3.b and G.3.c above so as to not require
variances to use the lots for their intended purpose.
   G.   Performance Standards For Private Facilities:
      1.   Purpose: To establish design standards for private facilities that
are consistent with best management practices and that minimize impacts to
primary conservation areas, public river corridor views and other resources
identified in the MRCCA plan.
      2.   General Design Standards: All private facilities must be developed
in accordance with the vegetation management and land alteration requirements
in subsections J and K below.
      3.   Private Roads, Driveways, And Parking Areas: Except as provided in
subsection M below, private roads, driveways and parking areas must:
         a.   Be designed to take advantage of natural vegetation and
topography so that they are not readily visible;
         b.   Comply with structure setback requirements according to
subsection G above; and
         c.   Not be placed within the bluff impact zone or shore impact zone,
unless exempt under subsection M below and designed consistent with subsection
I.2 below.
      4.   Private Water Access And Viewing Facilities:
         a.   Private access paths must be no more than:
         (1)   Eight (8) feet wide, if placed within the shore impact zone; and
         (2)   Four (4) feet wide, if placed within the bluff impact zone.
         b.   Private water access ramps must:
         (1)   Comply with Minnesota Rules, parts 6115.0210 and 6280.0250; and
         (2)   Be designed and constructed consistent with the applicable
standards in Design Handbook for Recreational Boating and Fishing Facilities.
         c.   Design and construction of private stairways, lifts, and landings
are subject to the following standards:
         (1)   Stairways and lifts must not exceed four (4) feet in width on
residential lots. Wider stairways may be used for commercial properties and
residential facilities held in common, if approved by the city;
         (2)   Landings for stairways and lifts on residential lots must not
exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area. Landings larger than thirty-two
(32) square feet area allowed for commercial properties and residential
facilities held in common, if approved by the city;
         (3)   Canopies or roofs are prohibited on stairways, lifts, or
landings;
         (4)   Stairways, lifts, and landings must be located in the least
visible portion of the lot whenever practical; and
         (5)   Ramps, lifts, mobility paths, or other facilities for persons
with physical disabilities are allowed for achieving access to shore areas
according to subsection H.4.c (1)-(4) above, and as provided under subsection
D.9 above.
         d.   One water-oriented accessory structure is allowed for each
riparian lot or parcel less than three hundred (300) feet in width at the
ordinary high water level, with one additional water-oriented accessory
structure allowed for each additional three hundred (300) feet of shoreline on
the same lot or parcel. Water-oriented accessory structures are prohibited in
the bluff impact zone and must:
         (1)   Not exceed twelve (12) feet in height;
         (2)   Not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet in area; and
         (3)   Be placed a minimum of ten (10) feet from the ordinary high
water level.
      5.   Decks And Patios In Setback Areas: Decks and at-grade patios may
encroach into the required setbacks from the ordinary high water level and
blufflines without a variance, when consistent with subsections J and K below,
provided that:
         a.   The encroachment of the deck or patio into the required setback
area does not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the required structure setback;
         b.   The area of the deck or patio that extends into the required
setback area occupies no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total area
between the required setback and the 15 percent using the formula:
            [Required setback depth (feet) x 0.15 x lot width at setback (feet)
x 0.25 = maximum total area]
         c.   The deck or patio does not extend into the bluff impact zone. See
Figure 5.8.
Figure 5.8. Deck and Patio Encroachment
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4b51a377144822298e340f2016f76ebbfa73789c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1765.jpg]
      6.    Off -pre mise and dire ctional signs.
         a.    Off -pre mise signs shall:
         (1)    Me et required stru cture plac ement and heig ht stan dards in
subs ections G.2 and G.3 above.
         (2)   Not be readily visible.
         b.   Water-facing signs must comply with the following standards:
         (1)   They must be consistent with Minn. Stat. § 86B.115.
         (2)   Only convey the location and name of the establishment and the
general types of goods and services available, if located in a shore impact
zone.
         (3)   Be no greater than ten (10) feet in height and thirty-two (32)
square feet in surface area; and
         (4)   If illuminated, the lighting must be fully shielded and directed
downward to prevent illumination out across the river or to the sky.
   H.   Performance Standards For Public Facilities:
      1.   Purpose: To establish design standards for public facilities that
are consistent with best management practices and that minimize impacts to
primary conservation areas, public river corridor views and other resources
identified in the MRCCA plan. Public facilities serve the public interest by
providing public access to the Mississippi River corridor or require locations
in or adjacent to the river corridor and therefore require some degree of
flexibility.
      2.   General Design Standards: All public facilities must be designed and
constructed to:
         a.   Minimize visibility of the facility from the river to the extent
consistent with the purpose of the facility;
         b.   Comply with the structure placement and height standards in
subsection G above, except as provided in subsection M below;
         c.   Be consistent with the vegetation management standards in
subsection J below and the land alteration and storm water management standards
in subsection K below, including use of practices identified in Best Practices
for Meeting DNR General Public Waters Work Permit GP 2004-0001, where
applicable;
         d.   Avoid primary conservation areas, unless no alternative exists.
If no alternative exists, then disturbance to primary conservation areas must
be avoided to the greatest extent practicable, and design and construction must
minimize impacts; and
         e.   Minimize disturbance of spawning and nesting times by scheduling
construction at times when local fish and wildlife are not spawning or nesting.
      3.   Right-of-way Maintenance Standards: Right-of-way maintenance must
comply with the following standards:
         a.   Vegetation currently in a natural state must be maintained to the
extent feasible;
         b.   Where vegetation in a natural state has been removed, native
plants must be planted and maintained on the right-of-way; and
         c.   Chemical control of vegetation must be avoided when practicable,
but when chemical control is necessary, chemicals used must be in accordance
with the regulations and other requirements of all state and federal agencies
with authority over the chemical's use.
      4.   Crossings Of Public Water Or Public Land. Crossings of public waters
or land controlled by the commissioner are subject to approval by the
commissioner according to Minn. Stat. §§ 84.415 and 103G.245.
      5.   Public Utilities: Public utilities must comply with the following
standards:
         a.   High-voltage transmission lines, wind energy conversion systems
greater than five (5) megawatts, and pipelines are regulated according to Minn.
Stat. Chapter 216E, 216F, and 216G respectively; and
         b.   If overhead placement is necessary, utility facility crossings
must minimize visibility of the facility from the river as much as practicable.
         c.   The appearance of structures must be as compatible as practicable
with the surrounding area in a natural state with regard to height and width,
materials used, and color.
         d.   Wireless communication facilities, according to subsection F.2.f
above.
      6.   Public Transportation Facilities: Public transportation facilities
shall comply with structure placement and height standards in subsection G
above. Where such facilities intersect or abut two (2) or more MRCCA districts,
the least restrictive standards apply. Public transportation facilities must be
designed and constructed to give priority to:
         a.   Providing scenic overlooks for motorists, bicyclists, and
pedestrians;
         b.   Providing safe pedestrian crossings and facilities along the
river corridor;
         c.   Providing access to the riverfront in public ownership; and
         d.   Allowing for use of the land between the river and the
transportation facility.
      7.   Public Recreational Facilities: Public recreational facilities must
comply with the following standards:
         a.   Buildings and parking associated with pubic recreational
facilities must comply with the structure placement and height standards in
subsection G above except as provided in subsection M below;
         b.   Roads and driveways associated with public recreational
facilities must not be placed in the bluff or shore impact zones unless no
other placement alternative exists. If no alternative exists, then design and
construction must minimize impacts to shoreline vegetation, erodible soils and
slopes, and other sensitive resources.
         c.   Trails, access paths, and viewing areas associated with public
recreational facilities and providing access to or views of the Mississippi
River are allowed within the bluff and shore impact zones if design,
construction, and maintenance methods are consistent with the best management
practice guidelines in Trail Planning, Design, and Development Guidelines.
         (1)   Hard-surface trails are not allowed on the face of bluffs with a
slope exceeding thirty percent (30%). Natural surface trails are allowed,
provided they do not exceed eight (8) feet in width.
         (2)   Trails, paths, and viewing areas must be designed and
constructed to minimize:
            (a)   Visibility from the river;
            (b)   Visual impacts on public river corridor views; and
            (c)   Disturbance to and fragmentation of primary conservation
areas.
         d.   Public water access facilities must comply with the following
requirements:
         (1)   Watercraft access ramps must comply with Minnesota Rules parts
6115.0210 and 6280.0250; and
         (2)   Facilities must be designed and constructed consistent with the
standards in Design Handbook for Recreational Boating and Fishing Facilities.
         e.   Public signs and kiosks for interpretive or directional purposes
are allowed in the bluff or shore impact zones, provided they are placed and
constructed to minimize disturbance to these areas and avoid visual impacts on
public river corridor views. If illuminated, the lighting must be fully
shielded and be directed downward.
         f.   Public stairways, lifts, and landings must be designed as
provided in subsection H.4.c above.
   I.   Vegetation Management:
      1.   Purpose: To establish standards that sustain and enhance the
biological and ecological functions of vegetation; preserve the natural
character and topography of the MRCCA; and maintain stability of bluffs and
steep slopes and ensure stability of other erosion-prone areas.
      2.   Applicability: This section applies to:
         a.   Shore impact zones;
         b.   Areas within fifty (50) feet of a wetland or natural drainage
route;
         c.   Bluff impact zones;
         d.   Areas of native plant communities; and
         e.   Significant existing vegetative stands identified in the MRCCA
plan.
      3.   Activities Allowed Without A Vegetation Permit:
         a.   Maintenance of existing lawns, landscaping and gardens;
         b.   Removal of vegetation in emergency situations as determined by
(insert name of LGU);
         c.   Right-of-way maintenance for public facilities meeting the
standards of subsection I.3 above;
         d.   Agricultural and forestry activities meeting the standards of
subsections F.2.a and F.2.c above;
         e.   Selective vegetation removal, provided that vegetative cover
remains consistent with the management purpose of the MRCCA District, including
removal of:
         (1)   Vegetation that is dead, diseased, dying, or hazardous;
         (2)   Vegetation to prevent the spread of diseases or insect pests;
         (3)   Individual trees and shrubs; and
         (4)   Invasive non-native species.
      4.   Activities Allowed With A Vegetation Permit:
         a.   Only the following intensive vegetation clearing activities are
allowed with a vegetation permit:
         (1)   Clearing of vegetation that is dead, diseased, dying, or
hazardous;
         (2)   Clearing to prevent the spread of diseases or insect pests;
         (3)   Clearing to remove invasive non-native species;
         (4)   Clearing to prepare for restoration and erosion control
management activities consistent with a plan approved by the city; and
         (5)   The minimum necessary for development that is allowed with a
building permit or as an exemption under subsection M below.
         b.   General Performance Standards: The following standards must be
met, in addition to a restoration plan under subsection J.6 below, in order to
approve a vegetation permit:
         (1)   Development is sited to minimize removal of or disturbance to
natural vegetation;
         (2)   Soil, slope stability, and hydrologic conditions are suitable
for the proposed work as determined by a professional engineer and approved by
the city;
         (3)   Clearing is the minimum necessary and designed to blend with the
natural terrain and minimize visual impacts to public river corridor views;
         (4)   Vegetation removal activities are conducted so as to expose the
smallest practical area of soil to erosion for the least possible time; and
         (5)   Any other condition determined necessary to achieve the purpose
of this section.
      5.   Prohibited Activities: All other intensive vegetation clearing is
prohibited.
      6.   Vegetation Restoration Plan:
         a.   Development of a vegetation restoration plan and reestablishment
of natural vegetation is required:
         (1)   For any vegetation removed with a permit under subsection J.4.a
above;
         (2)   Upon failure to comply with any provisions in this section; or
         (3)   As part of the planning process for subdivisions as provided in
subsection L below.
         b.   Restoration Plan Performance Standards: The vegetation
restoration plan must satisfy the application submittal requirements in
subsection D.6 above; and
         (1)   Vegetation must be restored in one or more of the following
restoration priority areas:
         (a)   Areas with soils showing signs of erosion, especially on or near
the top and bottom of steep slopes and bluffs;
         (b)   Shoreline areas within twenty-five (25) feet of the water with
no natural vegetation, degraded vegetation, or planted with turf grass;
         (c)   Areas on steep slopes and bluffs that are visible from the river
with no natural vegetation, degraded vegetation, or planted with turf grass; or
         (d)   Other approved priority opportunity area, including priorities
identified in the MRCCA plan, if none of the above exist.
         (2)   Include vegetation that provides suitable habitat and effective
soil stability, runoff retention, and infiltration capability. Vegetation
species, composition, density, and diversity must be guided by nearby patches
of native plant communities and by Native Vegetation Establishment and
Enhancement Guidelines;
         (3)   Any highly erodible soils disturbed during removal and/or
restoration must be stabilized with deep-rooted vegetation with a high stem
density;
         (4)   Vegetation removed must be restored with native vegetation to
the greatest extent practicable. The area (square feet) of the restored
vegetation should be similar to that removed to the greatest extent
practicable;
         (5)   For restoration of removed native plant communities, restored
vegetation must also provide biological and ecological function equivalent to
the removed native plant communities. The area (square feet) of the restored
vegetation should be equivalent to that removed;
         (6)   Be prepared by a qualified individual; and
         (7)   Include a maintenance plan that includes management provisions
for controlling invasive species and replacement of plant loss for three (3)
years.
         c.   A certificate of compliance will be issued after the vegetation
restoration plan requirements have been satisfied.
   J.   Land Alteration Standards And Stormwater Management:
      1.   Purpose: To establish standards that protect water quality from
pollutant loadings of sediment, nutrients, bacteria, and other contaminants;
and maintain stability of bluffs, shorelines, and other areas prone to erosion.
      2.   Land Alteration:
         a.   Within the bluff impact zone, land alteration is prohibited,
except for the following, which are allowed by permit.
         (1)   Erosion control consistent with a plan approved by the local
government or resource agency and consistent with subsection K.6 below;
         (2)   The minimum necessary for development that is allowed as an
exception under subsection M below; and
         (3)   Repair and maintenance of existing buildings and facilities.
         b.   Within the water quality impact zone, land alteration that
involves more than ten (10) cubic yards of material or affects an area greater
than one thousand (1,000) square feet requires a permit.
      3.   Rock Riprap, Retaining Walls, And Other Erosion Control Structures:
         a.   Construction, repair, or replacement of rock riprap, retaining
walls, and other erosion control structures located at or below the OHWL must
comply with Minnesota Rules, part 6115.0215, Subp. 4, item E, and 6115.0216,
Subp. 2. Work must not proceed until approved by the commissioner, permitted by
the US Army Corps of Engineers, and any other permits are obtained. See Figure
5.9.
Figure 5. 9. Riprap Guidelines
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4b51a377144822298e340f2016f76ebbfa73789c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1767.jpg]
         b.    Co nstr uc tion or repl ac eme nt of ro ck rip rap, retaining
walls, and other erosion control structures within the bluff impact zone and
the water quality impact zone are allowed with a permit consistent with
provisions of subsection K.6 below provided that:
         (1)   If the project includes work at or below the OHWL, the
commissioner has already approved or permitted the project.
         (2)   The structures are used only to correct an established erosion
problem as determined by the city.
         (3)   The size and extent of the structures are the minimum necessary
to correct the erosion problem and are not larger than the following, unless a
professional engineer determines that a larger structure is needed to correct
the erosion problem:
            (a)   Retaining walls must not exceed five (5) feet in height and
must be placed a minimum horizontal distance of ten (10) feet apart; and
            (b)   Riprap must not exceed the height of the regulatory flood
protection elevation.
         c.   Repair of existing rock riprap, retaining walls, and other
erosion control structures above the OHWL does not require a permit provided it
does not involve any land alteration.
      4.   Stormwater Management:
         a.   In the bluff impact zone, storm water management facilities are
prohibited, except by permit if:
         (1)   There are no alternatives for storm water treatment outside the
bluff impact zone on the subject site;
         (2)   The site generating runoff is designed so that the amount of
runoff reaching the bluff impact zone is reduced to the greatest extent
practicable;
         (3)   The construction and operation of the facility does not affect
slope stability on the subject property or adjacent properties; and
         (4)   Mitigation based on the best available engineering and
geological practices is required and applied to eliminate or minimize the risk
of slope failure.
         b.   In the water quality impact zone, development that creates new
impervious surface, as allowed by exemption in subsection M below, or fully
reconstructs existing impervious surface of more than ten thousand (10,000)
square feet requires a storm water permit. Multipurpose trails and sidewalks
are exempt if there is down gradient vegetation or a filter strip that is at
least five (5) feet wide.
         c.   In all other areas, storm water runoff must be directed away from
the bluff impact zones or unstable areas.
      5.   Development On Steep Slopes: Construction of structures, impervious
surfaces, land alteration, vegetation removal, or other construction activities
are allowed on steep slopes if:
         a.   The development can be accomplished without increasing erosion or
storm water runoff;
         b.   The soil types and geology are suitable for the proposed
development; and
         c.   Vegetation is managed according to the requirements of subsection
J above.
      6.   Conditions Of Land Alteration Permit Approval:
         a.   Temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control measures
retain sediment onsite consistent with best management practices in the
Minnesota Stormwater Manual;
         b.   Natural site topography, soil, and vegetation conditions are used
to control runoff and reduce erosion and sedimentation;
         c.   Construction activity is phased when possible;
         d.   All erosion and sediment controls are installed before starting
any land disturbance activity;
         e.   Erosion and sediment controls are maintained to ensure effective
operation;
         f.   The proposed work is consistent with the vegetation standards in
subsection J above; and
         g.   Best management practices for protecting and enhancing ecological
and water resources identified in Best Practices for Meeting DNR General Public
Waters Work Permit GP 2004-0001.
      7.   Compliance With Other Plans And Programs: All development must:
         a.   Be consistent with Minn. Stat. chapter 103B, and local water
management plans completed under Minn. Stat. chapter 8410;
         b.   Meet or exceed the wetland protection standards under Minnesota
Rules, chapter 8420; and
         c.   Meet or exceed the floodplain management standards under
Minnesota Rules, parts 6120. 5000 - 6120.6200.
   K.   Subdivision And Land Development Standards:
      1.   Purpose:
         a.   To protect and enhance the natural and scenic values of the MRCCA
during development or redevelopment of the remaining large sites;
         b.   To establish standards for protecting and restoring biological
and ecological functions of primary conservation areas on large sites; and
         c.   To encourage restoration of natural vegetation during development
or redevelopment of large sites where restoration opportunities have been
identified in MRCCA Plans.
      2.   Applicability:
         a.   The design standards in this section apply to subdivisions,
planned unit developments and master- planned development and redevelopment of
land involving ten or more acres for contiguous parcels that abut the
Mississippi River and twenty (20) or more acres for all other parcels,
including smaller individual sites within the following developments that are
part of a common plan of development that may be constructed at different
times:
         (1)   Subdivisions;
         (2)   Planned unit developments; and
         (3)   Master-planned development and redevelopment of land.
         b.   The following activities are exempt from the requirements of this
section:
         (1)   Minor subdivisions consisting of three or fewer lots;
         (2)   Minor boundary line corrections;
         (3)   Resolutions of encroachments;
         (4)   Additions to existing lots of record;
         (5)   Placement of essential services; and
         (6)   Activities involving river-dependent commercial and industrial
uses.
      3.   Application Materials: Project information listed in subsection D.6
above must be submitted for all proposed developments.
      4.   Design Standards:
         a.   Primary conservation areas, where they exist, must be set aside
and designated as protected open space in quantities meeting the following as a
percentage of total parcel area:
         (1)   CA-ROS District: Fifty percent (50%);
         (2)   CA-UM District: Ten percent (10%); and
         (3)   CA-SR District: Ten percent (10%) if the parcel includes native
plant communities or provides feasible connections to a regional park or trail
system, otherwise no requirement.
         b.   If the primary conservation areas exceed the amounts specified in
subsection L.4.a above, then protection of native plant communities and natural
vegetation in riparian areas shall be prioritized.
         c.   If primary conservation areas exist but do not have natural
vegetation (identified as restoration priorities in the MRCCA Plan), then a
vegetation assessment must be completed to evaluate the unvegetated primary
conservation areas and determine whether vegetation restoration is needed. If
restoration is needed, vegetation must be restored according to subsection
J.6.b above.
         d.   If primary conservation areas do not exist on the parcel and
portions of the parcel have been identified in the MRCCA plan as a restoration
area, vegetation must be restored in the identified areas according to
subsection J.6.b above and the area must be set aside and designated as
protected open space.
         e.   Storm water treatment areas or other green infrastructure may be
used to meet the protected open space requirements if the vegetation provides
biological and ecological functions.
         f.   Land dedicated under section 12-2-6, Park Dedication, for public
river access, parks, or other open space or public facilities may be counted
toward the protected open space requirement.
         g.   Protected open space areas must connect open space, natural
areas, and recreational areas, where present on adjacent parcels, as much as
possible to form an interconnected network.
      5.   Alternative Design Standards:
         a.   The city will consider alternative design standards through a
Planned Unit Development (PUD). With using a PUD, the city will consider
deviation from minimum lot sizes and lot dimension standards. Use of a PUD
within the MRCCA boundary shall include the following:
         (1)   A demonstrated protection and restoration of continuous
vegetation - preventing the fragmentation of vegetation and habitat by
individual lots, especially along the river and natural drainage areas and
protecting it as common open space.
         (2)   Protection of open space, particularly primary conservation
areas, beyond the minimum identified in 4.a.
      6.   Permanent Protection Of Designated Open Space:
         a.   Designated open space areas must be protected through one or more
of the following methods:
         (1)   Public acquisition by a government entity for conservation
purposes;
         (2)   A permanent conservation easement, as provided in Minn. Stat.
chapter 84C;
         (3)   A deed restriction; and
         (4)   Other arrangements that achieve an equivalent degree of
protection.
         b.   Permanent protection methods must ensure the long-term management
of vegetation to meet its biological and ecological functions, prohibit
structures, and prohibit land alteration, except as needed to provide public
recreational facilities and access to the river.
   L.   Exemptions:
      1.   Purpose: To provide exemptions to structure placement, height and
other standards for specific river or water access dependent facilities as
provided in Minn. Stat. § 116G.15 Subd. 4.
      2.   Applicability:
         a.   Uses and activities not specifically exempted must comply with
this section. Uses and activities exempted under shore impact zone and bluff
impact zone must comply with the vegetation management and land alteration
standards in subsections J and K above.
         b.   Uses and activities in subsection M.3 below are categorized as:
         (1)   Exempt - E. This means that the use or activity is allowed;
         (2)   Exempt if no alternative - (E). This means that the use or
activity is allowed only if no alternatives exist; and
         (3)   Not exempt - N. This means that a use or activity is not exempt
and must meet the standards of this chapter.
      3.   Use And Activity Exemptions Classification:
         a.   General Uses And Activities:
   Table 5.2. General Uses and Activities
 
                                                        Applicable standards
Use or Activity        Setbacks Height Limits SIZ BIZ   with which the use or
                                                        activity must comply
Industrial and utility
structures requiring                                    Structure design and
greater height for                                      placement must minimize
operational reasons    N        E             N   N     interference with
(such as elevators,                                     public river corridor
refineries and                                          views
railroad signaling
towers)
Barns, silos, and farm N        E             N   N      
structures
Bridges and bridge     E        EN (E)        Section 8  
approach roadways
Wireless communication E        E             N   N     Section 5.26
towers
Chimneys, church
spires, flag poles,
public monuments, and  N        E             N   N      
mechanical stacks and
equipment
Historic properties                                     Exemptions do not apply
and contributing       E        E             E   E     to additions or site
properties in historic                                  alterations
districts
 
         b.   Public Utilities:
   Table 5.3. Public Utilities
 
                                                          Applicable standards
Use or Activity       Setback s Heig ht Limi ts SIZ  BIZ  with which the use or
                                                          activity must comply
Electrical power      N(E)      E               (E ) Section 8
facilities
Essential services
(other than storm     E         E               E    (E ) Section 8
water facilities)
Strom water           E         N               E    (E ) Section 10
facilities
Wastewater treatment  E         N               E    N    Section 8
Public transportation E         N               (E ) (E ) Section 8
facilities
         c.   Public Recreational Facilities:
   Table 5.4. Public Recreational Facilities
Use or Activity Setbacks Height Limits SIZ BIZ Applicable standards with which
                                               the use or activity must comply
                                                        Applicable standards
Use or Activity        Setbacks Height Limits SIZ  BIZ  with which the use or
                                                        activity must comply
Accessory structures,                                   Section 8; within BIZ,
such as monuments,                                      only on slopes
flagpoles, light       E        E             (E ) (E ) averaging less than
standards, and similar                                  30%. Exemptions do not
features                                                apply to principal
                                                        structures.
Picnic shelters and
other one-sided        E        N             (E ) (E ) Section 8
structures
                                                        Section 8; within BIZ,
                                                        only within 20 feet of
Parking lots           (E)      N             (E ) (E ) toe of bluff; not on
                                                        face of bluff; and must
                                                        not affect stability of
                                                        bluff
Roads and driveways    (E)      N             (E ) (E ) Section 8
Natural-surfaced
trails, access paths,  E        N             E    E    Section 8
and viewing areas
Hard-surfaced trails                                    Section 8; within BIZ,
and viewing platforms  E        N             E    (E ) only on slopes
                                                        averaging less than 30%
Water access ramps     E        N             E    (E ) Section 8
Public signs and
kiosks for             E        N             E    (E ) Section 8
interpretive or
directional purposes
 
         d.   River-Dependent Uses.
   Table 5.5. River Dependent Uses
 
                                                        Applicable standards
Use or Activity         Setbacks Height Limits SIZ BIZ  with which the use or
                                                        activity must comply
                                                        Section 5.25.
                                                        Exemptions do not apply
                                                        to buildings,
Shoreline facilities    E        N1            E   (E ) structures, and parking
                                                        areas that are not part
                                                        of a shoreline
                                                        facility.
Private roads and
conveyance structures   E        N1            E   (E ) Section 5.25
serving river-dependent
uses
1 River-dependent commercial, industrial, and utility structures are exempt
from height limits only if greater height is required for operational reasons.
 
         e.   Private Residential And Commercial Water Access And Use
Facilities:
   Table 5.6. Private Residential and Commercial Water Access and Use
Facilities
Use or Activity Setbacks Height Limits SIZ BIZ Applicable standards with which
                                               the use or activity must comply
                                                        Applicable standards
Use or Activity         Setbacks Height Limits SIZ BIZ  with which the use or
                                                        activity must comply
                                                        Section 7; in BIZ, only
                                                        on slopes averaging
                                                        less than 30%.
Private roads serving 3                                 Exemption does not
or more lots            (E)      N             N   (E ) apply to private roads
                                                        serving fewer than 3
                                                        lots or to private
                                                        driveways and parking
                                                        areas
Access paths            E        N             E   E    Section 7
Water access ramps      E        N             E   N    Section 7
Stairways, lifts, and   E        N             E   E    Section 7
landings
Water-oriented          E        N             E   N    Section 7
accessory structures
Patios and decks        E        N             N   N    Section 7.5
Directional signs for                                   Section 7.6; exemption
watercraft (private)    E        N             E   N    does not apply to off-
                                                        premise signs
Temporary storage of
docks, boats, and other E        N             E   N     
equipment during the
winter months
Erosion control
structures, such as     E        N(E)          Sections 10.3, 10.5 and 10.6
rock riprap and
retaining walls
Flood control           E        N             E   (E ) Section 10
structures
 
(Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-5-5: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the planned unit development (PUD) district is
to provide a district that will encourage the following:
      1.   Flexibility in land development and redevelopment in order to
utilize new techniques of building design and construction, and site design
including clustering of buildings and land uses.
      2.   Provision of life cycle housing to all income and age groups.
      3.   Energy conservation through the use of more efficient building
design and siting and the clustering of buildings and land uses.
      4.   Preservation of desirable site characteristics and open space and
protection of sensitive environmental features, including, but not limited to,
steep slopes, trees and poor soils.
      5.   More efficient and effective use of land, open space and public
facilities through mixing of land uses and assembly and development of land
into larger parcels.
      6.   High quality of design and design compatible with surrounding land
uses, including both existing and planned.
      7.   Sensitive development in transitional areas located between
different land uses and along significant transportation or scenic corridors
within the city.
      8.   Development that is consistent with the comprehensive plan.
   B.   Development Standards: Within the PUD district, all development shall
be in compliance with the following:
      1.   Area: Each PUD shall have a minimum area of two (2) acres, excluding
wetlands, land lying below the ordinary high water level of any lake, land
within a floodway, and existing rights-of-way, unless the applicant can
demonstrate the existence of one of the following:
         a.   Unusual physical features of the property itself or of the
surrounding neighborhood such that development as a PUD will conserve a
physical or topographic feature of importance to the neighborhood or community.
         b.   The property is directly adjacent to or across the right-of- way
from property which has been developed previously as a PUD and will appear as
and will function as an extension of that previously approved development.
         c.   The property is located in a transitional area between different
land use categories or on a collector or arterial (minor or principal) street,
as defined in the comprehensive plan.
      2.   Uses: For a given PUD, all uses shall be consistent with the
comprehensive plan and the master development plan as approved.
         a.   Area Used For Land Uses: The city may permit up to ten percent
(10%) of the gross floor area of all buildings in a PUD to be used for land
uses for which the site is not designated in the comprehensive plan if the city
council finds that such use is in the best interests of the city and is
consistent with the requirements of this chapter. If non-designated uses are to
be incorporated into a PUD, the city may forward a copy of the request to the
metropolitan council for review.
         b.   Designated For Multiple Land Uses: Where the site of a proposed
PUD is designated for more than one land use in the comprehensive plan, the
city may require that the PUD include all the proposed land uses.
         c.   Single Land Use Or Housing Type: Any PUD which involves a single
land use type or housing type may be permitted; provided, that it is otherwise
consistent with the objectives of this title and the comprehensive plan.
      3.   Density:
         a.   Each residential PUD or the residential portion of each mixed-use
PUD shall have a density within the range specified in the comprehensive plan
for the PUD site.
         b.   The density of individual buildings or lots within a PUD may
exceed these standards, provided the density for the entire PUD does not exceed
the permitted standards.
         c.   If the site is not designated in the comprehensive plan for
residential use, the appropriate density shall be determined by the city based
upon the city council's finding that such density is consistent with the intent
of the PUD and of the comprehensive plan.
      4.   Application Of Title Provisions: The requirements contained in this
title shall apply to a PUD as deemed appropriate by the city. The regulations
of the most closely related base zoning district shall be considered
presumptively appropriate, but may be departed from in order to accomplish the
purposes of this section.
         a.   Buildings Per Lot: The city may permit more than one building to
be placed on one platted or recorded lot in a PUD as long as the buildings are
separated by at least twelve (12) feet.
         b.   Setbacks, Buffers, And Greenspace: Setback, buffers, and
greenspace within a PUD shall be consistent with applicable sections of this
title and title 12 "Subdivision Regulations" of this code unless the developer
can demonstrate to the city's satisfaction that a lesser standard should be
permitted with the addition of a screening treatment or other mitigative
measures.
         c.   Private Recreational Uses: Each residential PUD comprised of
units other than single-unit detached housing or within a mixed-use PUD shall
provide an area dedicated for private recreational uses for project residents.
Such areas will be for active or passive recreational uses suited for the needs
of the residents of the project, including, but not limited to, swimming pools,
trails, nature areas, picnic areas, tot lots and saunas.
         d.   Streets, Utilities, Public Facilities And Subdivisions: The city
ordinances governing the specifications and standards for streets, utilities,
public facilities and subdivisions may be modified based upon the unique
characteristics of the PUD. The city council may therefore approve streets,
utilities, public facilities, and land subdivisions that are not in compliance
with usual specifications or ordinance requirements if it finds that strict
adherence to such standards or requirements is not required to meet the intent
of this chapter or to protect the health, safety, or welfare of the residents
of the PUD, the surrounding area, or the city as a whole.
         e.   Parking: Parking provided for uses within a PUD shall be
consistent with the parking requirements contained in section
11-7-3 "Off-street Parking and Loading Standards" of this title, unless the
developer can demonstrate to the city's satisfaction that a lesser standard
should be permitted on the grounds of complementary peak parking demands by the
uses within the PUD. The city may require execution of a restrictive covenant
limiting future use of the property to those uses that will continue the
complementary peak parking demands or a proof of parking agreement.
         f.   Architectural And Landscape Design: The applicant shall
demonstrate that the architectural and landscape design proposed for all
residential PUDs or the residential portion of a mixed-use PUD will provide
privacy for both internal and exterior living areas. This provision shall
include, but not be limited to, landscape and fence screens, location of HVAC
equipment, and location of structures relative to adjacent homes. Deviations
from approved plans must be approved by both the City Council.
         g.   Signs: Signs shall be restricted to those permitted under chapter
8, "Signage", of this title or in a sign plan approved by the city regulated by
permanent covenants.
      5.   Covenants: All applicants for a PUD shall establish an association
or similar framework approved by the city to oversee the maintenance of
commonly held properties and review of architectural modifications to the
approved plans.
      6.   Unified Ownership Or Control: All property to be included within a
PUD shall be under unified ownership or control or subject to such legal
restrictions or covenants as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the
approved master development plan and final site and building plan. (Ord. 2024-
04, 6-4-2024)
CHAPTER 6
USE-SPECIFIC STANDARDS
SECTION:
11-6-1: Principal Uses, Residential
11-6-2: Principal Uses, Public And Institutional
11-6-3: Principal Uses, Commercial
11-6-4: Principal Uses, Industrial
11-6-5: Principal Uses, Agriculture, Open Space, And Natural Resources
11-6-6: Principal Uses, Utilities
11-6-7: Accessory Uses, A - M
11-6-8: Accessory Uses, N - Z
11-6-1: PRINCIPAL USES, RESIDENTIAL:
   A.   Assisted Living Facility:
      1.   A permanent common open space area for passive group outdoor
recreation activities shall be provided with a size of not less than ten
percent (10%) of the lot area:
         a.   The area shall be landscaped with shade trees and shrubbery for
the purpose of protection from the sun, screening and visual interest.
         b.   Such an outdoor living area shall be properly drained, located
for convenience and optimum use, and shall be walled, fenced, or planted to
provide reasonable privacy.
         c.   This area may be surfaced to provide an area for garden
furniture. It may also be roofed in whole or in part, provided that it is open
on all sides and meets the requirements for location of accessory buildings in
its designated zoning district.
      2.   All buildings shall have a common room open for use by all of the
residents of the building. The common area shall meet the occupancy and space
requirements for common rooms as outlined in the Uniform Building Code.
   B.   Continuing Care Senior Facility:
      1.   A continuing care senior facility may include several uses within a
single development, including townhouse or rowhouse dwellings, apartments, or
assisted living facilities. Each use within the development shall be required
to meet the standards specific to that use listed in this section.
   C.   Dwelling, Apartment:
      1.   No apartment dwelling shall be allowed one hundred fifty (150) feet
of Trunk Highway 3.
   D.   Dwelling, Apartment Mixed Use:
      1.   No dwelling units shall be allowed on the first floor of any part of
the building within one hundred fifty (150) feet of Trunk Highway 3.
   E.   Dwelling, Attached Townhouse Or Rowhouse:
      1.   No dwelling units shall be allowed within one hundred fifty (150)
feet of Trunk Highway 3.
      2.   No frontage requirement on a public street or road is necessary for
attached townhouse or rowhouse dwellings; however, access to a public street is
required via common open space fronting the right-of-way.
      3.   A maximum of ten (10) dwelling units may be attached per building,
except where buildings are adjacent to the RR and R-1 zoning districts; such
buildings shall be limited to a maximum of four (4) dwelling units per
building.
      4.   In addition to the site dimension requirements found in tables 3.3
and 4.3, the following setbacks shall be required for any townhome development:
         a.   Principal structures shall be set back at least sixty (60) feet
from the right-of-way of any principal arterial highway, fifty (50) feet from
the right-of-way of any minor arterial highway, and forty (40) feet from the
right-of-way of any collector street.
         b.   Principal structures shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet
from the back of curb of any private roadway.
         c.   Principal structures shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet
from any perimeter interior side or rear lot line.
      5.   Minimum Distance Between Townhome Structures: In addition to the
setback requirements above, the following minimum distances shall be maintained
between structures:
         a.   A minimum ten (10) feet shall be maintained between side walls of
end unit townhomes between adjacent rows of townhome units.
         b.   Where the rear of a row of townhome dwelling units faces the rear
of an adjoining row of townhome dwelling units, the minimum distance between
structures shall sixty (60) feet.
         c.   Where the rear of a row of townhomes faces the side wall or front
of an adjoining row of townhomes, the minimum distance between the structures
shall be forty (40) feet.
         d.   Off street parking areas provided within the common area for the
use of all of the homeowners shall maintain a minimum setback of fifteen (15)
feet from adjacent townhome dwelling units.
      6.   Design of Garage And Accessory Structures:
         a.   Garages and other accessory structures shall be architecturally
compatible in construction and appearance with the main building. Garage spaces
required to satisfy off-street parking requirements shall be attached to the
townhome dwelling unit.
         b.   A minimum of one hundred fifty (150) cubic feet of storage space,
exclusive of parking spaces provided, shall be provided within the garage.
      7.   Design Of Streets And Parking Areas:
         a.   All parking and driving surfaces shall be surfaced with concrete
or asphalt, and shall be defined by continuous concrete perimeter curbing.
         b.   All internal private roadways shall be a minimum twenty- eight
(28) feet wide face to face.
      8.   Vertical Wall Surface Alignments: No more than two (2) adjacent unit
exterior walls may occupy the same vertical plane. All townhouse or rowhouse
buildings containing three (3) or more dwelling units shall have minimum
offsets of four (4) feet between one of the units and the adjacent unit.
      9.   Open Space Requirements:
         a.   Recreational Space: All areas not occupied by structures, parking
or driving surfaces shall be landscaped and maintained with vegetation. At
least twenty percent (20%) of the open/green space, excluding required setback
areas, shall be reserved for playgrounds and/or passive recreational space.
Park lands shall be graded and seeded by the developer.
         b.   Streets And Lanes: The developer of each townhome development
shall be responsible for building and developing of the open space into
finished, graded and fully developed areas consisting of paved streets having a
minimum of five (5) ton axle load bituminous surfacing and common paved parking
areas, in accordance with section
11-7-3, "Off Street Parking and Loading Standards", of this title.
      10.   See section
12-2-9 "Homeowners Association" for Homeowners' Association requirements.
   F.   Dwelling, Courtyard Cottage:
      1.   All dwelling units within the development shall have a permanent
frost-free foundation or equal, in accordance with the applicable building
code.
      2.   Each dwelling shall have a maximum gross floor area of one thousand
two hundred (1,200) square feet.
      3.   Dwelling units shall have a maximum height of twenty-five (25) feet.
      4.   The minimum distance between dwellings shall be ten (10) feet.
      5.   Each cottage courtyard development shall provide a shared courtyard
which is centrally located, allowing each dwelling unit to be located adjacent
to the shared courtyard. The minimum width and depth of the shared courtyard
shall be twenty (20) feet.
      6.   Each dwelling with street frontage shall have a principal entrance
facing the front property line and street. Each dwelling that does not have
street frontage shall have a principal entrance facing the shared courtyard.
      7.   Pedestrian paths shall be provided to ensure pedestrian access from
each individual dwelling to the front property line and street.
      8.   Any parking, trash, or driveways which are located along the
perimeter of the site shall be screened with fencing and landscaping from
adjacent development.
      9.   No dwelling shall be allowed to have an accessory dwelling unit.
      10.   Each dwelling may be subdivided into an individual lot for rental
and ownership opportunities.
   G.   Dwelling, Single-Unit Detached (Includes Manufactured Home):
      1.   All single-unit detached dwellings shall have a permanent frost-free
foundation or equal, in accordance with the applicable building code.
      2.   Minimum Area For Enclosed Parking Spaces:
         a.   All single-unit detached dwellings shall provide no less than
four hundred forty (440) square feet in area and no less than twenty (20) feet
wide in either direction to accommodate two (2) enclosed parking spaces. The
maximum footprint of a garage shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the gross
floor area of the principal building (garage and living area combined).
         b.   Any single-unit detached dwelling permit for properties receiving
preliminary plat, lot division, or registered land survey approvals after the
effective date hereof, shall include certificates of survey providing for the
location of an attached third garage stall, whether or not construction is
intended. The area allotted for the third stall shall be a minimum of ten (10)
feet wide and twenty (20) feet long. The combined area for the required two (2)
stall attached garage and the proposed third stall shall not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the gross floor area of the principal building (garage and
living area combined).
   H.   Dwelling, Twin-Home:
      1.   All single-unit detached dwellings shall have a permanent frost-free
foundation or equal, in accordance with the applicable building code.
      2.   Attached dwellings without common open space or shared facilities
shall have FHA party wall, maintenance or comparable agreements consistent with
state statutes.
      3.   Attached dwellings which share the ownership of common open spaces
or other facilities (i.e., driveways or utility services) shall be required to
have condominium association documentation consistent with state statutes.
   I.   Dwelling, Two- To Four-Unit:
      1.   All single-unit detached dwellings shall have a permanent frost-free
foundation or equal, in accordance with the applicable building code.
      2.   Attached dwellings without common open space or shared facilities
shall have FHA party wall, maintenance or comparable agreements consistent with
state statutes.
      3.   Attached dwellings which share the ownership of common open spaces
or other facilities (i.e., driveways or utility services) shall be required to
have condominium association documentation consistent with state statutes.
   J.   Long-Term Or Transitional Care Facility:
      1.   A permanent common open space area for passive group outdoor
recreation activities shall be provided with a size of not less than five
percent (5%) of the lot area:
         a.   The area shall be landscaped with shade trees and shrubbery for
the purpose of protection from the sun, screening and visual interest.
         b.   Such an outdoor living area shall be properly drained, located
for convenience and optimum use, and shall be walled, fenced, or planted to
provide reasonable privacy.
         c.   This area may be surfaced to provide an area for garden
furniture. It may also be roofed in whole or in part, provided that it is open
on all sides and meets the requirements for location of accessory buildings in
its designated zoning district.
      2.   All buildings shall have a common room open for use by all of the
residents of the building. The common area shall meet the occupancy and space
requirements for common rooms as outlined in the Uniform Building Code.
   K.   Manufactured Home Park:
      1.   Manufactured homes not meeting single-unit dwelling requirements are
permitted only in planned manufactured home parks. The PUD procedure is
required for all park proposals.
      2.   Manufactured home parks must be serviced by public sewer and water
systems.
      3.   Manufactured homes must have a full basement or must be affixed to a
permanent frost- free foundation with a completely enclosed crawl space.
      4.   Only manufactured homes certified as meeting current HUD
"manufactured home construction and safety standards" shall be permitted,
unless evidence is furnished that manufactured homes meeting prior HUD codes
have been updated to meet current construction and safety standards and upon
inspection have been found safe and fit for residential occupancy.
      5.   Every person operating a manufactured home park within the city
shall provide and keep a suitable guest register for the registration of all
persons provided with accommodations, and each person shall register therein,
as provided by state law. This register shall contain the following:
         a.   Name and lot address of each occupant;
         b.   Name and address of the owner of the manufactured home;
         c.   Make, model, year and license of each manufactured home; and
         d.   Date of arrival and departure of each manufactured home.
         e.   This information shall be kept for at least three (3) years after
the date the occupant leaves the manufactured home park.
      6.   Minimum Site Area: Minimum site area for manufactured home parks is
forty (40) acres.
      7.   Property Line Abutting Street: Manufactured home parks shall have at
least one (1) property line abutting a collector or arterial street, as defined
by the comprehensive guide plan.
      8.   Setbacks: All structures within manufactured home parks shall be set
back a minimum of fifty (50) feet from all adjacent property lines. Said
setback area shall be provided with a dense combination of earthen berms and
plant materials, specific plans for which must be approved by the planning
commission.
      9.   Parks And Recreational Uses: Dedication for parks and recreational
uses shall be determined according to the requirements of title 12 of this
code. The city council shall determine whether land or cash in lieu of land
shall be required, and, in the case of land dedication, whether the land shall
be publicly or privately owned and maintained.
      10.   Streets And Utilities Under Single Ownership: Streets and utilities
in manufactured home parks under single ownership shall be privately
constructed, owned and maintained.
      11.   Privately Owned Utilities: Privately owned utilities shall be
designed and constructed to meet the minimum specifications of the Minnesota
department of health and the Minnesota pollution control agency. The use of
propane or butane gas for any purpose in lieu of public or private utilities
within the confines of the manufactured home park is prohibited.
      12.   Private Streets: Private streets shall be constructed to meet
minimum city specifications and shall be paved to a minimum width of thirty-two
(32) feet where on street parking is permitted. Where parking is permitted on
one side only and signs are posted, the minimum street width shall be twenty-
eight (28) feet. All streets and roadways located within the manufactured home
park shall have a concrete curb and gutter and paved in accordance with city
standards.
      13.   Condominium Style Parks: The city council shall determine whether
streets and utilities in condominium style manufactured home parks may be
publicly owned and maintained.
      14.   Access Points: All manufactured home parks shall be designed with a
minimum of two (2) access points on public thoroughfares, providing full
ingress and egress at each location.
      15.   Storm Shelters: Each manufactured home park shall provide a storm
shelter or shelters of sufficient capacity to safely protect all of the
residents of the park in case of a storm emergency. In lieu thereof, the
planning commission may approve basement shelters within each unit provided the
minimum standards for safety are assured.
      16.   Outdoor Storage Of Recreation Vehicles: The outdoor storage of
recreation vehicles shall not be permitted except as provided for in section
11-6-8 "Accessory Uses, N-Z" of this title.
      17.   Sidewalks: A concrete sidewalk, not less than five (5) feet wide
shall be constructed along one side of streets entering the manufactured
housing park and provide safe pedestrian links to recreational amenities and
the required shelter within the park and to public recreational facilities as
recommended by the parks and recreation commission.
      18.   Landscaping: All surfaces not occupied by the manufactured home,
patios, sidewalks or hard surfaced off street parking shall be sodded and
maintained with grass or native ground cover. One boulevard or shade tree shall
be provided per manufactured home with a minimum size of two (2) inches (B&B).
In addition, landscape screening is required in the perimeter setback areas to
mitigate the effects of dissimilar uses and traffic.
      19.   Carports And Garages: A freestanding carport or garage not attached
to a manufactured home may be permitted provided that it conforms to all
applicable uniform building codes and is consistent with accessory structure
setbacks provided herein. Prior to issuance of any building permit, permission
must be provided by the park owner and certified to the city.
      20.   Accessory Structures: One freestanding accessory structure or
storage shed per manufactured home may be permitted in addition to above
mentioned carports or garages. All accessory structures shall conform to
applicable building codes. Said structures shall be limited to one hundred
twenty (120) square feet in size.
      21.   Manufactured Home Park Closings:
         a.   Purpose And Intent: In view of the peculiar nature and problems
associated with the closure or conversion of manufactured home parks, the city
council finds that the public health, safety and general welfare will be
promoted by requiring compensation to displaced homeowners and tenants of such
parks. The purpose of this section is to define by whom and in what amount
compensation for the park relocation or displacement of a manufactured home is
paid. This section is adopted pursuant to the authority granted under Minn.
Stat. § 327C.095. The relocation costs stated in this section are intended to
be considered along with all other compensation eligible to the displaced
residents. If the park closing falls under the federal uniform relocation act,
the park owner will not be required to reimburse residents' expenses reimbursed
under that act.
         b.   Notice Of Closing: If the manufactured home park is to be sold
with the intent to convert in whole or in part to another use or the owner of
the park requests and receives rezoning of the property from the city, the park
owner shall, at least nine (9) months prior to conversion to another use or
sale to someone with the intent to convert to another use, provide a copy of a
closure statement to a resident or each manufactured home and to the city
community development department.
         c.   Notice Of Public Hearing: The community development department
shall schedule a public hearing with the city council. The community
development department shall mail a notice at least ten (10) days prior to the
public hearing to a resident of each manufactured home in the park stating the
time, place and purpose of the hearing. The park owner shall provide the city
with a list of the names and addresses of at least one resident of each
manufactured home in the park at the time the closure statement is submitted to
the community development department.
         d.   Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be held before the city
council for the purpose of reviewing the closure statement and evaluating what
impact the park closing may have on displaced residents and the park owner. At
the public hearing, the city council will take testimony regarding the
reasonableness of the maximum relocation costs to be paid by the park owner and
the actual costs to relocate park residents. Based on the testimony, the city
council, at its discretion, may adopt an ordinance increasing or decreasing the
maximum total relocation costs as described in provision i within this
subsection.
         e.   Conditions Of Closing:
         (1)   As a condition of the closing of the manufactured home park, the
park owner shall pay the relocation costs to the contractors providing the
relocation services and/or to displaced residents. If the park owner determines
within four (4) months prior to the date of closure of the park that the park
will not be closed, the park owner may rescind the notice of closure and shall
pay any actual relocation costs incurred by any of the park's manufactured home
owners. If the park owner determines at least four (4) months prior to the date
of closure of the park that the park will not be closed, the park owner may
rescind the notice of closure, and not be liable for any relocation costs.
         (2)   Each displaced resident is eligible for an equal share of the
maximum total compensation as described in provision (1) within this
subsection. If a displaced resident's relocation cost is less than their equal
share, then the difference between the equal share and the actual relocation
costs of that household is equally distributed to the displaced residents who
have relocation costs in excess of their equal share.
         (3)   The city shall not issue a building permit in conjunction with
the reuse of the manufactured home park property unless the park owner has paid
the relocation costs and/or the park purchaser has compensated displaced
residents in accordance with the requirements of this section. Approval of any
application for rezoning, platting, conditional use permit, planned unit
development or variance in conjunction with a park closing or conversion shall
be conditional on compliance with the requirements of this section.
         f.   Displaced Resident Statement: Within ninety (90) days of receipt
of a closure notice, the displaced resident shall provide the park owner with a
written statement of relocation costs, or in the alternative, a written
statement that the resident cannot relocate his or her manufactured home to
another manufactured home park within a twenty-five (25)-mile radius. If a
resident determines not to relocate as defined within this section, the
resident must state whether he or she elects to receive relocation costs under
provisions g and j of this subsection.
         g.   Election To Relocate:
         (1)   If a manufactured home can be relocated to another manufactured
home park within a twenty-five (25)-mile radius, the park owner shall pay
displaced residents' "relocation costs" as defined herein.
         (2)   The park owner shall make relocation payments directly to
contractors providing the relocation service, or the displaced resident may
choose to be reimbursed by the park owner after the resident submits to the
park owner proof of payment of relocation costs. The park owner shall be
entitled to receive adequate documentation of relocation costs, including costs
of proposals, invoices, estimates and contacts for relocation services.
         (3)   If a displaced resident cannot relocate the manufactured home
within a twenty-five (25)-mile radius of the park which is being closed or some
other agreed upon distance, and the resident elects not to tender title to the
manufactured home, the resident is entitled to relocation costs based upon an
average of relocation costs awarded to other residents in the park.
         (4)   A displaced resident compensated under this section shall retain
title to the manufactured home and shall be responsible for its prompt removal
from the manufactured home park. All rent due and owing to the park owner, and
all property taxes for the current and prior years shall be paid by the
displaced resident prior to removing the manufactured home from the park.
         h.   Election To Receive Compensation: If a resident cannot relocate
his or her manufactured home to another manufactured home park within a twenty-
five (25)-mile radius or some other agreed upon distance and tenders title to
the manufactured home, the resident is entitled to compensation to be paid by
the purchaser of the park in order to mitigate the adverse financial impact of
the park closing. In such instance, the compensation shall be an amount equal
to the estimated market value of the manufactured home as determined by an
independent appraiser experienced in manufactured home appraisal, or the tax
assessed value of the manufactured home for the year in which the park is
scheduled to close, whichever is greater. The appraisal shall be conducted only
after it is determined that the manufactured home cannot be relocated to
another park within twenty-five (25) miles. The purchaser shall pay the cost of
the appraisal. The resident shall transfer title of the manufactured home to
the park purchaser free and clear of all liens and encumbrances. All rent due
the property owner and all property taxes for the current and prior years shall
be paid by displaced residents prior to the removal of the manufactured home
from the park by the park purchaser.
         i.   Limitation Of Relocation Costs And Compensation: Subject to
provision d of this subsection, the total amount of compensation paid to
displaced owners of manufactured homes shall not exceed the greater of twenty-
five percent (25%) of the county assessor's estimated market value of the
manufactured home park, as determined by the county assessor for the year in
which the park is scheduled to close, or twenty-five (25%) of the purchase
price of the park. At the public hearing of the park closure, the city council
will take testimony regarding the reasonableness of the maximum relocation
costs to be paid by the park owner and the actual costs to relocate park
residents. Based on the testimony, the city council, at its discretion, may
adopt an ordinance increasing or decreasing the maximum total relocation costs.
         j.   Penalty: Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-6-2: PRINCIPAL USES, PUBLIC AND INSTITUTIONAL:
   A.   Cemetery:
      1.   Application, Public Hearing, Notice, And Procedure: The application,
public hearing, public notice, and procedure requirements for cemeteries shall
be the same as for planned unit development (PUD) as provided in section
11-9-6 "Planned Unit Development" of this title. At the time of plat approval,
a security in the form of a performance bond, letter of credit or other such
form as deemed necessary to secure the landscape improvements and perpetual
maintenance for the platted portion of the cemetery will be required.
         a.   All cemeteries must be platted so that each gravesite will have a
lot and block number.
         b.   Cemeteries must have a minimum acreage size of five (5) acres.
         c.   All gravesites must be set back a minimum of fifty (50) feet from
any cemetery property boundary.
         d.   All gravesites must be set back a minimum of fifteen (15) feet
from any potable water well.
         e.   No gravesite shall be located in a flood hazard area within a
five hundred (500)-year flood event boundary.
         f.   Any cemetery not completely enclosed by a secured fence after
closing, nor staffed by on site personnel during daylight hours shall be
developed as a memorial park with no aboveground gravesite markers.
         g.   All cemeteries must have planting strips or buffer yards adjacent
to residential districts or uses, public uses and public rights-of-way. In the
absence of a planting strip along a property line, boulevard trees are required
to be planted at fifty (50)-foot intervals. The interior of the cemetery must
have a minimum of one (1) tree per five thousand (5,000) square feet to break
up the large expanse of turf area.
         h.   All gravesites must be within two hundred (200) feet of interior
access drives, if the cemetery is to be open to public access. All interior
driveways must be paved in accordance with standards specified in section
11-7-3 "Off-Street Parking and Loading Standards" of this title.
         i.   All gravesites must have minimum direct frontage to a six (6)
foot wide land containing no gravesites to provide access to gravesites for
equipment.
         j.   All burials must utilize a concrete vault to avoid risk of cave
ins, buried to a minimum depth of six (6) feet so that no portion of the grave
is above the frost line during winter months.
         k.   Cemeteries must have direct access to a collector or arterial
street.
         l.   All cemetery development will require site plan review approval
and will be subject to the conditions for grading permits as specified in
section
11-9-1 "Site Plan and Building Design Review" of this title. In addition, soil
borings will be required to determine the depth of the water table and the soil
structure appropriateness for burials.
         m.   All gravesites shall be set back a minimum of one hundred (100)
feet from any wetland.
   B.   Day Care Center:
      1.   Child Daycare Services, More Than Twelve (12) Persons:
         a.   Pick up and drop off areas shall be located on the site, and
shall be designed to avoid interfering with traffic and pedestrian movements.
         b.   Outdoor recreational area shall be located and designed in a
manner which mitigates visual and noise impacts on any abutting residential
parcels.
         c.   Provide proof of all applicable state, federal, and other
governmental licensing agency approvals.
      2.   Adult Daycare Services:
         a.   When a center is located in a multi-functional organization, the
center may share a common space with the multi-functional organization if the
required space available for use by participants is maintained while the center
is operating.
         b.   Outdoor recreational area shall be located and designed in a
manner which mitigates visual and noise impacts on any abutting residential
parcels.
         c.   Provide proof of all applicable state, federal, and other
governmental licensing agency approvals.
   C.   Funeral Home Or Mortuary:
      1.   The use shall provide adequate off-street parking as regulated in
this title. In the case of shared parking between abutting uses, a reduction of
up to forty percent (40%) in the number of required parking spaces may be
approved.
   D.   Place Of Worship:
      1.   In any residential district, the property must have direct access
onto an arterial street, as designated in the comprehensive plan, or access to
a local street within five hundred (500) feet of the local street's
intersection with an arterial street.
      2.   In the RR District, the following additional standards shall apply:
         a.   The property is designated "TR Transitional Residential" within
the city's adopted comprehensive plan.
         b.   No ancillary uses, including, but not limited to, daycares and
nurseries occurring separately from the religious services, are allowed at the
place of worship.
         c.   Parking lot landscaping requirements for a place of worship shall
be the standards for the PI district in Section
11-7-6 A of this title.
         d.   Permitted materials requirements for a place of worship shall be
the standards for the PI district in Section
11-7-2 B of this title.
         e.   The maximum lot coverage for places of worship shall be thirty
percent (30%).
      3.   In the B-2 district, the property must have direct access to or be
within three hundred (300) feet of a collector or arterial roadway as defined
in the Comprehensive Plan.
   E.   Sacred Community:
      1.   Any sacred community use shall meet all requirements listed in Minn.
Stat. § 327.30. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-6-3: PRINCIPAL USES, COMMERCIAL:
   A.   Adult Establishment:
      1.   Incorporation Of Findings And Definitions: The findings, purpose and
definitions in sections
3-8-1 and
3-8-2 of this code are incorporated and relied upon in this section.
      2.   Permitted Locations:
         a.   Adult establishments as defined and regulated in title 3, chapter
8 of this code are permitted in an overlay district which is established in the
I-1 District east of County Road 73 and north of CSAH 42 in the city of
Rosemount. Adult uses will conform to the I-1 District standards.
         b.   Adult establishments may be located within the overlay district
provided they are not located within:
         (1)   Five hundred (500) feet of a residential structure;
         (2)   One thousand (1,000) feet from the property line of a park,
school, church, library, commercial daycare center, cemetery; or
         (3)   One thousand (1,000) feet of another adult establishment.
   B.   Animal Boarding, Kennel, Or Daycare Center:
      1.   Any site used for overnight animal boarding or kennel shall not be
less than five (5) acres in size. Animal daycare centers, which may include
overnight boarding, within the B-2 - Employment District may be located on
properties smaller than five (5) acres.
      2.   All structures used in conjunction with overnight animal boarding,
including outdoor dog runs, shall be located a minimum of five hundred (500)
feet from adjacent residential structures and seventy-five (75) feet from
residential property lines. Animal daycare centers shall be exempt from this
requirement.
      3.   All commercial kennels shall be licensed by the State of Minnesota
Board of Animal Health.
      4.   The maximum number of animals shall not exceed the space provided in
accordance with the requirements of the State of Minnesota Board of Animal
Health.
      5.   Subject to the regulations regarding the care and keeping of animals
within the city contained in title 7, chapter 4 of this code.
      6.   In the RR District, no outdoor keeping of animals or dog runs shall
be permitted.
   C.   Animal/Veterinary Clinic Or Hospital:
      1.   Outdoor runs or kennels shall not be permitted.
      2.   Subject to the regulations regarding the care and keeping of animals
within the City contained in title 7, chapter 4 of this Code.
   D.   Automobile Fuel Station:
      1.   The site and building(s) shall be designed to limit the effects of
this use on adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. No gasoline pumps
shall be located on a site abutting any residential use or district.
      2.   The principal building shall be the primary source for screening the
gasoline pumps from adjacent properties and/or rights-of-way. Landscaping and
berming shall be a secondary source for screening gasoline pumps. Should
landscaping and berming be found ineffective by the city, the city may approve
screening walls and/or decorative fencing as an alternative. Screening walls
shall be constructed of the same materials as the principal building and shall
not extend more than twenty-five (25) feet without a change in architecture to
reduce their mass and appearance. The secondary source of screening
(landscaping and berming or walls and/or decorative fencing) shall provide a
minimum ninety percent (90%) opacity screen to a height of four (4) feet.
      3.   Stacking for gas pumps shall be provided for at least one car beyond
the pump island in each direction in which access can be gained to the pump.
Each space shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet wide by eighteen (18) feet long.
      4.   Stacking areas shall be designed and located to minimize noises,
emissions, and headlight glare upon adjacent properties and shall not interfere
with circulation through any required parking, loading, maneuvering or
pedestrian area.
      5.   Fuel pumps shall be installed on pump islands. Pump islands shall be
elevated six (6) inches above the traveled surface of the site and shall
conform to the applicable principal building setback. Additionally, there shall
be sufficient area around the pump island(s) to allow for safe and efficient
movement of vehicles through the site, with a minimum twenty-four (24) feet
between pump rows, measured curb face to curb.
      6.   Underground fuel storage tanks are to be positioned to allow
adequate access by motor fuel transports and unloading operations that do not
conflict with circulation, access and other activities on the site.
      7.   A protective canopy structure may be located over the pump islands,
subject to the following standards:
         a.   The edge of the canopy shall maintain setbacks as required for
the principal building.
         b.   The architectural design, colors, and character of the canopy
shall be consistent with the principal building on the site. The canopy posts/
signposts shall not obstruct traffic or the safe operation of the gas pumps.
         c.   The canopy shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet in height and must
provide at least fourteen (14) feet of clearance to accommodate a semitrailer
passing underneath. The height of the canopy may be increased should the city
council determine the architectural design enhances the site and/or is more
consistent with the principal building.
         d.   The canopy fascia shall not exceed three (3) feet in vertical
height.
         e.   Canopy lighting shall consist of canister spotlights recessed
into the canopy. No portion of the light source or fixture may extend below the
bottom face of the canopy. Total canopy illumination shall not exceed one
hundred fifteen (115) foot-candles below the canopy at ground level. The fascia
of the canopy shall not be illuminated.
         f.   Signage may be allowed on a canopy; however, such signage will
apply toward the allowable sign area for the principal building and/or ground
sign.
      8.   No public address system shall be audible from a noncommercial or
nonindustrial use or district.
      9.   The sale, storage, or display of vehicles is prohibited.
      10.   No outside storage, display, or services shall be allowed except as
follows:
         a.   Propane sales limited to twenty (20)-pound capacity tanks may be
located outside provided the tanks are secured in a locker and the use meets
all state building and fire codes.
         b.   Sale or display of goods shall be allowed on the private sidewalk
immediately in front of the principal building, provided that a minimum four
(4) foot clearance is maintained for pedestrian access and that the display
does not exceed four (4) feet in height and is maintained in an orderly
fashion. Display shall not block the handicap accessible route.
         c.   Sale or display of goods shall be allowed in an area underneath
the canopy adjacent to the pump island provided that the display does not
exceed three (3) feet in height or extend beyond the concrete base of the pump
island. This area shall be maintained in an orderly and safe fashion and in
accordance with applicable state fire code regulations.
      11.   Any repair, assembly, disassembly or maintenance of vehicles shall
require an additional conditional use permit subject to the performance
standards outlined in this subsection for automotive repair.
      12.   A car wash facility not accessory to automobile repair or a non-
service motor fuel station shall require an additional conditional use permit
subject to the performance standards outlined in this subsection for car wash,
full- or self-service.
   E.   Automotive Repair And Service, Major:
      1.   The site and building(s) shall be designed to limit the effects of
this use on adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. No automotive repair
use shall be located on a site abutting any residential use or district.
      2.   All repair, assembly, disassembly or maintenance of vehicles shall
occur within a closed building, except minor maintenance, including tire
inflation, adding oil, wiper replacement and the like. All overhead vehicle
doors on the building shall remain closed except when a vehicle is entering or
exiting the building.
      3.   Gasoline pumps/sales shall require an additional conditional use
permit subject to the performance standards outlined in this subsection for
non-service motor fuel stations.
      4.   Outdoor storage of parts, materials, and equipment may be allowed in
the B-2 District subject to the performance standards outlined in those
districts for outdoor storage and outdoor display or sales.
      5.   Automotive repair uses shall designate on a site plan separate areas
for customer parking and storage of inoperable vehicles awaiting repair or
repaired vehicles awaiting pick up. These areas shall meet the design standards
outlined in section
11-7-3, “Off Street Parking and Loading Requirements” of this title and be
screened as follows:
      6.   Customer parking areas shall meet the applicable screening standards
outlined in this title including, but not limited to, section
11-7-3, “Off Street Parking and Loading Requirements” of this title and this
subsection.
      7.   Inoperable vehicles awaiting repair or repaired vehicles awaiting
pick up shall be stored behind the principal building. Landscaping and berming
shall be a secondary source for screening said vehicles. Should landscaping and
berming be found ineffective by the city, the city may approve screening walls
and/or decorative fencing as an alternative. Screening walls shall be
constructed of the same materials as the principal building and shall not
extend more than twenty-five (25) feet without a change in architecture to
reduce their mass and appearance. Stacking areas shall have a minimum ninety
percent (90%) opacity screen to a height of six (6) feet.
      8.   In the B-1 and B-2 districts, junk or unlicensed vehicles awaiting
repair or pick up shall be stored completely inside a closed building in
accordance with the performance standards for outdoor storage outlined in
section
11-6-8 of this chapter.
      9.   Parking of vehicles on public right-of-way shall be prohibited.
      10.   All painting must be conducted in an approved paint booth. All
paint booths and all other activities of the operation shall thoroughly control
the emission of fumes, dust, or other particulate matter in compliance with
Minnesota pollution control standards and applicable fire and building codes.
      11.   All flammable materials, including liquids and rags, shall conform
to the applicable provisions of the Minnesota fire code.
      12.   No public address system shall be audible from a noncommercial or
nonindustrial use or district.
   F.   Automotive Repair And Service, Minor:
      1.   The site and building(s) shall be designed to limit the effects of
this use on adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. No automotive repair
use shall be located on a site abutting any residential use or district.
      2.   All repair, assembly, disassembly or maintenance of vehicles shall
occur within a closed building, except minor maintenance, including tire
inflation, adding oil, wiper replacement and the like. All overhead vehicle
doors on the building shall remain closed except when a vehicle is entering or
exiting the building.
      3.   Gasoline pumps/sales shall require an additional conditional use
permit subject to the performance standards outlined in this subsection for
non-service motor fuel stations.
      4.   Automotive repair uses shall designate on a site plan separate areas
for customer parking and storage of inoperable vehicles awaiting repair or
repaired vehicles awaiting pick up. These areas shall meet the design standards
outlined in section
11-7-3 “Off Street Parking and Loading Requirements” of this title and be
screened as follows:
         a.   Customer parking areas shall meet the applicable screening
standards outlined in this title including, but not limited to, section
11-7-3 “Off Street Parking and Loading Requirements” of this title and this
subsection.
         b.   Inoperable vehicles awaiting repair or repaired vehicles awaiting
pick up shall be stored behind the principal building. Landscaping and berming
shall be a secondary source for screening said vehicles. Should landscaping and
berming be found ineffective by the city, the city may approve screening walls
and/or decorative fencing as an alternative. Screening walls shall be
constructed of the same materials as the principal building and shall not
extend more than twenty-five (25) feet without a change in architecture to
reduce their mass and appearance. Stacking areas shall have a minimum ninety
percent (90%) opacity screen to a height of six (6) feet.
         c.   In the MX-2 District, junk or unlicensed vehicles awaiting repair
or pick up shall be stored completely inside a closed building in accordance
with the performance standards for outdoor storage outlined in section
11-6-8 of this chapter.
      5.   Parking of vehicles on public right-of-way shall be prohibited.
      6.   All painting must be conducted in an approved paint booth. All paint
booths and all other activities of the operation shall thoroughly control the
emission of fumes, dust, or other particulate matter in compliance with
Minnesota pollution control standards and applicable fire and building codes.
      7.   All flammable materials, including liquids and rags, shall conform
to the applicable provisions of the Minnesota fire code.
      8.   No public address system shall be audible from a noncommercial or
nonindustrial use or district.
   G.   Car Wash:
      1.   The site and structure(s) shall be designed to limit the effects of
the washing operation on adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. No car
wash use shall be located abutting any residential use or district.
      2.   Stacking lanes shall not interfere with circulation in any required
parking, loading, maneuvering, or pedestrian area.
      3.   Stacking and exiting areas shall be screened from adjacent
properties and/or rights-of-way. Stacking areas shall have a minimum ninety
percent (90%) opacity screen to a height of six (6) feet while exiting areas
shall have a minimum fifty percent (50%) opacity screen to a height of at least
four (4) feet.
         a.   The principal structure shall be the primary source for screening
the stacking and exiting areas from adjacent properties and/or rights-of-way.
         b.   Landscaping and berming shall be a secondary source for screening
the stacking and exiting areas. Should landscaping and berming be found
ineffective by the city, the city may approve screening walls and/or decorative
fencing as an alternative.
         c.   Screening walls shall be constructed of the same materials as the
principal structure and shall not extend more than twenty-five (25) feet
without a change in architecture to reduce their mass and appearance.
      4.   All overhead vehicle doors on the building shall remain closed
except when a vehicle is entering or exiting the building.
      5.   Untreated water from the car wash shall not be discharged into the
storm sewer. If the water is to be pretreated and discharged into the storm
sewer, the pretreatment plans shall be subject to review and approval of the
city engineer and building official, and subject to applicable requirements of
metropolitan council environmental services and MPCA.
   H.   Commercial Animal Breeding:
      1.   Any site used for commercial animal breeding shall not be less than
five (5) acres in size.
   I.   Commercial Event Center:
      1.   The parcel must be a minimum of five (5) acres in size.
      2.   Site must be located east of County Road 71.
      3.   The property owner and venue operator must be the same individual(s)
and the site shall be its primary residence. The operator, or its designee,
must be on the premises for the duration of each event.
      4.   The maximum number of guests is two hundred (200). A larger number
of guests may be approved by the city based on the size of site, structures,
parking availability, and other relevant factors.
      5.   Outdoor seating areas, where liquor is available shall be located in
a controlled or cordoned area acceptable to the city with at least one (1)
opening.
      6.   Outdoor seating areas where food and/or liquor is available shall be
set back twenty (20) feet from property lines and have appropriate screening to
adjacent properties.
      7.   The hours of operation shall be no later than 10:00 P.M. on Sunday
through Thursday and 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday.
      8.   Class 5 gravel surfacing shall be allowed for off-street parking as
long as the property is without access to public sanitary sewer to the site.
When public sanitary sewer service becomes available to the property, the
property owner shall surface the parking lot with a blacktop or concrete
surface within one (1) year. No vehicle parking is permitted within or along
any public right-of-way.
      9.   Parking lot setbacks for gravel or surface lots shall be twenty (20)
feet from the side and rear property lines and fifty (50) feet from the front
property line.
      10.   Parking lot shall be screened from neighboring parcels.
      11.   Lighting shall be provided as necessary for security, safety, and
traffic circulation. The level of lighting shall not exceed 0.5 lumen at any
residential property line or 1.0 lumen at any nonresidential property line.
      12.   A traffic circulation and safety plan, including but not limited to
access and signage, shall be reviewed and approved by the City Fire Marshal and
Police Chief.
      13.   Compliance with all applicable regulations including State Health
Code, State building codes, and local liquor licensing requirements. The
operator shall coordinate events and activities with adjoining property owners
to ensure appropriate Health and Safety Codes are met.
      14.   The serving of food and beverages is permitted only in conjunction
with an event.
      15.   Overnight accommodations for guests, including campers, tents, or
other recreation vehicles, are prohibited.
      16.   Sanitary facilities adequate for the number of attendees shall be
provided as determined by the city. Portable toilets may be approved for
temporary use and must be screened from view from roads and neighboring
properties by landscaping or a wooden enclosure. No portable toilets shall be
located closer than four hundred (400) feet from a neighboring residential
structure.
      17.   Sound amplification systems cannot be used outdoors after 10:00
P.M.
      18.   Noise from an event shall not be plainly audible at a distance of
fifty (50) feet or more from the property line.
      19.   Trash enclosures must be provided and meet the standards for the B-
1 District.
   J.   Commercial Recreation Facility, Outdoor:
      1.   Outdoor commercial recreation facilities shall adhere to the
following standards:
         a.   No outdoor amusement and recreation service shall be located on a
site abutting any residential use or district.
         b.   The site and building(s) shall be designed to limit the effects
of this use on adjacent properties and public rights-of-way.
         c.   All improvements except landscaping shall conform to the setback
requirements for principal buildings in the district.
         d.   No public address system shall be audible from a noncommercial or
nonindustrial use or district.
   K.   Landscape And Horticultural Service:
      1.   A principal structure must be built on the site.
      2.   Landscape and horticultural services are subject to the requirements
for outdoor display, sales, and storage in the I-1 District.
   L.   Vehicle Sales Or Rental:
      1.   The site and building(s) shall be designed to limit the effects of
the sales or rental use on adjacent properties. No sales or display area shall
be located on a site abutting any residential use or district.
      2.   A minimum building floor area of twenty percent (20%) of the lot
area shall be required. All overhead vehicle doors on the building shall remain
closed except when a vehicle is entering or exiting the building.
      3.   The outdoor sales or display area shall not interfere with
circulation in any required parking, loading, maneuvering or pedestrian area.
      4.   The maximum area permitted for outdoor sales or display shall not
exceed three and one-half (3½) square feet of outdoor storage area to each one
(1) square foot of enclosed ground floor principal building area.
      5.   The outdoor sales or display area shall conform to the principal
building setback requirements of this district and meet the off-street parking
and loading performance standards outlined in section 11-7-3 “Off-Street
Parking and Loading Standards” of this title.
      6.   Junk vehicles are prohibited.
      7.   Any repair, assembly, disassembly or maintenance of vehicles shall
require an additional conditional use permit subject to the performance
standards outlined in this subsection for automotive repair.
      8.   Landscaping and berming shall be a primary source for screening
outdoor sales and display area from adjacent rights-of-way. Should landscaping
and berming be found ineffective by the city, the city may approve screening
walls and/or decorative fencing as an alternative. Screening walls shall be
constructed of the same materials as the principal building and shall not
extend more than twenty-five (25) feet without a change in architecture to
reduce their mass and appearance. The screening source (landscaping and berming
or walls and/or decorative fencing) shall provide a minimum fifty percent (50%)
opacity screen to a height of at least four (4) feet.
      9.   All necessary city or state licenses/permits shall be obtained and
remain in good standing.
      10.   All exterior lighting shall conform to section
11-7-8 “Lighting Standards” of this title.
      11.   No public address system shall be audible from a noncommercial or
nonindustrial use or district. Playing of music or advertisements from the
public address system is prohibited.
      12.   Tents, rooftop parking, ramps or similar vertical devices for
elevated displays are prohibited.
      13.   Signs shall conform to the performance standards outlined in this
title as well as the standards listed below:
         a.   Pennants, balloons, streamers, pinwheels or other attention
attracting devices are prohibited.
         b.   No freestanding light poles shall be uses as temporary sign
supports, as flagpoles or to connect flags, streamers, or pennants.
         c.   No graphics shall be painted on the building or windows.
         d.   Open hoods of vehicles, windshields, car windows, trunks, roofs
or the like shall not be used for individual letters or other signage.
         e.   No vehicle or trailer shall be parked in such a manner as to
advertise the site location, or to promote or advertise a sale or event. (Ord.
2024-04, 6-4-2024; amd. Ord. B-317, 11-19-2024)
11-6-4: PRINCIPAL USES, INDUSTRIAL:
   A.   Brewery, Farm Winery, Or Distillery:
      1.   The use shall comply with all applicable provisions of state and
local law and obtain all required licenses.
      2.   The site and building(s) shall be designed to limit the effects of
this use on adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. No loading docks or
overhead vehicle doors shall be on a side abutting any public rights-of-way or
any residential use or district.
      3.   The principal building shall be the primary source for screening of
the loading area or any required outdoor equipment.
      4.   All drives, loading and parking areas for the brewery, farm winery,
or distillery and associated uses shall be paved with a concrete or bituminous
surface including concrete curbing.
      5.   Pedestrian circulation between the parking area and the brewery,
farm winery, or distillery and associated uses shall be provided through
sidewalks at least five (5) feet in width and paved with concrete, bituminous,
pavers or similar hardscape.
      6.   Outdoor dining is subject to the performance standards outlined for
outdoor dining in section
3-1-14 of this Code and section
11-6-8 "Accessory Uses, N-Z" of this chapter.
   B.   Microbrewery Or Microdistillery:
      1.   Compliance with all applicable provisions of state and local law and
obtain all required licenses.
      2.   The site and building(s) shall be designed to limit the effects of
this use on adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. No loading docks or
overhead vehicle doors shall be on a side abutting any public rights-of-way or
any residential use or district.
      3.   The principal building shall be the primary source for screening of
the loading area or any required outdoor equipment.
      4.   All drives, loading and parking areas for the microbrewery or
microdistillery and associated uses shall be paved with a concrete or
bituminous surface including concrete curbing.
      5.   Pedestrian circulation between the parking area and the microbrewery
or microdistillery and associated uses shall be provided through sidewalks at
least five (5) feet in width and paved with concrete, bituminous, pavers or
similar hardscape.
      6.   Outdoor seating is subject to the performance standards outlined for
outdoor seating in section 3-1-14 of this Code and section 11-6-8 "Accessory
Uses, N-Z" of this chapter.
   C.   Small Brewery:
      1.   Compliance with all applicable provisions of state and local law and
obtain all required licenses.
      2.   The site and building(s) shall be designed to limit the effects of
this use on adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. No loading docks or
overhead vehicle doors shall be on a side abutting any public rights-of-way or
any residential use or district.
      3.   The principal building shall be the primary source for screening of
the loading area or any required outdoor equipment.
      4.   Outdoor seating is subject to the performance standards outlined for
outdoor seating in section
3-1-14 of this Code and section
11-6-8 "Accessory Uses, N-Z" of this chapter.
   D.   Combined Heat And Power Plant:
      1.   The combined heat and power plant is customarily incidental and
subordinate to the primary use of the site and must support existing processes
within the facility. A minimum of eighty percent (80%) of power generated by
the CHP plant must be utilized by the facility.
      2.   For the sale of power from the combined heat and power plant to
remain incidental and subordinate to the primary use (i.e., the refinery), the
sale of excess power cannot exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total amount of
power needed to operate the principal use. This thirty percent (30%) limit,
however, cannot be calculated based upon the total amount of power that can
theoretically be generated by the CHP plant. Rather, the thirty percent (30%)
sale limitation must be based upon:
         a.   The critical load and ancillary load demand of the refinery
itself; and
         b.   Necessary redundancy power.
      3.   The owner/operator of the combined heat and power plant may not sell
any power in excess of the maximum power sale amounts set forth herein without
the advance consent of the city; the city shall only consider such a request by
the owner/operator of the facility in the event of a crisis or casualty (i.e.,
a tornado, or other similar disaster).
      4.   The facility must have a single owner at all times.
      5.   The owner/operator of the combined heat and power plant is
prohibited from selling, transferring or otherwise providing power to any third
party user directly, and shall only sell, transfer, or otherwise provide power,
if at all, to the city, Xcel Energy, Dakota Electric, and shall only export
power through an interconnection with the regional electric grid.
      6.   Maximum height of any structure cannot exceed that allowed by the
zoning ordinance or that of any existing structures within the facility,
whichever is lower.
      7.   The project must comply with all other applicable zoning code
provisions for the I-2 District with regard to site and building requirements
as well as performance standards.
      8.   The project must comply with all requirements of state and federal
agencies.
      9.   Landscaping plans must take into account sightlines from neighboring
rights-of-way and land uses that differ from the project.
      10.   The CHP plant cannot exceed the principal structure in square
footage, height, or massing as determined by the city.
      11.   The parcel where the CHP plant is located must be greater than one
hundred (100) acres.
   E.   Construction Demolition Waste Facility:
      1.   Recycling operations subject to the requirements of subsection J
below.
      2.   The facility is developed, operated and maintained in accordance
with an approved interim use permit by the City of Rosemount and all other
applicable local, state and federal laws.
      3.   Permits for the facility by the State of Minnesota and Dakota County
are pending or have received approval.
   F.   Large-Scale Mineral Extraction:
      1.   Large-scale mineral extraction uses shall only be established within
the following boundary: CSAH 42 to the north, County Road 73 to the east, CSAH
46 to the south and Biscayne Avenue to the west.
      2.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to remove, store or excavate rock, sand, gravel, clay, silt or
other like material in the city, or to fill or raise the existing surface
grades, without receiving a permit for large-scale mineral extraction. Such
permits may only be issued in a zoning district where large-scale mineral
extraction is listed as an interim use and within the boundary identified
above.
      3.   Initial large scale mineral extraction permit applications for a
permit under this section shall be submitted with and considered simultaneously
with an application for an interim use permit under section 11-9-4 "Interim Use
Permit" of this title. No permit will be required for any of the following:
         a.   Excavation for a foundation, cellar or basement of a building if
a building permit has been issued.
         b.   Excavation by state, county or city authorities in connection
with construction or maintenance of roads, highways or utilities.
         c.   Curb cuts, utility hookups or street opening for which another
permit has been issued by the city.
         d.   Excavation less than one hundred (100) square feet in area or one
(1) foot in depth.
         e.   Excavation or grading for agricultural purposes.
      4.   Review Process:
         a.   Public Hearing: A public hearing will be conducted for
consideration of permit applications. The public hearing, public notice and
procedure requirements for the permits shall be the same as those for
amendments as provided in section
11-9-2 "Zoning Code Amendment" of this title.
         b.   Criteria For Permit Approval: The following factors will be
evaluated when determining whether to approve a large-scale mineral extraction
operation. The approval or denial of a permit shall include, but not be limited
to, findings on the following factors:
         (1)   Consistency With City Plans And Policies: The proposed large
scale mineral extraction permit is consistent with the comprehensive guide plan
and the location is suitable in that the excavation, mining, processing,
stockpiling or hauling of sand and gravel deposits will not tend to create a
nuisance or unreasonably adverse land use impacts or exceed local, state or
federal safety and environmental standards on the adjacent properties. The
applicant for a permit, at the applicant's sole cost, shall provide information
to help determine the suitability, including, but not limited to, a completed
zoning amendment application; exhibits illustrating adjacent and on-site
buildings and land uses; existing elevations and percent of slope within and
three hundred (300) feet beyond the perimeter of the EIS boundary; and an
environmental impact statement.
         (2)   Environmental Impacts: An environmental impact statement (as
defined by Minnesota environmental quality board rules) shall be completed for
each large-scale gravel mining project proposed. The proposed project shall be
so designed and operated as to minimize adverse impacts identified in the
environmental impact statement. The environmental impact statement shall be
considered by the city council prior to any final action on a large-scale
mineral extraction permit request. The application for a large-scale mineral
extraction permit shall not be considered complete until the time as final
comment has been received on the adequacy of the environmental impact
statement.
      5.   Application Requirements: The application for a large-scale mineral
extraction permit shall include the following:
         a.   The correct legal description of the land upon which excavation
is proposed.
         b.   The name and address of the applicant, the owner of the land and
the person or corporation conducting the actual removal operation.
         c.   The names and addresses of all adjacent landowners within one-
fourth (0.25) mile.
         d.   The purpose of the proposed excavation.
         e.   The estimated time required to complete the proposed excavation
and rehabilitation.
         f.   The names of the highways, streets or other public roadways
within the city upon which the material shall be transported.
         g.   A map of the proposed pit or excavation area to a scale of one
inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200') showing the presently excavated area,
the area proposed to be excavated during the permit period, and the minimum and
maximum elevations of the area, and showing a minimum of three hundred (300)
feet of the adjacent land on all sides of the proposed excavation area.
         h.   A rehabilitation, reclamation, and restoration plan providing for
the orderly and continuing rehabilitation of all excavated land. Such plan
shall illustrate, using appropriate photographs, maps, and surveys drawn to a
scale of one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200') and with a five (5) foot
contour interval satisfactory to the engineer, the following:
         (1)   Removal Of Planned Contours: The removal of planned contours of
the land when the mineral removal operations are completed.
         (2)   Timetable: The estimated period of time that the pit will be
operated and a schedule setting forth the timetable for excavation and
rehabilitation of land lying within the active, inactive and restoration areas.
         (3)   Storage: Those areas of the site used for storage of topsoil and
overburden.
         (4)   Depth; Slope; Revegetation: The depth of all water bodies, the
slopes of all slopes after rehabilitation and a description of the type and
quantity of plantings where revegetation is to be established.
         (5)   Contour Extension: The five-foot contours shall extend at least
two hundred (200) feet beyond the boundary of the operation or beyond the
adjoining right-of-way, whichever is more inclusive.
         (6)   Ancillary And Accessory Uses: Ancillary and accessory use
rehabilitation, reclamation, and restoration plan.
         (7)   Maximum Slope: The maximum slope of the reclamation area that is
developable shall be at no steeper than five (5) feet horizontal to one (1)
foot vertical. The maximum slope of the reclamation area that is undevelopable,
such as the area between a water body and a right-of-way line shall be no
steeper than two (2) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical. Any slope
greater than three (3) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical shall be
designed by a licensed engineer and approved by the city engineer.
         (8)   Adjacent To Water Bodies: For manmade groundwater lakes, the
bottom contour shall be gradually sloping from the shoreline to the deepest
portion of the water body at a maximum slope of ten (10) feet horizontal to one
(1) foot vertical from at least fifty (50) feet upland from the proposed
shoreline to at least ten (10) feet from the proposed shoreline toward the
center of the water body. Beyond ten (10) feet in horizontal distance, the
slope of the bottom contours may be no steeper than two to one (2:1).
         i.   When mining is proposed within the groundwater or within twenty
(20) vertical feet of a historic groundwater measurement elevation, then a
hydrogeological study shall be submitted. The study will include tests of soils
and groundwater to determine the presence of contaminants on the site that
will, or could be, released to the groundwater or the environment by mining or
related activities. All contaminants of concern identified in the EIS and any
other contaminants identified by the city council will be studied unless the
applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city council that such study
is not warranted. The hydrogeological study shall include the following:
         (1)   Description of each groundwater excavation (size, shape and
location).
         (2)   Description of the location and construction information of all
wells within three hundred (300) feet of the EIS boundary.
         (3)   Description of the proposed fill activity (grain size
distribution, quantity, and placement procedures).
         (4)   Description of the aquifer characteristics in the area of each
groundwater excavation to be affected by proposed fill activity (aquifer
thickness and general geological setting).
         (5)   Description of the impacts of the proposed fill activity on
groundwater flow regimes.
         (6)   Description of a groundwater monitoring plan including evidence,
to the city council's satisfaction, that the proposed monitoring will provide
timely and effective notice of changes to the hydrology, the presence of
contaminants of concern that were not previously identified, or the release,
movement, or the threatened release of contaminants.
         (7)   Identify and describe all measures that will be taken to avoid
potential impacts on the groundwater from mining or related activities
including, but not limited to, testing, monitoring, containment, and
mitigation.
         (8)   Identify the depth to Prairie Du Chien aquifer and determine the
appropriate separation between the mining activity and the aquifer.
         (9)   Such other information as the city may from time to time
require.
         j.   Location of any and all existing wells and the size and depth
thereof.
         k.   Surface water protection plan including a contingency response
plan and employee training to facilitate immediate and remedial response should
any accident, release of contaminant, or other spill occur.
         l.   Such other information as the city may from time to time require,
including, but not limited to, the location or anticipated location of all
stockpiles of aggregate based construction debris material on the land for
which the permit is desired.
      6.   Performance Standards:
         a.   Boundary: Extraction operations shall be conducted within the
confines of the excavation site described in the permit.
         b.   Access: Extraction operations shall only be allowed on sites that
have direct access to a principal arterial, minor arterial, or collector street
as designated in the city of Rosemount comprehensive guide plan. A local street
may be used if approved by the city council.
         c.   Setbacks: Setback boundaries shall be as follows. Where setbacks
are measured from zoning district boundaries that occur along a public street
right of way, the zoning district boundary is assumed to be the centerline of
that public right-of-way.
         (1)   Residential Zoning District: Three hundred fifty (350) feet.
         (2)   Industrial, Commercial Or Institutional Zoning District: One
hundred fifty (150) feet.
         (3)   Agricultural Zoning District: Thirty (30) feet.
         (4)   Inhabited Residence Not In A Residential Zoning District: Two
hundred (200) feet.
         (5)   Rights-of-Way Or Streets: Seventy-five (75) feet.
         (6)   Preexisting Water Bodies: One hundred fifty (150) feet.
         d.   Height:
         (1)   The height of all equipment, stockpiles, and all other
operations, except those described in provisions (2) and (3) below, within the
permitted mineral extraction operation shall not exceed sixty (60) feet. This
standard does not apply to the ancillary facilities covered by a separate
interim use permit.
         (2)   The city council may approve a limited number of stationary
conveyors to a height no taller than sixty-five (65) feet provided that all
practical means of screening and setbacks are employed into the conveyor's
construction and installation.
         (3)   The floating dredge shall not exceed seventy-five (75) feet in
height.
         e.   Appearance, Screening, And Berming: The mining shall be screened
from any public right-of-way or urban development through a combination of
existing stands of trees, berming and installed landscaping.
         (1)   Existing Tree Stands: The preferred method of screening the
mining operation is the maintaining existing stands of trees that would provide
a level of at least ninety percent (90%) opacity. If the stand of trees does
not provide ninety percent (90%) opacity, then additional landscaping or
berming shall be installed to provide ninety percent (90%) opacity. An annual
opacity audit of the tree stands shall be conducted and dead vegetation shall
be removed and additional landscaping or berming shall be installed to maintain
ninety percent (90%) opacity. The methodology for the opacity measure shall be
taken during full leaf growth from the shoulder of any public road or
neighboring property to determine opacity in a band five to seven (7) feet off
the ground.
         (2)   Berms: Berms shall be constructed in areas where the existing
tree stands do not exist. The berms shall be at least ten (10) feet in height
measured from the toe of the berm or from the fog line of the existing public
road, whichever results in the greatest height of the berm.
         f.   Hours Of Operation:
         (1)   Mining: The hours of operation shall be limited to seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. Monday through Saturday. The community
development director may authorize Sunday operation from eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on no more than five (5) Sundays annually
provided the operator notifies the community development director no less than
seventy-two (72) hours before a Sunday operation. The city council may grant
special permission for extra hours of operation within the annual extraction
permit. The extra hours of operation may be conditioned on more restrictive
performance standards to address the additional adverse impacts caused by the
extra hours of operation.
         (2)   Crushing And Washing: The hours of operation shall be limited to
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. Monday through Saturday.
The city council may grant special permission for extra hours of operation
within the annual extraction permit. The extra hours of operation may be
conditioned on more restrictive performance standards to address the adverse
impacts caused by the extra hours of operation.
         (3)   Truck Hauling: The hours of operation shall be limited to seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. Monday through Saturday. The
community development director may authorize Sunday operation from eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on no more than five (5)
Sundays annually provided the operator notifies the community development
director no less than seventy-two (72) hours before a Sunday operation. The
city council may grant special permission for extra hours of operation within
the annual extraction permit. The extra hours of operation may be conditioned
on more restrictive performance standards, including, but not limited to, the
truck haul routes, to address the adverse impacts caused by the extra hours of
operation.
         (4)   Staging Activities: Staging activities will be permitted one-
half (1/2) hour before normal hours and one-half (1/2) hour after normal hours.
Staging activities include lining up and loading of trucks, equipment
inspections, fueling, and other similar related actions. Trucks may enter the
site within one-half (1/2) hour before the normal hours; however, no gravel
trucks may leave the site until normal hours of operation. After the P.M.
normal hours of operation and within one-half (1/2) hour past the P.M. normal
hours of operation, site cleanup and equipment maintenance is permitted as
well.
         g.   Slopes:
         (1)   Mining: During the entire period of operations, all excavations
other than the working face shall be sloped on all sides no steeper than one
foot horizontal to one foot vertical, unless a steeper slope is approved by the
city engineer.
         (2)   Berming: The public view or right-of-way face of the perimeter
berms shall be sloped no steeper than four (4) feet horizontal to one (1) foot
vertical. The extraction side of the perimeter berm shall be sloped no steeper
than three (3) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical.
         h.   Noise: Maximum noise level at the perimeter of the EIS boundary
shall comply with the limits or standards established by the Minnesota
pollution control agency and the United States environmental protection agency.
         i.   Paved Access Road: All access roads from a large-scale mineral
extraction operation to any public roadway shall be paved with asphalt or
concrete for a distance of at least one hundred fifty (150) feet, measured from
the mining side of the public right-of-way, to minimize dust conditions. During
the annual operating permit review, the city council may require additional
paving length if dust and mud tracking are identified as a problem by the city.
All unpaved roads within the mining operation shall be treated with a dust
retardant on a regular basis as stipulated in the annual operating permit.
         j.   Dust Control: Operators shall use all practical means to reduce
the amount of fugitive dust generated by excavation operations. In any event,
the amount of dust or other particulate matter generated by the excavation
shall not exceed air pollution standards established by the Minnesota pollution
control agency. On days with wind advisory, as defined by the national oceanic
and atmospheric administration's national weather service, the community
development director may require during the time of wind advisory that the dry
mining operation cease operations to eliminate additional dust generation.
         k.   Explosives: The use of explosives in the large-scale mineral
extraction operation is prohibited.
         l.   Surface Water Pollution: The permittee shall prepare a surface
water protection plan to ensure that surface water quality is not impacted by
the mining operation, accidents or spills within the EIS boundary. The mining
plans shall comply with the city's surface water management plan. Excavation
operators shall comply with all applicable Minnesota pollution control agency
and department of natural resources regulations and all applicable United
States environmental protection agency regulations for the protection of water
quality. No waste products or processed residue, including untreated wash
water, shall be deposited in any public waters of the state of Minnesota.
         m.   Groundwater: The excavation operators shall prepare a groundwater
monitoring plan to ensure that groundwater flow, level, or quality is not
impacted. The groundwater monitoring plan shall comply with city and Minnesota
department of health regulations. The groundwater monitoring plan may include
the surface water monitoring of any created water body that is fed by
groundwater including the monitoring of any water bodies or channelized
waterways tributary to the created water body.
         n.   Wastewater: On site sewage treatment systems shall conform with
title 9, chapter 6 of this code, Dakota County ordinance 113, and all
applicable state and federal regulations.
         o.   Topsoil: All topsoil located within the EIS boundary before the
mineral extraction operation begins, except the topsoil located over areas that
are planned to be reclaimed as open water, shall remain within boundaries of
the operation. Additional topsoil may be retained to ensure that a minimum of
six (6) inches of topsoil is placed on all areas reclaimed and restored as dry
ground.
         p.   Landscaping:
         (1)   Existing tree and ground cover shall be preserved to the maximum
extent feasible, maintained or supplemented by selective cutting, transplanting
and replanting of trees, shrubs and other ground cover along all setback areas.
         (2)   The public view and right-of-way side of berms that are planned
to exist longer than fifteen (15) years shall be landscaped with a density of
one tree per six hundred twenty-five (625) square feet. A minimum of sixty-six
percent (66%) of the trees shall be conifers.
         (3)   The city council may consider staggering the timing of the
installation of the landscaping if more berming is constructed than is required
to screen the phase of mining permitted with the annual operating permit.
         (4)   Berms that are planned to exist less than fifteen (15) years
shall be landscaped with a standard MNDOT ROW mix.
         (5)   All areas reclaimed shall be seeded with a city approved seed
mix within fourteen (14) days of final grade being established. Additional
seeding shall be applied as needed until the vegetation has been established.
         (6)   The city may require cover over areas that have remained
undisturbed for more than twelve (12) months if it is determined that these
areas generate airborne dust particles.
         q.   Maintenance Of Mining Vehicles:
         (1)   All machinery shall be kept operational.
         (2)   Abandoned machinery and rubbish shall be promptly removed from
the excavation site.
         (3)   All machinery shall be periodically inspected, repaired, and
painted as needed to prevent rusting or other deterioration of the machinery.
         r.   Lighting: Any lighting shall be shielded to prevent lights from
being directed at traffic on a public road in such brilliance that it impairs
the vision of the driver and may not interfere with or obscure traffic signs or
signals. The level of lighting shall not exceed 1.0 lumen at the EIS boundary
line.
         s.   Compliance With Other Governmental Regulations: The large-scale
mineral extraction operation shall comply with all applicable federal, state,
and county laws and regulations, including Dakota County ordinances 110 and
111.
         t.   Compliance with the EIS: The city shall determine permit
conditions and requirements that address issues and potential impacts that
include, but are not limited to, those described in the EIS. The city council
may require additional studies or information on any issues that the council
determines were not adequately addressed in the EIS because the EIS does not
contain sufficient detail for permitting purposes, because the proposed means
of mitigation have changed, because new mitigation techniques are available,
because new information has been discovered, or for any other reason.
         u.   Council Waiver: The city council, at the time of issuance of the
annual extraction permit, may waive or modify any of the provisions in this
section or impose additional requirements if it finds that the plan of
operation or other materials submitted with the application or other factors
make appropriate more suitable measures for standards consistent with the
public health, safety and welfare.
      7.   Special Requirements:
         a.   Reimbursement Of City Costs: The permittee shall reimburse the
city for the cost of periodic inspections for the purpose of determining that
the provisions of the extraction permit and this section are being followed.
The city may retain consultants at the applicant's expense to evaluate the
application requirements, monitoring and testing results.
         b.   Haul Routes: The applicant shall submit to the city a detailed
map of the streets on which the material removed shall be transported (haul
routes). The city shall inspect the haul routes proposed to be used by the
applicant or owner and shall recommend to the city council necessary upgrading
or repairing of the haul routes prior to their use by the applicant or owner.
The city council shall designate the haul routes and may consider the
recommendations of the responsible city officials in the extraction permit
issued to the applicant. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant or
owner to maintain the haul routes in accordance with the provisions set forth
in the permit. The city shall periodically inspect haul routes to ensure
compliance with the permit. During the period of, or upon completion of, the
excavation operations, the applicant or owner shall make any necessary repairs
to the haul routes as recommended by the city. All costs of inspection provided
for in this subsection shall be borne by the applicant or owner. The use of the
haul routes shall be subject to any road and weight restrictions imposed by the
city. The operator shall be responsible for reimbursing the city for any
additional maintenance costs incurred for public roads as a result of the
mining operation.
         c.   Gravel Production And Phasing:
         (1)   A phasing plan shall be prepared.
         (2)   No mineral extraction permit shall authorize extraction
operations to be conducted in more than two (2) noncontiguous eighty (80)-acre
areas of an extraction operation concurrently.
         (3)   No mineral extraction permit shall authorize extraction to be
conducted on more than one hundred sixty (160) acres at one time.
         d.   Other Requirements As Determined By The Council: The permittee
shall comply with such other requirements as the city council shall from time
to time deem proper and necessary for the protection of its citizens and the
general welfare.
      8.   Reclamation, Restoration, And Rehabilitation:
         a.   Phased Operation: To ensure that the mine is reclaimed in a
timely and orderly manner, the mining operation shall be divided into phases of
no more than eighty (80) acres per phase.
         b.   Significant Transportation Corridors: The reclamation plan shall
show all future collector and arterial roadways. To provide for the roadway and
utility construction of these future roadways, a reasonable reclamation grade
as determined by the city shall be established within the entire designated
right of way width for the appropriate roadway classification. Within twenty-
four (24) months of receipt of written notice from the city that the collector
or arterial right- of-way is needed for either roadway and/or utility
construction, the permittee will complete mining within that right-of-way and
reclaim the right-of-way to the grades approved within the interim reclamation
plan.
         c.   Trunk Utility Services: Within twenty-four (24) months of receipt
of written notice from the city that public trunk utility services are needed
to be constructed within the mining operation, the permittee shall provide an
easement for the utility construction, complete the mining within the easement,
and reclaim the easement to the grades approved within the interim reclamation
plan.
         d.   Water Bodies And Drainage Plan: The city has an adopted surface
water management plan which plans for the conveyance of surface water across
the city. The mining operation shall allow for the conveyance of surface water
within the approved mining areas as called for within the surface water
management plan.
         e.   Interim Reclamation Plan: The permittee shall provide an interim
reclamation plan which provides reclamation grades for all eighty (80)-acre
phases that would allow for agricultural use immediately following reclamation.
         f.   End Use Grading Plan: The comprehensive plan anticipates that the
ultimate use for the entirety of the city is urban development. To accommodate
this ultimate use and allow for orderly development, the permittee shall
provide an end use grading plan that can reasonably accommodate urban
development. For mining operations that are expected to require more than
twenty (20) years to complete, the city council may approve an end use grading
plan for the area that is expected to be completed within twenty (20) years.
The city council shall not approve an annual operating permit for an area
without an approved end use grading plan.
         g.   Removal Of Buildings, Structures, And Vehicles: Within eighteen
(18) months of the reclamation of each phase, all buildings, structures and
plants incidental to that phase of operation shall be dismantled and removed by
and at the expense of the sand and gravel producer last operating the building,
structure or plant, or the owner of the property, unless the structure or use
is compatible with the anticipated ultimate use of the property. All buildings,
structures or plants not removed as required by this section may be removed by
the city with the costs for the removal charged to the permittee or the owner
of the property.
         h.   Haul Back Materials And Operations: The city council may permit
the depositing of clean and compactable inorganic fill that is able to support
urban development to achieve the reclamation grades. The permittee shall submit
a haul back management plan that includes the types of fill that shall be
deposited, where the fill comes from, and what testing of the fill shall occur.
The testing result for the material proposed to be used as fill shall be
submitted to and approved by city staff before the fill material is transferred
within the EIS boundary. All fill deposited within the mining operation must be
able to support urban residential development.
         i.   Duration Of Mining And/Or Ancillary Uses: To provide for the
orderly development of the city, the city council shall determine the duration
of the mining or ancillary use within the interim use permit.
      9.   Operating Permit:
         a.   Purpose Pf The Operating Permit: A large scale mineral extraction
operation may extend for years or decades to complete. The purpose of the
operating permit is to provide an opportunity for the city council to review
the operation of the mine, gather public comment on the operation, modify any
permit conditions as necessary to address adverse impacts that arise from the
operation, and revise the phases and/or subphases of the mine. The large-scale
mineral extraction interim use permit provides a zoning basis for the mine
provided the city issues an operating permit.
         b.   Application, Public Hearing, Notice And Procedure: The
application, public hearing, public notice and procedure requirements for
operating permit shall be the same as those for amendments as provided in
section
11-9-2 Zoning Code Amendment of this title, except that the permit may be
issued only on the affirmative vote of a majority of the entire city council.
         c.   Area Without An End Use Grading Plan: The city council shall not
issue an operating permit for an area without an approved end use grading plan
that accommodates urban development.
         d.   Duration Of Operating Permit: The large-scale mineral extraction
permit shall run for two (2) years from January 1 through December 31 of the
next year or for a lesser period of time as the city council may specify at the
time of issuance of the extraction permit. If the extraction permit is to run
for less than two (2) full years, the fee shall be prorated as determined by
the city council. An administrative review of the permit will be completed mid-
way through the two (2)-year period.
         e.   Operating Permit Fee: The fee for large scale mineral extraction
permit shall be as established from time to time by resolution of the city
council.
         f.   Inspections: The city may inspect all mineral extraction sites
where a large-scale mineral extraction permit has been issued. The operator or
owner of any large-scale mineral extraction operation found in violation of the
requirements of this title or its extraction permit shall remedy such
violations within the time specified by written notice from the city.
         g.   Financial Surety: The city council shall require the applicant or
owner of the premises on which the excavation operation is located to post a
surety with a surety acceptable to the city, cash escrow, performance bond or
letter of credit ("security") in an amount and source determined by the city
council, in favor of the city, conditioned to pay the city the costs and
expense of repairing any streets where such repair work is made necessary by
the special burden resulting from hauling and travel, and removing material
from any pit or excavation, and conducting required rehabilitation and
conditioned further to comply with all the requirements of this section and the
particular extraction permit, and to pay any expense the city may incur by
reason of doing anything required to be done by any applicant to whom a permit
is issued. The security shall remain in full force and effect for a minimum
period of one (1) year after expiration of the extraction permit to guarantee
the required rehabilitation as well as the other requirements herein provided.
The surety bond will be based on the number of acres requested within the
annual renewal extraction permit, the amount of acres that have not been
reclaimed to the end use grading plan elevations, and an amount that can be
immediately withdrawn for the special burden of street repair or to replace
insufficient landscaping. Surety for unfulfilled rehabilitation measures will
be determined and a security will be required as long as the rehabilitation
measures are not completed.
         h.   Insurance: The permittee shall maintain general liability
insurance and provide the city annually a certificate of general liability
insurance issued by insurers duly licensed within the state of Minnesota. The
city council shall determine the appropriate amount of liability insurance
every two (2) years during its review of the permit renewal.
      10.   Enforcement:
         a.   Notice Of Violation: Whenever the city finds that the permittee
has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this section, the
authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of
violation to the permittee. Such notice may require, without limitation:
         (1)   The performance of monitoring, analysis, and reporting;
         (2)   That violating practices or operations shall cease and desist;
         (3)   The abatement or remediation of contamination or hazards and the
restoration of any affected property;
         (4)   The notice shall state that the determination of violation may
be appealed to the city administrator by filing with the city clerk a written
notice of appeal within seven (7) calendar days of service of the notice of
violation.
         b.   Appeal Of Notice Of Violation: Upon receiving a notice of
violation, the permittee may appeal the determination of the authorized
enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be received by the city clerk
within seven (7) calendar days from the date of the notice of violation.
Hearing on the appeal before the city administrator or the city administrator's
designee shall take place within seven (7) calendar days from the date of
receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the city administrator or city
administrator's designee shall be final.
         c.   Enforcement Measures After Appeal: If the violation had not been
corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation,
or, in the event of an appeal, within fifteen (15) days of the decision of the
municipal authority upholding the decision of the authorized enforcement
agency, then representatives of the authorized enforcement agency shall enter
upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all
measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall
be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any
premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to
enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above.
         d.   Cost Of Abatement Of The Violation: Within thirty (30) days after
abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the
cost of abatement, including administrative costs. If the amount due is not
paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the municipal
authority, the enforcement agency may levy the charges as a special assessment
against the property, which assessments shall constitute a lien on the property
for the amount of the assessment. The permittee violating any of the provisions
of this section shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation.
         e.   Legal Action: It shall be unlawful for the permittee to violate
any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this section.
If the permittee has violated and continues to violate the provisions of this
section, the authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or
permanent injunction restraining the permittee from activities which would
create further violations or compelling the permittee to perform abatement or
remediation of the violation, or seek any other available remedy in law or
equity.
         f.   Compensatory Action: In lieu of enforcement proceedings,
penalties, and remedies authorized by this section, the authorized enforcement
agency and violator may agree on alternative compensatory actions.
         g.   Nuisance: In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties
provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the
provisions of this section is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare,
and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored
at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
         h.   Criminal Prosecution: The permittee that has violated or
continues to violate this section shall be liable to criminal prosecution to
the fullest extent of the law, and shall be subject to a criminal penalty in
accordance with section
1-4-1 of this code. The authorized enforcement agency may recover all attorney
fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this
section, including sampling and monitoring expenses.
         i.   Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit:
         (1)   The city council may suspend or revoke a permit issued under
this section upon a finding of a violation of any of the provisions of this
section or violation of any condition of the annual operating permit.
         (2)   A revocation or suspension by the city council shall be preceded
by written notice to the permittee and a public hearing. The written notice
shall give at least eight (8) days' notice of the time and place of the hearing
and shall state the nature of the charges against the permittee. The notice may
be served upon the permittee personally or by United States mail addressed to
the most recent address in license application.
   G.   Large-Scale Mineral Extraction, Ancillary Uses:
      1.   An ancillary use may be allowed provided that any of the following
conditions are met:
         a.   On a site that has an approved large scale mineral extraction
permit in compliance with this section; or
         b.   In conjunction with large scale mineral extraction occurring
within the approved EIS boundary, provided the adjoining municipality has
approved the large-scale mineral extraction and provided the ancillary use
facility was originally an interim use permit in conjunction with large scale
mineral extraction in the city of Rosemount.
      2.   Ancillary Uses Considered: The following is a list of ancillary uses
that may be considered in association with a large-scale mineral extraction
operation and the issues and performance standards that shall be addressed
within the interim use permit:
         a.   Aggregate processing and recycled aggregate products production.
The conveying, crushing, mixing, screening, and washing of aggregate and
recycling concrete and asphalt may be allowed on a site that has an approved
large scale mineral extraction permit in compliance with this section. In
addition, the following performance standards shall apply:
         (1)   Location: The plant shall be located in such a way as to
minimize its visibility from an adjacent residential use or a public right-of-
way. This may be accomplished through topography, landscaping, existing
vegetation, berming or setback.
         (2)   Material Stockpiles: Stockpiles associated with these uses shall
be limited to a height of sixty (60) feet.
         (3)   Hours Of Operation: The hours of operation shall be limited to
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. Monday through Saturday
unless special permission is granted by the city council within the interim use
permit. The extra hours of operation may be conditioned on more restrictive
performance standards to address the adverse impacts caused by the extra hours.
         (4)   Ratio Of Aggregate Processing To Recycled Aggregate Products
Production: To maximize the use of mined aggregate material and minimize
importing of recycled material transported from outside the associated gravel
mine, a ratio of aggregate processing to recycled aggregate product processing
shall be established within the interim use permit. The ratio shall have a
minimum of seventy percent (70%) aggregate processing and a maximum of thirty
(30%) recycled aggregate product processing. The ratio shall be based on
tonnage sales and the actual tonnage sales shall be reported to the city on an
annual basis. The city council may limit the area in the aggregate process
facility in which the recycled aggregate products may be stored.
         b.   Asphalt Production: A plant for the production of asphalt may be
allowed on a site that has an approved large scale mineral extraction permit in
compliance with this section. In addition, the following performance standards
shall apply:
         (1)   Location: The asphalt plant and all equipment associated with it
shall be located a minimum of six hundred sixty (660) feet from any
nonagricultural zoned land.
         (2)   Setback And Buffering: The plant and all equipment and materials
associated with it shall be set back a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet from
any EIS boundary line and screened by natural features including berming or
vegetation. Year round one hundred percent (100%) opaque screening with earthen
berms and landscaping shall be required from ground level to the first thirty
percent (30%) of the overall height and fifty percent (50%) opaque to fifty
percent (50%) of the overall height of the plant as viewed from eye level from
surrounding rights-of-way or roadways.
         (3)   Haul Routes: Traffic generated by this use shall utilize haul
routes approved by the city and other agencies as required. The plant owner
shall be responsible for road improvements and easements needed for ingress and
egress subject to approval by the city. The haul routes may require Dakota
County highway department or the Minnesota department of transportation
approval as well.
         (4)   Access: Traffic generated by this use shall enter onto streets
consistent with city access and design standards. The owner of these uses shall
be responsible for all costs associated with road improvements required to
serve the use.
         (5)   Material Stockpiles: Stockpiles associated with these uses shall
be limited to a height of sixty (60) feet.
         (6)   Outdoor Storage: There shall be no outdoor storage of finished
material or products. All equipment and raw material associated with the
asphalt plant must be screened from view from an adjacent residential use or
public right of way in conformance with section
11-7-6 Landscaping, Screening, and Buffering Standards of this title.
         (7)   Air Emissions: Asphalt operations shall comply with Minnesota
rules, part 7011 for testing, monitoring and operational requirements.
         (8)   Waste Byproducts: This use shall operate so as not to discharge
onto the soils within the EIS boundary, across the boundaries of the EIS
boundary line or through percolation into the subsoil within the EIS boundary
or beyond the EIS boundary line where such use is located, toxic or noxious
matter in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or endanger the public
health, safety, comfort or welfare; or, cause injury or damage to property or
business.
         (9)   Odors: This use shall operate so as to prevent the emission of
odorous matter of such quality as to be detectable beyond EIS boundary line.
         (10)   Surety Bond: This use shall comply with the applicable
operating, special requirements and bonding for restoration standards for
mineral extraction specified in subsection K7 of this section.
         (11)   Hours Of Operation: The hours of operation shall be limited to
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. Monday through Saturday
unless special permission is granted by the city council within the interim use
permit. The extra hours of operation may be conditioned on more restrictive
performance standards to address the adverse impacts caused by the extra hours.
         c.   Casting Yard: A facility for the manufacturing of precast
concrete products may be allowed on a site that has an approved large scale
mineral extraction permit in compliance with this section. The casting of the
concrete products shall occur within a building while the curing of the
products may occur outdoors. The city council may approve the outdoor casting
of oversized concrete products provided that the oversized products are to be
used in a construction project that the operator has been awarded and the
outdoor oversized product casting ceases when the construction project is
finished. The construction and design of a casting yard that will exist longer
than ten (10) years shall comply with site, lot, and building standards
established for the I-2 District.
         d.   Concrete Production: A plant for the production of concrete may
be allowed on a site that has an approved large scale mineral extraction permit
in compliance with this section. In addition, the following performance
standards shall apply:
         (1)   Location: The plant shall be located in such a way as to
minimize its visibility from an adjacent residential use or a public right-of-
way. This may be accomplished through topography, landscaping, existing
vegetation, berming or setback. The minimum setback from any EIS boundary line
shall be twice the height of the plant or applicable setback under this code,
whichever is greater.
         (2)   Multiple Ready Mix Concrete Plants: If a facility is to have
multiple concrete plants, each concrete plant shall have its own separate
interim use permit. The primary ready mix concrete plant shall have the
equipment, except for silos and the conveyors that transport materials into the
building, enclosed within a building. One or more secondary concrete plants may
be permitted if an active interim use permit for the primary concrete plant has
been approved that includes a requirement that the primary concrete plant
building be completed within eighteen (18) months of approval.
         (3)   Plant Height: The maximum height of any concrete plant shall be
one hundred five (105) feet.
         (4)   Material Stockpiles: Stockpiles associated with these uses shall
be limited to a height of sixty (60) feet.
         (5)   Outdoor Storage: There shall be no outdoor storage of finished
material or products. All equipment and raw material associated with the cement
or concrete plant must be screened from view from an adjacent residential use
or public right of way in conformance with section
11-7-6 Landscaping, Screening, and Buffering Standards of this title.
         (6)   Hours Of Operation: The hours of operation shall be limited to
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. Monday through Saturday
unless special permission is granted by the city council within the interim use
permit. The extra hours of operation may be conditioned on more restrictive
performance standards to address the additional adverse impacts resulting from
the extra hours.
         (7)   Haul Routes: Traffic generated by this use shall utilize haul
routes approved by the city and other agencies as required. The plant owner
shall be responsible for road improvements and easements needed for ingress and
egress subject to approval by the city. The haul routes may require Dakota
County highway department or the Minnesota department of transportation
approval as well.
         e.   Maintenance Facility. A facility for the repair of trucks, other
vehicles and equipment used in a mineral extraction operation may be allowed on
a site that has an approved large scale mineral extraction permit in compliance
with this section. The construction and design of the maintenance facility
shall comply with site, lot, and building standards established for the I-
2 District.
   H.   Manufacturing, Custom:
      1.   This use includes accessory retail sales and display.
      2.   The size of a custom manufacturing facility shall be no greater than
ten thousand (10,000) gross square feet.
      3.   Such use shall be prohibited on property abutting a residential
district.
   I.   Manufacturing, Heavy:
      1.   Asphalt Plant, Cement and Concrete Production and Related Processing
of Stockpile Materials, subject to the following:
         a.   The asphalt, cement, or concrete plant and all equipment and
materials associated with it shall be located a minimum of six hundred (600)
feet from any nonindustrial district land, and two thousand six hundred (2,600)
feet from any residential or public district.
         b.   The plant and all equipment and materials associated with it
shall be set back a minimum of three hundred (300) feet from any property
boundary line and screened by natural features including changes in elevation
and vegetation. Year round one hundred percent (100%) opaque screening with
earthen berms and landscaping shall be required from ground level to the first
thirty percent (30%) of the overall height and fifty percent (50%) opaque to
fifty percent (50%) of the overall height of the plant as viewed from eye level
from surrounding right-of-way or roadways.
         c.   Asphalt plant, cement and concrete production may be exempt from
conformance with the following standards of the zoning ordinance at the
discretion of the city council:
         (1)   Section
11-7-2 "Architectural Standards" of this title;
         (2)   Subsection
11-7-3 C.7 "Off Street Parking Design and Construction Standards" of this
title;
         (3)   Section
11-7-6 "Landscaping, Screening, and Buffering Standards" of this title; and
         (4)   Subsection
11-4-5 E.2 requiring a minimum building size of ten percent (10%) of the
subject property.
         d.   Traffic generated by these uses shall utilize haul routes
approved by the city and other agencies as required. The plant owner shall be
responsible for road improvements and easements needed for ingress and egress
subject to approval by the city, as well as the county highway department or
the Minnesota department of transportation as required.
         e.   Traffic generated by these uses shall enter onto streets
consistent with city access and design standards. The owner of these uses shall
be responsible for all costs associated with road improvements required to
serve the use.
         f.   Stockpiles associated with these uses shall be limited to a
height of fifty (50) feet.
         g.   No smoke or particulate matter shall be discharged that is darker
than no. 1 classification of the Ringelmann smoke chart furnished by the U.S.
bureau of mines, or twenty percent (20%) opacity as determined by the MPCA.
Further, emissions shall conform to standards set by EPA and MPCA.
         h.   These uses shall operate so as not to discharge onto the soils of
the lot, across the boundaries of the lot or through percolation into the
subsoil of the lot or beyond the boundary of the lot where such use is located,
toxic or noxious matter in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or
endanger the public health, safety, comfort or welfare; or, cause injury or
damage to property or business.
         i.   These uses shall operate in a way so as to prevent the emission
of odorous matter of such quality as to be readily detectable beyond the lot
line of the site on which such use is located.
         j.   These uses shall comply with the applicable operating, special
requirements and bonding for restoration standards for mineral extraction
specified in subsection L "Small-scale Mineral Extraction" of this section.
         k.   In the A-2 District, cement or concrete production is permitted
provided the site has an approved mineral extraction permit in compliance with
subsection L "Small-scale Mineral Extraction" of this section.
      2.   Lumber And Construction Materials Businesses:
         a.   A principal structure must be built on site.
         b.   Lumber and construction material yards are subject to the
performance standards outlined for outdoor display, sales, and storage in the
I-2 District.
         c.   In the I-2, wholesale lumber and construction materials
businesses are permitted subject to the standards above.
   J.   Nonhazardous Industrial Waste Containment Facility:
      1.   Permit applicants shall submit the following information together
with any other information requested by the city:
         a.   The proposed project layout including site drawings showing
building locations, access roads, buffers and all major facilities.
         b.   Proposed technology and design.
         c.   A complete description of the proposed project's operation,
including, but not limited to, phasing and anticipated operating lifetime,
types of wastes to be accepted and methods to verify the waste stream,
recordkeeping methods, staffing, anticipated waste volumes, containment
facilities, contingency and response plans.
         d.   A description of anticipated traffic generated by the facility,
routes to be used, and access to the site.
         e.   Identification of known and potential environmental risks
associated with the construction, operation and closure of the facility.
         f.   Closure, postclosure and contingency plans, including financing
plans.
         g.   A description of the existing site and surrounding area including
current ownership and land uses, current zoning, transportation access to the
site, topography, existing soil and hydrogeologic conditions, vegetation,
wildlife, surface waters.
         h.   Need for city emergency services including fire, police,
emergency response, medical.
         i.   A description of the applicant's experience in operating the
technology, proposed training for all operation staff, and the environmental
record of the technology.
      2.   Permits for nonhazardous industrial waste land disposal facilities
shall only be issued if the following standards are met or exceeded:
         a.   The facility must represent the best available technology for
land disposal of nonhazardous industrial waste.
         b.   The operator and staff must have sufficient experience in the
operation of such facilities to ensure competent operation.
         c.   The design, construction and operation of the facility must
minimize negative environmental impacts and must mitigate such impacts to the
fullest extent possible.
         d.   Public health, safety and welfare must be ensured.
         e.   Adequate closure, postclosure and contingency plans must be
established.
         f.   An emergency response plan must be established and accepted by
the city.
         g.   An environmental impact statement must be completed and declared
adequate by the responsible governmental unit.
         h.   There must be adequate access to the site.
         i.   The proposed project must be compatible with surrounding land
use.
         j.   The applicant provides financial security sufficient to guarantee
compliance with the terms of the permit.
         k.   The economic benefits, incentives and other advantages to the
city and community must outweigh any known or potential negative aspects of the
facility.
         l.   The applicant must have a plan for working with industry to
develop techniques and markets for recycling industrial waste streams.
         m.   An interim permit shall not be issued until all required local,
state and/or federal permits have been obtained by the applicant. The city may
allow interim permits that were previously approved and are in the process of
being amended or reissued to continue to operate under the existing permit
conditions during the review process by the city or other governmental
agencies.
         n.   The applicant must notify each user of the site that free liquids
cannot be placed in the containment cell; inspect each container of waste for
the presence of free liquids; and have procedures to prevent any free liquid
from being placed in the cell.
   K.   Recycling Operation:
      1.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to establish or expand, in any way, a recycling operation without
first receiving a permit from the city. Such permit may only be issued in a
zoning district where such use is listed as a permitted use.
      2.   Permit Application Requirements: Application for a permit shall be
made in writing in the form specified by the city and shall contain the
following information:
         a.   The correct legal description of the land.
         b.   The name and address of the applicant and the owner of the land
if different from the applicant.
         c.   Maps, photographs and surveys illustrating the relationship of
the site to the community and surrounding properties and existing site
conditions including vegetation, surface waters and topography.
         d.   A description of the operation as regards the sales of parts and
the use of cutting, compressing and packaging equipment.
         e.   A site plan, to scale, showing the location and intended use of
all structures, storage areas, driveways, parking and equipment.
      3.   Development And Operating Standards:
         a.   The site shall be a minimum of five (5) acres in size.
         b.   A solid wall or opaque fence at least eight (8) feet in height
shall be provided around the entire perimeter of the site to screen said site
from public streets and surrounding property. Such fence shall be of sound
construction and shall be properly maintained.
         c.   All activities shall be confined within the fenced in area. There
shall be no stacking of material above the height of the fence or wall except
that equipment used on the site may exceed the wall or fence height. No
equipment, material, signs or lighting shall be used or stored outside the
fenced area. There shall be no storage of materials within semitrailer units or
other vehicles which would extend above the height of the fence.
         d.   All equipment used in industrial processes, including that used
for cutting, compressing or packaging, shall be within a completely enclosed
building.
         e.   The fenced area shall be set back at least two hundred (200) feet
from any street and the area within front or street side yards shall be planted
with trees, grass, and shrubs in accordance with section
11-7-6 "Landscaping, Screening, and Buffering Standards" of this title.
         f.   Whenever the operation abuts an R district, a transition strip of
at least two hundred (200) feet in width shall be provided between the fenced
area and the R district boundary. Said transition strip shall be landscaped as
prescribed in provision 3.e above.
         g.   The fenced area shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from
any nonresidential district.
      4.   Additional Requirements: The city may attach such additional
conditions as may be required to ensure compliance with this title.
   L.   Self-Service Storage Facility:
      1.   All storage shall be maintained in the storage space and there shall
be no outdoor storage of any products, equipment or other material within the
storage facility; provided, however, open storage for licensed, operable
recreation vehicles shall be permitted, provided the amount is not more than
twenty-five percent (25%) of the area occupied by buildings.
         a.   Within the I-1 District, all storage shall be maintained in the
storage space and there shall be no outdoor storage of any products, equipment
or other material within the storage facility site; except that outdoor storage
for licensed, operable recreation vehicles shall be permitted provided the
amount is not more than ninety percent (90%) of the area occupied by buildings.
      2.   The perimeter of the storage facility shall be entirely enclosed by
a combination of buildings and decorative fencing. Chain link, barbed wire, or
wood privacy fencing shall not be permitted as decorative material, except as
may otherwise be approved by the city council. For the purposes of calculating
foundation planting requirements, the decorative fencing of the perimeter shall
be used in lieu of the building perimeter calculation.
      3.   All storage space openings shall be oriented internally to the
facility and shall not directly face a public street or adjoining property.
      4.   Green space, planting clusters and berming shall be strategically
designed and located around openings between storage facility structures.
      5.   The self-service storage facility shall be required to provide 1.25
times the required minimum for over story tree plantings so as to satisfy the
requirements of provision K.4 above, and provided the minimum interval spacing
requirement at the boulevard is satisfied and met. All landscaped areas shall
be required to include the proper installation of an underground irrigation
system.
      6.   An accessory caretaker residence may be permitted with a storage
facility, provided it is only used for resident security and management
purposes and the exterior building materials shall match those of the principal
and accessory storage facility structures.
      7.   The exterior wall surfaces of all building structures that comprise
the development project shall consist of brick, decorative block, stone,
architectural concrete cast in place or precast concrete panels. The "interior"
wall surfaces where storage spaces are located at or below the top of the
overhead door, and including the storage space doors and columns between such
spaces, may be of metal, which shall consist of a decorative factory applied
finish.
      8.   The hours of operation for the self-service storage facility shall
be restricted to between the hours of 6:00 A.M. and 11:00 P.M.
      9.   Access to the interior of the fenced area shall be available to
emergency responders in a manner to be acceptable to the fire marshal.
      10.   All internal driveways intended for access to individual storage
spaces shall have minimum widths of twenty (20) feet.
      11.   No internal driveway may exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet
without providing sufficient space to turn vehicles around allowing for a
minimum turning radius of forty-five (45) feet, or as approved by the fire
marshal.
      12.   Common parking space available to all storage units shall be
provided at a rate no less than one (1) space per six thousand (6,000) square
feet of storage area.
      13.   The exterior buildings, driveways, open space and landscaping,
front, side and rear yards shall be maintained and repaired or replaced in
conformance with the approved plans by the property owner or landlord. This
condition shall be kept that it will not cause a blighting of the area or a
general deterioration of the self-storage facility.
      14.   If storage units are to be sold individually, and no landlord or
property owner is available to assume site management responsibilities, an
owners' association shall be required to assume the responsibilities of overall
site management. The owners' association shall be governed by a declaration of
covenants that shall be approved by the city and recorded at Dakota County. The
open space and common areas shall be maintained and cared for by the developer
of the self-storage facility until an owners' association is formed to maintain
open space and common areas. This owners' association shall be responsible for
the care and maintenance of all open space and common areas of the self-storage
facility and also for the maintenance and appearance of the exterior of each
unit. The owners' association shall levy charges to each owner for the
maintenance cost, operating costs and improvement costs for the open or green
space, and for the common and privately owned parking and paved areas beyond
each storage unit. In addition, the owners' association will assume the
responsibility to maintain the exterior of the building(s) and also in an
acceptable condition which is compatible with adjoining properties. The owners'
association will cause blighted individually owned units or areas within the
facility to be repaired, restored and maintained as necessary to an acceptable
standard for the area.
      15.   In the event that the developer or owner of the self-storage
facility is unable to organize the property owners into an association for the
maintenance of the open space and individually owned storage units after twelve
(12) months from the completion of the construction, the council will call for
a public hearing of all persons so concerned and ask for the creation of such
an association. If no association is formed or if the association ceases to
function any time after it is formed, the council will order such maintenance
work and restoration of the area and then will assess such costs, together with
a reasonable supervision charge, to the owners in the self-storage facility or
the individual owner receiving the individual benefit.
      16.   The council may require that the declaration of covenants include
provisions to meet the minimum requirements of this section or to satisfy
conditions of city approval, may be enforced by the city, and may not be
amended or released without city council approval.
   M.   Small-Scale Mineral Extraction:
      1.   Small-scale mineral extraction uses shall be allowed within the
following boundary: a line one-half (0.5) mile north of County State Aid
Highway 42, the municipal boundary to the east, a line one-half (0.5) mile
south of County State Aid Highway 42, and US Highway 52 to the west.
      2.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to remove, store or excavate rock, sand, gravel, clay, silt or
other like material in the city, or to fill or raise the existing surface
grades, without receiving a permit for mineral extraction. Permits for small
scale mineral extraction under this section may only be issued in a zoning
district where mineral extraction is listed as an interim use and within the
boundary identified above.
         a.   Exceptions: An extraction permit shall not be required for any of
the following:
         (1)   Excavation for a foundation, cellar or basement of a building if
a building permit has been issued.
         (2)   Excavation by state, county or city authorities in connection
with construction or maintenance of roads, highways or utilities.
         (3)   Curb cuts, utility hookups or street openings for which another
permit has been issued by the city.
         (4)   Excavation less than one hundred (100) square feet in area or
one (1) foot in depth.
         (5)   Excavation or grading for agricultural purposes.
      3.   Application, Public Hearing, Notice, And Procedure: The application,
public hearing, public notice and procedure requirements for mineral extraction
permits shall be the same as those for amendments as provided in section
11-9-2 "Zoning Code Amendment of this title, except that the permit shall be
issued on the affirmative vote of a majority of the entire council. Application
for the extraction permit shall be made in writing in the form specified by the
city. The application shall contain the following information:
         a.   The correct legal description of the land upon which excavation
is proposed.
         b.   The name and address of the applicant, the owner of the land and
the person or corporation conducting the actual removal operation.
         c.   The names and addresses of all adjacent landowners within three
hundred fifty (350) feet or, if the subject property is located in A-1, A-2, or
RR districts, within one-fourth (0.25) mile.
         d.   The purpose of the proposed excavation.
         e.   The estimated time required to complete the proposed excavation
and rehabilitation.
         f.   The names of the highways, streets or other public roadways
within the city upon which the material shall be transported.
      4.   Standards: The following standards shall apply to all extraction
operations:
         a.   Boundary: Extraction operations shall be conducted within the
confines of the excavation site described in the application.
         b.   Access: Extraction operations shall only be allowed on sites
which have direct access to either a principal arterial, minor arterial, a
collector street, or to a local street if approved by the public works
department, as designated in the city of Rosemount comprehensive guide plan.
         c.   Prohibited Areas: Extraction operations shall not be conducted
within the following:
         (1)   Five (5) feet of the right-of-way or easement of an existing
public utility.
         (2)   Thirty (30) feet of the boundary of an adjoining property which
is not being used for extraction operations.
         (3)   Fifty (50) feet of the right-of-way of a public street or
highway.
         d.   Phasing Of Operations: Extraction operations to be conducted on a
site larger than fifteen (15) acres shall be subject to the following
requirements:
         (1)   A phasing plan must be prepared which limits operations to a
maximum area of fifteen (15) acres per phase of operations.
         (2)   A mineral extraction permit for the first phase of an extraction
operation shall be limited to a maximum area of fifteen (15) acres. An
extraction permit for phase two or subsequent phases of a mineral extraction
operation shall not be issued until at least seventy percent (70%) of the
previous phase of operations has been rehabilitated according to an approved
comprehensive rehabilitation plan.
         (3)   No mineral extraction permit shall authorize extraction
operations to be conducted in more than two (2) phases of an extraction
operation concurrently.
         (4)   No mineral extraction permit shall authorize extraction to be
conducted on more than 19.5 acres at one time.
         e.   Fencing: During excavation operations, access to any area where
collections of water are one and one-half (1½) feet in depth or more or where
excavation slopes are steeper than one (1) foot vertical to one and one-half
(1½) feet horizontal and any other areas where obvious danger to the public
exists shall be controlled by a fence erected and maintained around the entire
site or portions thereof and shall be a type specified by the council.
         f.   Appearance And Screening:
         (1)   All machinery shall be kept operational.
         (2)   Abandoned machinery and rubbish shall be promptly removed from
the excavation site.
         (3)   Within three (3) months after the termination of excavation
operations or within three (3) months after the expiration of the extraction
permit provided by this section, the applicant or owner shall dismantle
buildings and structures incident to excavation operations and shall grade the
excavation site as well as complete all rehabilitation on the site as provided
by the rehabilitation plan.
         (4)   When required, the perimeter of the excavation site shall be
planted or otherwise screened.
         (5)   Existing tree and ground cover shall be preserved to the maximum
extent feasible, maintained or supplemented by selective cutting, transplanting
and replanting of trees, shrubs and other ground cover along all setback areas.
         g.   Excavation Operating Standards:
         (1)   Noise: Maximum noise level at the perimeter of the excavation
site shall comply with the limits or standards established by the Minnesota
pollution control agency and the United States environmental protection agency.
         (2)   Hours: All excavation operations shall be conducted between 7:00
A.M. and 7:00 P.M., Monday through Saturday only. The council may restrict
excavation, processing or related operations on legal holidays if such
activities cause noise or other disturbances offensive to adjacent property
owners.
         (3)   Explosives: The use and handling of explosives at the excavation
site shall be coordinated with the police department. Blasting shall occur only
at hours specified in the extraction permit.
         (4)   Fugitive Dust: Excavation operators shall use all practical
means to reduce the amount of fugitive dust generated by excavation operations.
In any event, the amount of dust or other particulate matter generated by the
excavation shall not exceed air pollution standards established by the
Minnesota pollution control agency.
         (5)   Water Pollution: Excavation operators shall comply with all
applicable Minnesota pollution control agency and department of natural
resources regulations and all applicable United States environmental protection
agency regulations for the protection of water quality. No waste products or
processed residue, including untreated wash water, shall be deposited in any
public waters of the state of Minnesota.
         (6)   Topsoil Preservation: All topsoil shall be retained at the
excavation site until the completion of rehabilitation work in accordance with
the rehabilitation plan.
         (7)   Slopes During Excavation Operations: During the entire period of
operations, all excavations other than the working face, shall be sloped on all
sides to a maximum ratio of one (1) foot horizontal to one (1) foot vertical,
unless a steeper slope is approved by the city. Where excavations are adjacent
to a public roadway or other right-of-way, the excavation shall have a maximum
slope of four (4) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical. Slopes adjacent to
waterways shall not exceed six (6) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical.
         (8)   Equipment: All equipment and machinery shall be operated and
maintained in such a manner as to minimize dust, noise and vibration. Power
drives or power producing machines shall not be housed or operated less than
one thousand (1,000) feet from a residential use. Access roads shall be
maintained in dust free condition by surfacing or other treatment as may be
specified by the city engineer.
         (9)   Processing: Crushing, washing and refining, or other similar
processing may be authorized by the council as an accessory use, provided,
however, that such accessory processing shall not be in conflict with the use
regulations of the district in which the operation is located.
         (10)   Council Waiver: The council, at the time of issuance of the
extraction permit, may waive or modify any of the provisions in this section or
impose additional requirements if it finds that the plan of operation or other
materials submitted with the application or other factors make appropriate more
suitable measures for standards consistent with the public health, safety and
welfare.
      5.   Special Requirements: The council, as a prerequisite to the issuance
of an extraction permit, or after an extraction permit has been granted, may
require the applicant or owner of the premises to:
         a.   Reimburse the city for the cost of periodic inspections for the
purpose of determining that the provisions of the extraction permit and this
title are being followed.
         b.   Submit to council a detailed map of the streets on which the
material removed shall be transported (haul roads). The city shall inspect the
haul roads proposed to be used by the applicant or owner and shall recommend to
the council necessary upgrading or repairing of the haul roads prior to their
use by the applicant or owner. The council shall designate the haul roads and
shall incorporate the recommendations of the responsible city officials in the
extraction permit issued to the applicant. It shall be the responsibility of
the applicant or owner to maintain the haul roads in accordance with the
provisions set forth in the permit. The city shall periodically inspect haul
roads to ensure compliance with the permit. During the period of or upon
completion of the excavation operations, the applicant or owner shall make any
necessary repairs to the haul roads as recommended by the city. All costs of
inspection provided for in this subsection shall be borne by the applicant or
owner. The use of the haul roads shall be further subject to any road and
weight restrictions imposed by the city.
         c.   Submit annually in writing to the council the estimated quantity
of minerals to be excavated. If the quantity of minerals to be excavated is for
any reason likely to exceed the original estimate herein required, the
applicant or owner shall notify the council of the change in estimated
quantity.
         d.   Comply with such other requirements as the council shall from
time to time deem proper and necessary for the protection of its citizens and
the general welfare.
      6.   Inspections: The city may inspect all excavation sites where an
extraction permit has been issued. The operator or owner of any excavation
operation found in violation of the requirements of this title or its
extraction permit shall remedy such violations within the time specified by
written notice from the city.
      7.   Duration Of Extraction Permit: The excavation license shall run from
January 1 through December 31 of the next year or for a lesser period of time
as the council may specify at the time of issuance of the extraction permit. If
the extraction permit is to run for less than a full year, the fee shall be
prorated as determined by the council.
      8.   Extraction Permit Fee: The applicant or owner of the premises on
which the excavation operation is located shall annually submit to the council
written estimates of:
         a.   The total area of the mineral extraction operation (expressed in
acres) to be actively mined during the forthcoming year; and
         b.   The total area for which an extraction permit permitting mineral
extraction operations has been granted (expressed in acres) which will not be
actively mined in the forthcoming year.
         c.   The council shall, by resolution, establish an annual per acre
permit fee.
      9.   Surety Bond: The council shall require the applicant or owner of the
premises on which the excavation operation is located to post a surety bond
with a surety acceptable to the city, cash escrow or letter of credit
("security") in an amount determined by the council, running to the city,
conditioned to pay the city the extraordinary costs and expense of repairing
any streets where such repair work is made necessary by the special burden
resulting from hauling and travel, and removing material from any pit or
excavation, and conducting required rehabilitation and conditioned further to
comply with all the requirements of this title and the particular extraction
permit, and to pay any expense the city may incur by reason of doing anything
required to be done by any applicant to whom a permit is issued. The security
shall remain in full force and effect for a minimum period of one year after
expiration of the extraction permit to guarantee the required rehabilitation as
well as the other requirements herein provided.
      10.   Cement Or Concrete Production: Cement or concrete production may be
allowed in the A-2 District as a conditional use provided the site has an
approved mineral extraction permit in compliance with this section and section
11-9-3 "Conditional Use Permit" of this title. In addition to these sections,
the following performance standards shall apply:
         a.   Council Review: The council, at the time of issuance of a CUP for
cement or concrete production, may waive or modify any of the provisions of
this section or section 11-9-3 "Conditional Use Permit" of this title or impose
additional requirements if it finds that the plans or other factors make
appropriate more suitable measures for standards consistent with the public
health, safety, and welfare.
         b.   Inspection: The city may inspect all sites with or requesting a
CUP for cement or concrete production. The operator or owner of any cement or
concrete production site found in violation of the requirements of this section
or its CUP shall remedy such violations within the time specified by written
notice from the city. Failure to remedy any violations within the specified
time frame may result in revocation of the CUP.
         c.   Location: The plant shall be located in such a way that it is not
visible from an adjacent residential use or a public right-of-way. This may be
accomplished through topography, berming or setback. The minimum setback from
any property line shall be twice the height of the plant or applicable setback
under this code, whichever is greater.
         d.   Height: The maximum height of any concrete plant shall be
seventy-five (75) feet.
         e.   Outdoor Storage: There shall be no outdoor storage of vehicles.
All equipment and material associated with the cement or concrete plant must be
screened from view from an adjacent residential use or public right-of- way in
conformance with the provisions for outdoor storage in Section
11-6-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-6-5: PRINCIPAL USES, AGRICULTURE, OPEN SPACE, AND NATURAL RESOURCES:
   A.   Commercial Horse Stable:
      1.   The site shall not be less than twenty (20) acres in size;
      2.   All structures shall be located a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet
from all residential property lines.
      3.   Subject to the regulations regarding the care and keeping of horses
within the city in title 7, chapter 4 of this Code.
   B.   Community Solar Garden Or Solar Farm:
      1.   Purpose And Intent: It is the goal of the city council, as expressed
in the comprehensive plan, for Rosemount to become a more sustainable community
by encouraging activities that conserve energy and result in less/no pollution
output such as alternative energy sources. In accordance with that goal, the
city finds that it is in the public interest to encourage alternative energy
systems that have a positive impact on energy production and conservation while
not having an adverse impact on the community. Therefore, the purposes of this
section include:
         a.   To promote rather than restrict development of alternative energy
sources by removing regulatory barriers and creating a clear regulatory path
for approving alternative energy systems.
         b.   To create a livable community where development incorporates
sustainable design elements such as resource and energy conservation and use of
renewable energy.
         c.   To protect and enhance air quality, limit the effects of climate
change and decrease use of fossil fuels.
         d.   To encourage alternative energy development in locations where
the technology is viable and environmental, economic and social impacts can be
mitigated.
      2.   Exemptions: Passive or building integrated solar energy systems are
exempt from the requirements of this section and shall be regulated as any
other building element.
      3.   Setbacks: Community solar gardens or solar farms shall comply with
the principal structure setback standards for the applicable zoning district in
which they are located.
      4.   Screening: Community solar gardens or solar farms shall be screened
from view of the public right-of-way to the extent possible without reducing
their efficiency by setback, berming, landscaping, walls or a combination
thereof.
      5.   General Requirements For All Solar:
         a.   Feeder Lines: All power lines shall be placed underground within
the interior of each parcel.
         b.   Compliance With Building Code: All active solar energy systems
shall meet approval of local building code officials, consistent with the state
of Minnesota building code, and solar thermal systems shall comply with HVAC
related requirements of the energy code.
         c.   Compliance With State Electric Code: All photovoltaic systems
shall comply with the Minnesota state electric code.
         d.   Compliance With State Plumbing Code: Solar thermal systems shall
comply with applicable Minnesota state plumbing code.
         e.   Certifications: Solar electric system components shall be
certified by Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., and solar thermal systems shall
be certified by the Solar Rating and Certification Corporation, or other
appropriate certification(s) as determined by the city. The city reserves the
right to deny a building permit for proposed solar energy systems deemed to
have inadequate certification.
         f.   Utility Connection: All grid intertie systems shall have an
agreement with the local utility prior to the issuance of a building permit. A
visible external disconnect must be provided if required by the utility. Off
grid systems are exempt from this requirement.
         g.   Abandonment: If the solar energy system remains nonfunctional or
inoperative for a continuous period of one (1) year, the system shall be deemed
to be abandoned and shall constitute a public nuisance. The owner shall remove
the abandoned system at their expense after a demolition permit has been
obtained. Removal includes the entire structure including transmission
equipment.
         h.   Permits: No solar energy system shall be erected, altered,
improved, reconstructed, maintained or moved in the city without first securing
a permit from the city. Community solar gardens or solar farms as defined in
section
11-10-3 "Alternative Energy System Definitions" shall also require an interim
use permit. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-6-6: PRINCIPAL USES, UTILITIES:
   A.   Commercial Use Antenna And/Or Tower:
      1.   Permit Required: No commercial use antenna and/or tower may be
constructed in the city without first applying for a permit. The permit
application must be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee. The
application fee shall be established by the city council. The permit fee shall
be calculated according to the city's schedule of rates and fees. All technical
data and all relevant information shall be submitted to the planning commission
for its review.
         a.   Upon receiving approval by the planning commission and obtaining
the appropriate permits, the following standards for commercial use antennas
and/or towers shall be met:
         (1)   Commercial use antenna and/or towers shall not be multicolored,
and shall contain no signage, including logos, except as may be required by any
state and federal regulations.
         (2)   Commercial use antenna towers shall not be located within one-
half (0.5) mile of another commercial use antenna tower.
         (3)   No guywires shall be used.
         (4)   The setbacks of commercial use antenna towers shall be no less
than the height of the tower. The height of the tower shall not exceed two
hundred fifty (250) feet. A commercial use antenna tower cannot locate any
closer than five hundred (500) feet from a residential structure.
         (5)   The structural integrity of a commercial use antenna tower shall
be approved by a certified engineer.
         (6)   A commercial use antenna tower shall not be artificially
illuminated unless required by the FAA, FCC or other federal or state
authority. Any illumination shall be oriented inward whenever possible while
complying with federal or state requirements. If lighting is required, it shall
be oriented inward, if possible, so as not to project onto surrounding
residential property.
         (7)   Non-climbable fencing shall enclose the area on which the
commercial use antenna tower is located.
         (8)   Accessory structures in accordance with applicable I-1 and I-
2 standards shall enclose transmission equipment, power equipment, or any
equipment located on the ground near the tower that is used in conjunction with
the commercial use antenna tower.
         (9)   Commercial use antenna towers located within six hundred sixty
(660) feet (1/8 mile) of a public right-of-way (ROW) or a residential (R) or
public (P) district shall be landscaped along the side adjacent to the ROW, R
or P district with boulevard trees planted on fifty (50)-foot spacing in
accordance with section
11-7-6 "Landscaping, Screening, and Buffering Standards" of this title.
         (10)   Applicant must provide data indicating location of proposed
antenna in relationship with nearest existing or anticipated antenna locations
that would provide optimum service involving the city of Rosemount.
      2.   Violation Of Standards: Should the commercial use antenna and/or
tower owner engage in any activity that violates these standards or endangers
the public health, safety, and welfare, the city may require the abatement of
said antenna and/or tower from its current site. The city will provide notice
to the commercial use antenna and/or tower owner of the violations, and provide
an opportunity for the owner to address the city council regarding the proposed
action. The city may require immediate abatement in the case that there is an
immediate public health threat.
      3.   Obsolete Or Unused Tower: An obsolete or unused commercial use
antenna and/or tower and accompanying accessory facilities shall be removed
within six (6) months of the cessation of operations unless a time extension is
approved by the city council. If a time extension is not approved, the
commercial use antenna and/or tower may be deemed a nuisance pursuant to Minn.
Sta. § 429. In the event an antenna or tower is determined to be a nuisance,
the city of Rosemount may act to abate such nuisance and require the removal of
the commercial use antenna and/or tower at the property owner's expense. The
owner shall provide the city with a copy of the notice of the federal
communications commission's (FCC) intent to cease operations and shall be given
six (6) months from the date of ceasing operations to remove the obsolete
commercial use antenna and/or tower, and all accessory structures including
anything that may have been placed belowground. In the case of multiple
operators sharing the use of a single commercial use antenna tower, this
provision shall not become effective until all users cease operations for a
period of six (6) months. The equipment on the ground shall not be removed
until the tower structure has first been dismantled. After the facilities are
removed, the site shall be restored to its original, or to an improved state.
      4.   Potential For Collocation Requirements: All commercial use antenna
towers erected, constructed, or located within the city shall comply with the
following requirements related to assessing the potential for collocation on an
existing tower:
         a.   A proposal for a commercial use antenna tower shall not be
approved unless it can be documented by the applicant that the communications
equipment planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing
or approved tower or building within a one-half (0.5) mile radius of the
proposed tower due to one or more of the following reasons:
         (1)   The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of
the existing or approved tower or building, as documented by a qualified and
licensed professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower cannot be
reinforced or modified to accommodate planned equipment at a reasonable cost;
         (2)   The planned equipment would cause interference with other
existing or planned equipment at the tower or building as documented by a
qualified and licensed professional engineer, and the interference cannot be
prevented at a reasonable cost;
         (3)   No existing or approved towers or commercial/industrial
buildings within a half mile radius meet the radio frequency (RF) design
criteria;
         (4)   Existing or approved towers and commercial/industrial buildings
within a one-half (0.5) mile radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment at
a height necessary to function reasonably as documented by a qualified and
licensed professional radio frequency (RF) engineer; and/or
         (5)   The applicant must demonstrate that a good faith effort to
collocate on existing towers and structures within a one-half (0.5) mile radius
was made, but an agreement could not be reached.
      5.   Tower Construction Requirements: All towers erected, constructed, or
located within the city, and all wiring therefor, shall comply with the
following requirements:
         a.   Monopoles using stealth technology are the preferred tower
design. However, the city will consider alternative tower types in cases where
structure RF design considerations, and/or the number of tenants required by
the city preclude the use of a monopole.
         b.   Towers and their antennas shall comply with all applicable
provisions of this code.
         c.   Any proposed commercial use antenna tower shall be designed,
structurally, electrically, and all other respects to accommodate both the
applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for at least one additional user.
To allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower, the tower shall
be designed to accept antennas mounted at no less than ten (10)-foot intervals.
         d.   All towers and their antennas shall utilize building materials,
colors, textures, screening and landscaping that effectively blend the tower
facilities within the surrounding natural setting and built environment to the
greatest extent possible as determined by the city.
         e.   In addition to the submittal requirements required elsewhere in
this code, applications for building permits for towers and their antennas
shall be accompanied by the following information:
         (1)   Written statements from the federal aviation administration,
federal communications commission, and any appropriate state review authority
stating that the proposed tower complies with regulations administered by that
agency or that the tower is exempt from those regulations;
         (2)   A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer
that does the following: describes the tower height and design including a
cross section and elevation; demonstrates the tower's compliance with the
aforementioned structural and electrical standards; documents the height above
grade for all potential mounting positions for collocated antennas and the
minimum separation distances between antennas; describes the tower's capacity,
including the number and type of antennas that it can accommodate; and
documents what steps the applicant will take to avoid interference with
established public safety communications; and
         (3)   A letter of intent committing the tower owner and his or her
successors to allow the shared use of the tower, as long as there is no
negative structural impact upon the tower, and there is no disruption to the
service provided.
      6.   Antennas Mounted On Roofs, Walls And Existing Towers: The placement
of wireless communication antennas on roofs, walls, and existing towers may be
permitted on public, institutional, commercial or industrial buildings or
facilities, with a building permit approved by the appropriate city staff. In
addition to the submittal requirements required elsewhere in this code, an
application for a building permit for antennas to be mounted on an existing
structure shall be accompanied by the following information:
         a.   A site plan showing the location of the proposed antennas on the
structure and documenting that the request meets the requirements of this code.
         b.   A building plan showing the construction of the antennas, the
proposed method of attaching them to the existing structure, and documenting
that the request meets the requirements of this code.
         c.   A report prepared by a qualified and licensed professional
engineer indicating the existing structure or tower's ability to support the
antennas.
         d.   An intermodulation study to ensure there will be no interference
with existing tenants or public safety telecommunication providers.
   B.   Essential Service Facilities:
      1.   Electrical substations and switching stations are prohibited in all
residential and public/institutional districts.
      2.   Essential service facilities shall be subject to all of the
applicable district development standards as well as any overlay district
standards with the following additional standards:
         a.   Fenced Enclosure:
         (1)   Every fenced enclosure is subject to the principal building
setback or yard criteria of the district in which it is located.
         b.   Electrical Substation:
         (1)   Electrical substations and switching stations located on any lot
or parcel which is adjacent to a lot or parcel in a residential (R), commercial
(C), and/or public institutional (P) district or use must provide mechanical or
vegetative screening in the yard adjacent to a public right of way or such lot
or parcel in the R, C, or P district. Screening consisting of earthen berm,
landscaping, and/or wall having ninety percent (90%) opacity to a height not
less than six (6) feet in height shall be provided within the yard adjacent to
a public right-of-way or such lot or parcel in the R, C, or P district.
Screening shall not be required in yards that are adjacent to wastewater
treatment facilities.
         c.   Transmission Facilities:
         (1)   An application for transmission facilities shall be required to
be submitted to the city, including information related to the proposed design,
proposed siting, and alternative sites together with such application fee as
may be approved from time to time by the city council. All transmission
facilities shall be required to receive a permit from the city, except for
those that are less than or equal to one-fourth (0.25) mile in length. No
application shall be considered until a public hearing has been held by the
planning commission. A notice of such hearing shall be published at least ten
(10) days prior to the hearing, and notices shall be mailed to each property
owner within three hundred fifty (350) feet of the affected property, except
when located in the A-1, A-2, and RR districts which shall require mailed
notice to each property owner within one-fourth (0.25) mile. The city council
shall consider the recommendation of the planning commission and either approve
or deny the application.
         d.   The application for transmission facilities must be approved
based upon the following findings:
         (1)   The proposed siting complies with the city's comprehensive plan.
         (2)   To the extent possible, the proposed siting is within or
adjacent to existing public rights-of-way, private utility easements or other
designated corridors for transportation or transmission facilities.
         (3)   The proposed siting is necessary based upon a need and
locational analysis.
         (4)   Impacts, including, but not limited to, noise and views, are
identified and mitigated.
         (5)   The proposed siting will not create hazards to the health,
safety and general welfare of surrounding property owners or natural
environment.
   C.   Small Wireless Facility Within ROW:
      1.   Subject to the regulations contained in title 4, chapter 2 "Right-
of-Way Management" of this code.
   D.   Truck Stop:
      1.   Location: Truck stops shall be located east of Blaine Avenue (County
Road 71) and within one-fourth (0.25) mile or one thousand three hundred twenty
(1,320) feet of a principal arterial roadway.
      2.   Installation Standards: Truck stops shall be installed in accordance
with state and city standards. Additionally, adequate space shall be provided
to access gas pumps and allow maneuverability around the pumps. Underground
fuel storage tanks are to be positioned to allow adequate access by motor fuel
transports and unloading operations which do not conflict with circulation,
access and other activities on the site. Fuel pumps shall be installed on pump
islands.
      3.   Sanitary Dump: A sanitary dump shall be required at all truck stops.
The sanitary dump must comply with all requirements of the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency (MPCA).
      4.   Canopy: A protective canopy structure may be located over the pump
island(s) as a permitted accessory structure. The canopy shall meet the
following performance standards:
         a.   The edge of the canopy shall be seventy (70) feet or more from
the front and/or side lot line, provided that adequate visibility both on site
and off site is maintained.
         b.   The canopy shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet in height and must
provide fourteen (14) feet of clearance to accommodate a semitrailer truck from
passing underneath.
         c.   The canopy fascia shall not exceed three (3) feet in vertical
height.
         d.   Canopy lighting shall consist of canister spotlights recessed
into the canopy. No portion of the light source or fixture may extend below the
bottom face of the canopy. Total canopy illumination may not exceed one hundred
fifteen (115) foot-candles below the canopy at ground level. The fascia of the
canopy shall not be illuminated.
         e.   The architectural design, colors, and character of the canopy
shall be consistent with the principal building on the site.
         f.   Signage may be allowed on a detached canopy in lieu of wall
signage on the principal structure, provided that:
         (1)   The individual canopy sign does not exceed more than twenty
percent (20%) of the canopy façade facing a public right-of-way.
         (2)   The canopy fascia shall not be illuminated, except for permitted
canopy signage.
         g.   Canopy posts/signposts shall not obstruct traffic or the safe
operation of the gas pumps.
      5.   Pump Islands: Pump islands must be elevated six (6) inches above the
traveled surface of the site. Pump islands must be set at least seventy (70)
feet back from any property line. Setback between pump island curb face shall
be sufficient for the servicing and maneuvering of semitrucks with trailers.
      6.   Dust Control And Drainage: The entire site other than taken up by a
building, structure, or plantings shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete,
cobblestone or paving brick. Plans for surfacing and drainage shall be subject
to approval of the city engineer. Drainage from all fueling areas shall be
directed to an oil/grit separator. Minimum design standards for the oil/grit
separator shall include the following:
         a.   A minimum of four hundred (400) cubic feet of permanent pool
storage capacity per acre of drainage area.
         b.   A minimum pool depth of four (4) feet.
         c.   A minimum oil containment capacity of eight hundred (800)
gallons.
         d.   Minimum maintenance/inspection of two (2) times per year and/or
after measurable spill events. A measurable spill shall be defined by the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA). A measurable spill must be reported
to the MPCA.
      7.   Access And Circulation: Vehicular access points shall create a
minimum of conflict with through traffic movement. The site design must
accommodate adequate turning radius and vertical clearance for a semitrailer
truck. A site plan must be provided to illustrate adequate turning radius,
using appropriate engineering templates.
      8.   Parking:
         a.   Parking for motor fuel service shall be in addition to that
required for other uses on the site.
         b.   Parking spaces shall be determined on an individual basis by the
city council. Factors to be considered in such determination shall include
(without limitation) size of building, type of use, number of employees,
expected volume and turnover of customer traffic and expected frequency and
number of delivery or service vehicles.
         c.   Parking stalls for trucks and trailers shall be a minimum of
twelve (12) feet wide and seventy (70) feet long, exclusive of drive aisles.
      9.   Pedestrian Traffic:
         a.   An internal site pedestrian circulation system shall be defined
and appropriate provisions made to protect such areas from encroachments by
parked cars or moving vehicles.
      10.   Noise: Public address system shall not be audible at any property
line. Play of music or advertisement from the public address system is
prohibited.
      11.   Outside Storage, Sales, And Service: No outside storage or sales
shall be allowed, except as follows:
      12.   Public phones may be located on site as long as they do not
interrupt on site traffic circulation, and may not be located in a yard
abutting residentially zoned property.
      13.   Propane sales limited to twenty (20)-pound capacity tanks may be
located outside as long as the propane tanks are secured in a locker and meet
all state uniform building and fire codes.
      14.   A compressed air service area may be located on site as long as it
does not interrupt on site traffic circulation.
      15.   Signs: A comprehensive sign plan must be submitted as part of a
conditional use permit application. All signing and informational or visual
communication devices shall be minimized and shall be in compliance with
chapter 8, "Signage" of this title.
   E.   Truck Terminal:
      1.   The minimum building size of the principal building associated with
a truck terminal shall be at least ten percent (10%) of the subject site. (Ord.
2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-6-7: ACCESSORY USES, A - M:
   A.   Accessory Dwelling Unit, Internal Or Attached:
      1.   The maximum size of an ADU may be no more than seventy-five percent
(75%) of the living area of the principal dwelling or eight hundred (800)
square feet, whichever is less.
      2.   The primary exterior materials of an attached accessory dwelling
unit shall match the primary exterior materials of the principal structure.
      3.   Balconies and decks shall not face an interior side yard.
      4.   In addition to the parking requirements for the principal use, one
(1) additional parking space shall be required per accessory dwelling unit.
   B.   Accessory Retail:
      1.   Retail sale floor area of products manufactured, fabricated, or
assembled on site shall be limited to fifteen percent (15%) of the gross floor
area of the principal building.
   C.   Accessory Structure:
      1.   Accessory structures shall not be located within a drainage or
utility easement.
      2.   Detached accessory structures shall not:
         a.   Be located in the front yard, except for riparian lots; nor
         b.   Be constructed prior to the principal structure.
      3.   Accessory structures shall have increased setbacks adjacent to
arterial roadways as specified in the comprehensive plan as follows:
         a.   Ten (10) feet from a minor arterial
         b.   Twenty (20) feet from a principal arterial
      4.   Temporary inflatable structures in the PI District which are
incompatible with residential districts shall be located a minimum of five
hundred (500) feet from any residential district or use.
      5.   The following provisions of this subsection shall not apply to
properties within the A-2 district which are located west of County Road 73 and
which are greater than twenty (20) acres in size and/or used for agricultural
use:
         a.   The maximum aggregate detached accessory structure area allowed
per lot is specified in Table 6.1.
      Table 6.1. Maximum Aggregate Detached Accessory Structure Area
 
District                 Maximum Aggregate Detached Accessory Structure Area
A-1                      2,400 sq. ft.
A-2, west of County Road 1,200 sq. ft. or 50% of the ground floor area of the
73                       principal building, whichever is greater1
A-2, east of County Road 2,400 sq. ft.
73
RR                       1,200 sq. ft. or 50% of the ground floor area of the
                         principal building, whichever is greater1
R-1, R-2                 1,000 sq. ft.
1   Maximum aggregate area may increase to 50% of the ground floor area of the
principal building, provided that the total amount of impervious surface on
the lot does not exceed 10%.
2   The allowable area of detached accessory structures shall not apply to
uses which require additional covered parking spaces by section 11-7-3 “Off-
Street Parking and Loading Standards.”
 
         b.   Prefabricated metal storage buildings are limited to a maximum
area of one hundred twenty (120) square feet.
      c.   Any accessory structure exceeding two hundred (200) square feet in
area shall be constructed of materials and styles comparable with and
complementary to the principal structure. Comparable treatment includes the
following requirements:
         (1)   Minimum three to twelve (3:12) roof pitch.
         (2)   Roofs shingled with asphalt, wood, or tile to match the
principal structure.
         (3)   Adequate number of windows shall be provided to break up the
solid plane or exterior walls to simulate the character of the principal
structure.
         (4)   Siding which is identical or closely matches the principal
structure shall be incorporated into the design of the accessory structure.
         d.   In the A-2 and RR districts, existing accessory structures may be
exempted from the aforementioned area and building material standards. This
exemption applies only in the case of structures originally constructed for
agricultural use, being in existence at the time of adoption hereof, and
qualifying as a barn under this title.
         (1)   This exemption does not apply to prefabricated structures and
does not permit the expansion of the structure's footprint.
         (2)   Properties with structures (barns) qualifying for this exemption
are located at the following addresses:
            (a)   13345 Bonaire Path.
            (b)   12101 Dodd Boulevard.
            (c)   12391 Dodd Boulevard.
            (d)   3270 McAndrews Road.
            (e)   13429 South Robert Trail.
         (3)   Any exterior improvements to these barns shall replicate the
original appearance or agricultural character of the existing structure and
shall be approved by the Planning Commission.
         (4)   Exterior materials shall be limited to wood, metal, vinyl,
brick, or better materials and be comparable with the existing conditions of
the barn in the areas of:
            (a)   Color;
            (b)   Texture or grain;
            (c)   Orientation of siding (vertical or horizontal); and
            (d)   Lap width.
         (5)   Metal siding shall be noncorrugated and have a thickness of at
least nineteen (19) millimeters while vinyl siding shall have a gauge of at
least 0.044 inches. In addition, metal or vinyl siding shall have a
manufacturer's guarantee of at least twenty-five (25) years.
         (6)   Roof materials shall be noncorrugated standing seam metal,
asphalt shingles, or better and shall be comparable to the original roof.
Substitution of new materials will only be allowed in the case of replacing
obsolete roofing materials.
   D.   AM Radio Antenna, Supporting Tower, And Related Accessory Structures:
      1.   In the A-2 District, this use may be permitted only on properties
situated in that part of the city north and east of State Trunk Highway 55.
      2.   Submittal Of Information: Permit applicants shall submit the
following information together with any other information requested by the
city:
         a.   In submitting an application for a conditional use permit for the
construction and maintenance of radio antennas, and accessory structures, the
applicant shall provide sufficient information to indicate that construction,
installation and maintenance of the antenna and tower will not create a hazard
to the health, safety and general welfare of surrounding property owners,
animal population or natural environment.
         b.   This information shall include an outside consultant conducting
an independent study at the cost of the applicant, demonstrating that the tower
complies with structural standards for steel antenna towers and antenna
supporting structures, engineering department, Electronic Industries
Association (EIA); describing the capacity of the tower, including the number
and type of antennas that it can accommodate and the basis for the calculation
of capacity; and demonstrating that the application complies with FAA, FCC and,
if applicable, state aeronautics division requirements.
         c.   A site plan as specified in section
11-9-1 "Site Plan and Building Design Review" of this title.
         d.   A written analysis of the impacts of the proposed project shall
be required. The applicant must discuss issues related to the aesthetics of the
project, any implications or nuisances in the operations of the project and
property tax implications for long term use of the site.
      3.   Permit Requirements For Construction And Maintenance: Permits for AM
radio communications antenna, towers and accessory structures erected,
constructed or located on any property and all supporting devices thereof shall
only be issued if the following standards are met or exceeded:
         a.   The tower shall not exceed four hundred (400) feet above grade or
less as authorized by law.
         b.   Antenna and/or tower setbacks shall be such that the distance
from the base to the nearest property line or non-owned structures is not less
than the calculated structural collapse radius.
         c.   No part of any antenna or tower nor any lines, cable, equipment
or wires or braces in connection with either shall at any time extend across or
over any part of the right-of-way, public street, highway, sidewalk or property
line.
         d.   Towers with antennas shall be designed to withstand a uniform
wind loading as prescribed by the state building code and the Electronic
Industries Association recognized national standards, whichever is more
restrictive.
         e.   Antenna and metal towers shall be properly protected against
direct strike by lightening, either by adequate grounding or suitable circuits
designed to provide such protection. The installation shall comply with all
applicable electrical wiring codes, statutes, regulations and standards.
         f.   The city shall determine whether self-supporting towers or towers
supported by cables or guy wires serve to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
         g.   All signal and remote control conductors of low energy extending
horizontally above the ground between the tower or antenna and structure, or
between towers, not buried underground, shall be at least twelve (12) feet
above the ground at all points.
         h.   The base of the tower and all anchors shall be surrounded with a
minimum six (6) foot high security fence with the appropriate warning signs
posted on all sides.
         i.   No accessory structure or appurtenances shall be temporarily or
permanently affixed to AM radio antennas or supporting towers except as
required to accomplish the license service for which the antenna or tower is
authorized by the FCC, or as may be approved by city council.
         j.   The economic benefits, incentives and other advantages to the
city and community must outweigh any known or potential negative aspects of the
project.
         k.   The applicant shall furnish the city with copies of all
correspondence with the FCC and FAA regarding permit performance of the AM
radio antennas; or any matters affecting public health, safety and welfare.
         l.   If use of the tower is discontinued for a period of twelve (12)
months, or upon expiration of the interim use permit the AM radio
communications antennas, supporting towers and all above and below ground
appurtenances shall be removed.
         m.   The applicant shall be required to adequately maintain the AM
radio communications antennas, supporting towers and related accessory
structures and property upon which those facilities do not represent a hazard
or nuisance to the public, animal population or natural environment.
      4.   Broadcast Interference: The applicant shall be responsible to
investigate all and remedy legitimate complaints regarding interference to
consumer electronic equipment alleged to be caused by signals from the
broadcast facility.
      5.   Advisory Commission: The city council may establish an advisory
commission to hear disputes that cannot be resolved between the broadcast
representatives and affected parties.
      6.   Tower Use Fee: The city council may require an annual use fee in
lieu of taxes.
      7.   In all districts, setbacks for all freestanding tower antennas shall
be equal to the height of the antenna and its supporting structure.
   E.   Car Wash, Full- Or Self-Service:
      1.   See standards for car washes listed in section
11-6-3 "Principal Uses, Commercial" of this chapter.
   F.   Cemetery:
      1.   See standards for cemeteries listed in section
11-6-2 "Principal Uses, Public and Institutional" of this chapter.
   G.   Construction-related temporary use
      1.   Temporary buildings incidental to construction work on the premises
shall be permitted provided they receive a building permit and such buildings
are removed upon completion or abandonment of said construction.
      2.   In the I-2 District, temporary buildings accessory to an approved
construction project may be allowed with an interim use permit, subject to the
following standards:
         a.   Execution of an interim use permit agreement specifying the
expiration of the IUP and removal of the temporary building(s).
         b.   Temporary buildings are subject to the interim use permit
standards, findings and conditions specified in this title.
         c.   Temporary buildings may be exempt from conformance with the
following standards of the zoning ordinance at the discretion of the city
council:
         (1)   Section
11-7-2 "Architectural Standards" of this title;
         (2)   Subsection
11-7-3 C.7 "Off Street Parking Design and Construction Standards" of this
title;
         (3)   Section
11-7-6 "Landscaping, Screening, and Buffering Standards" of this title; and
         (4)   Subsection
11-4-5 E.2 requiring a minimum building size of ten percent (10%) of the
subject property.
         d.   Temporary buildings shall conform to all other heavy industrial
district standards specified within this title, and be set back five hundred
(500) feet from adjoining public right-of-way or visually screened from public
right-of-way, public/institutional or residential districts or uses. If the
building is not appropriately screened, the city may require additional
landscaping or enhanced treatment of the temporary structure.
         e.   Temporary buildings are subject to building code permits and
requirements.
         f.   Temporary buildings are subject to fire code permits and
requirements.
         g.   The site must accommodate adequate parking for the intended use.
         h.   Site grading and drainage must comply with city ordinances and
engineering guidelines. The city may, at its discretion waive some of the
requirements if alternative solutions are acceptable.
   H.   Day Care, Family And Group Family:
      1.   The use shall be licensed by the state as necessary and shall comply
with all state and local standards.
      2.   The use of any accessory structure for day care is not allowed.
      3.   In addition to the parking required for the dwelling unit as
specified in section
11-7-3 "Off-Street Parking and Loading Standards," one additional space shall
be provided for pick-up/drop-off.
   I.   Drive-Through Facility:
      1.   Drive-through facilities in any district shall adhere to the
following standards:
         a.   The site and structure(s) shall be designed to limit the effects
of the drive-through, including noises, emissions, and headlight glare, on
adjacent properties and public rights-of-way.
         b.   No use with a drive-through window shall be located abutting any
residential use or district.
         c.   Stacking lanes shall not interfere with circulation through any
required parking, loading, maneuvering or pedestrian area.
         d.   Stacking and exiting areas shall be screened from adjacent
properties and/or rights-of-way. Stacking areas shall have a minimum ninety
percent (90%) opacity screen to a height of six (6) feet while exiting areas
shall have a minimum fifty percent (50%) opacity screen to a height of at least
four (4) feet
         (1)   The principal structure shall be the primary source for
screening the drive-through facility and stacking and exiting areas from
adjacent properties and/or rights-of-way.
         (2)   Landscaping and berming shall be a secondary source for
screening drive-through, stacking or exiting areas. Should landscaping and
berming be found ineffective by the city, the city may approve screening walls
and/or decorative fencing as an alternative.
         (3)   Screening walls shall be constructed of the same materials as
the principal structure and shall not extend more than twenty-five (25) feet
without a change in architecture to reduce their mass and appearance.
      2.   In addition to the standards in subsection 1, the following
standards shall apply to drive-throughs in the MX-2 and B-1 districts:
         a.   Drive-through facilities shall have a minimum six (6) stacking
spaces per drive-through window. Fast food uses operating more than one (1)
window per individual drive aisle shall meet the stacking requirements for a
single drive-through facility. Each space shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet
wide by eighteen (18) feet long.
         b.   No public address system shall be audible from a noncommercial or
nonindustrial use or district.
         c.   Fast food uses may display menu boards as follows:
         (1)   The menu board(s) not encroach into any parking setback and
shall be located directly adjacent to the drive-through aisle and oriented in
such a manner that the sign provides information to the drive-through patrons
only and does not provide supplemental advertising to pass-by traffic and does
not impair visibility or obstruct circulation.
         (2)   Individual menu board(s) shall be single sided with an area not
to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet including both sign copy and sign
cabinet.
         (3)   The height of the menu board(s) shall not exceed eight (8) feet
including its base or pole measured from grade to the top of the structure.
      3.   In addition to the standards in subsection I.1 above, the following
standards shall apply for drive-throughs accessory to financial institutions in
the MX-1 District:
         a.   Drive-up teller structures shall be located behind the building.
         b.   Drive-through canopies shall not extend beyond the sides of the
building.
   J.   Garage Sale:
      1.   The sale shall not be more than four (4) successive days in
duration.
      2.   Not more than three (3) such sales are permitted on the premises in
a calendar year.
      3.   There shall be at least one (1) month between sales on the same
premises.
   K.   Home Occupation:
      1.   The conduct of a home occupation or the use of substances which may
be hazardous to or may in any way jeopardize the health, safety, or welfare of
neighbors and neighboring property shall not be permitted. The following
activities shall be prohibited from being home occupations:
         a.   Body art establishments, as defined by Minn. Stat. 146B;
         b.   Business that rents vehicles or equipment;
         c.   Dispatch business where persons come to a site and are dispatched
to other locations; and
         d.   Firearm training except for properties zoned A-2; and
         e.   Other similar uses which pose a risk to the health, safety, or
welfare of neighbors and neighboring property as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
      2.   The following uses are not considered home occupations and therefore
are not required to meet the standards of this section:
         a.   Family and group family day care uses.
         b.   Remote work.
      3.   Home occupations are permitted so long as the following standards
are met:
         a.   Home occupations shall be conducted solely by persons residing in
the residence.
         b.   All business activity and storage shall take place within
structures.
         c.   There shall be no alteration to the exterior of the residential
dwelling, accessory building(s), or yard that in any way alters the residential
character of the premises.
         d.   No sign, display, or device identifying the occupation shall be
used.
         e.   The occupation shall not be visible or audible from any property
line.
         f.   Said occupation shall not involve the retail sale or rental of
products on the premises.
         g.   Unless completely enclosed within an approved structure, no
vehicle used in the conduct of the occupation shall be parked, stored, or
otherwise present at the premises other than such as is customarily used for
domestic or household purposes such as a van or three-quarter ton truck.
         h.   Only on-site parking facilities normal for a residential use
shall be used.
   L.   Keeping Of Animals (Domestic And Non-Domestic):
      1.   All animal keeping uses shall adhere to the regulations contained in
title 7, chapter 4 "Animal Control" of this code.
      2.   Horses:
         a.   All structures related to the keeping of horses shall be located
a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet from any abutting residential property.
         b.   The maximum number of horses allowed on the property shall not
exceed one per two (2) acres.
   M.   Keeping Of Bees:
      1.   Annual permit required.
      2.   Applicant shall demonstrate that they have completed a full course
on beekeeping.
      3.   Number Of Colonies:
         a.   No person is permitted to keep more than the following numbers of
colonies on any lot within the city, based upon the size or configuration of
the apiary lot:
   Table 6.2. Bee Colonies Allowed
 
Lot Size                     Number of Colonies Allowed
Less than 0.5 acres          2
Between 0.5 acres and 1 acre 4
Between 1 and 5 acres        8
Larger than 5 acres          No restriction
 
         b.   For each colony permitted to be maintained under this title,
there may also be maintained upon the same apiary lot, one nucleus colony in a
hive structure not to exceed one standard 9-5/8 inch depth ten (10)-frame hive
body with no supers.
         c.   If the beekeeper serves the community by removing a swarm or
swarms of honey bees from locations where they are not desired, the beekeeper
shall not be considered in violation of the portion of this title limiting the
number of colonies if he or she temporarily houses the swarm on the apiary lot
in compliance with the standards of practice set out in this title for no more
than thirty (30) days from the date acquired.
      4.   Location:
         a.   No person shall establish or maintain any hive or keep any bees
in the front yard of a property or within ten (10) feet of any property line,
sidewalk, alley, or other public right-of-way as measured from the nearest
point on the hive to the property line.
         b.   Where a colony is kept less than twenty-five (25) feet from a
property line, the beekeeper shall establish and maintain a flyway barrier of
at least five (5) feet in height. The flyway barrier may consist of a wall,
fence, dense vegetation, or a combination thereof such that bees will fly over
rather than through the materials to reach the colony. The flyway barrier shall
be approved by the Zoning Administrator.
      5.   Honey bee colonies shall be kept in hives with removable frames.
      6.   Each beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient source of water is
available within ten (10) feet of each of the colonies so long as colonies
remain active outside of the hive.
      7.   Each apiary shall be visually screened from adjacent properties and
public right-of-way. This may be achieved through a combination of buildings,
fencing, or vegetation. Additional screening may be required at the discretion
of the Zoning Administrator based on specific site characteristics.
      8.   Each beekeeper shall ensure that no wax comb or other materials that
might encourage robbing by other bees are left upon the grounds of the apiary
lot.
      9.   All beekeeping equipment shall be maintained in good condition.
Unused equipment shall be secured from weather, potential theft or vandalism,
and occupancy by swarms.
   N.   Keeping Of Chickens:
      1.   Annual permit required.
      2.   No person shall keep more than five (5) total hen chickens. No
roosters shall be allowed.
      3.   Chickens shall be kept confined to the premises at all times and
shall be secured inside of a shelter from sundown to sunrise each day to
prevent nuisance noise and attracting predators. Chickens shall be housed
within a coop and have access to the outdoors in a run. All chicken coops and
runs shall meet the following requirements:
         a.   No more than one (1) coop and one (1) run allowed per lot.
         b.   The coop and run shall be located behind the principal structure,
at least ten (10) feet from any property line, and outside of any drainage and
utility easements. The coop or run shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet
from any adjacent habitable dwelling.
         c.   Coops and runs shall be screened from all adjacent properties and
streets. Screening may include an existing structure, a four (4)-foot high
solid fence, or a four (4)-foot high landscaped hedge. All fencing shall meet
the requirements of Chapter 6, Article 6 of the Unified Development
Regulations.
         d.   Coops:
         (1)   All coops shall provide at least four (4) square feet and no
more than eight (8) square feet per chicken and must not exceed six (6) feet in
height.
         (2)   Coops shall be elevated between twelve (12) and thirty-six (36)
inches above grade to ensure circulation beneath the coop.
         e.   Runs:
         (1)   All runs shall provide at least six (6) square feet and no more
than ten (10) square feet per chicken with fencing not exceeding six (6) feet
in total height.
         (2)   Runs may be enclosed with wood and/or woven wire materials, and
may allow chickens to contact the ground.
         (3)   Runs shall have a protective overhead netting to keep the
chickens separated from other animals. Fencing shall be adequate to keep
chickens in and predators out.
         (4)   Runs may be located under coops with such areas counting towards
minimum square footage requirements.
      4.   Chickens shall not be permanently housed in any part of the
principal dwelling, including an attached garage.
      5.   Chicken grains and feed shall be stored in a rodent proof container.
      6.   All animal waste (fecal matter, bedding, food, etc.) shall be
properly stored and disposed of at least once per week.
      7.   No slaughter of chickens or use of chickens for cockfighting is
allowed within the city limits.
      8.   Dead chickens shall be disposed of according to the Minnesota Board
of Animal Health.
   O.   Mobile Food Unit (MFU):
      1.   See regulations in Title 3, Chapter 10.
      2.   MFUs shall obtain the required state and/or county licensing and
permits for operation. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-6-8: ACCESSORY USES, N - Z:
   A.   Outdoor Dining:
      1.   The following standards for outdoor dining shall apply in all
districts:
         a.   The site and enclosure(s) shall be designed to limit the effects
of outdoor seating or dining areas on contiguous properties and/or public
rights-of-way.
         b.   The seating area shall be located on private property along the
front, side or rear of the principal building but shall not be located within a
required setback or on the side abutting any residential use or district.
         c.   The seating area shall not interfere with circulation in any
required parking, loading, maneuvering or pedestrian area. A minimum four (4)-
foot passageway shall be maintained along the private sidewalk for pedestrians.
         d.   No public address system shall be audible from a noncommercial or
nonindustrial use or district.
      2.   For all outdoor dining areas in the B-1 District and for those
dining areas in the MX-2 district with eleven (11) or more seats, the following
standards shall apply:
         a.   The seating area shall be located in a controlled or cordoned
area acceptable to the city with at least one (1) opening to an acceptable
pedestrian walk.
         b.   When a liquor license is granted, an uninterrupted enclosure is
required and the enclosure shall only have access through the principal
building.
         c.   The seating area shall not be permitted within two hundred (200)
feet of any residential use or district as measured at the property line and
shall be separated from residential use or district by the principal structure
or other method of screening acceptable to the city. The minimum distance from
a residential use or district may be reduced should the city determine the
applicant has added sufficient elements to reduce the impact of this use.
      3.   In the MX-2 District, the following standards shall apply to outdoor
seating or dining areas for ten (10) or fewer seats:
         a.   Patrons shall not be served food or beverages outside, except
that employees may refill beverage containers in the seating area. At no time
shall the seating area be used for the consumption of alcoholic beverages.
         b.   The outdoor seating or dining area shall be equipped with refuse
containers. The business owner shall ensure that the area is properly
maintained and litter free.
   B.   Outdoor Display Or Sales:
      1.   Outdoor display or sales related to trailer, construction, or
agricultural machinery sales or rental shall be subject to those standards
identified for vehicle sales or rental in Section 11- 6-3 "Principal Uses,
Commercial."
      2.   Outdoor display or sales in all districts shall adhere to the
following standards:
         a.   The site and building(s) shall be designed to limit the effects
of outdoor display or sales on adjacent properties and public rights-of-way.
         b.   Displayed merchandise shall be maintained in a neat and orderly
fashion.
         c.   Outdoor sales shall be conducted by the owner or lessee of the
premises or with the written consent of the owner or lessee.
         d.   Only merchandise that is normally manufactured, sold, or stored
by the occupant on the premises shall be sold and/or promoted.
         e.   Merchandise shall consist only of finished products. Disassembled
merchandise parts may be displayed outdoors only when new products are
customarily sold unassembled and are intended for customer purchase and
assembly.
         f.   Display or sales areas shall meet all required setbacks.
         g.   Display and sales activity shall be conducted on a paved surface
and shall not take up, or interfere with access to, any required parking,
loading, maneuvering or pedestrian area.
         h.   Outdoor display or sales of goods shall be allowed on the private
sidewalk immediately in front of the principal building, provided that the area
shall not exceed four (4) feet in height.
         i.   No public address system shall be audible from a noncommercial or
nonindustrial use or district.
         j.   Temporary structures associated with sales lots that are in
compliance with all building code, fire code, zoning ordinance, this code,
county ordinance, or state statute may be allowed with an Interim Use Permit.
      3.   In addition to the standards listed in subsections B.1 and B.2
above, outdoor display or sales in the MX-1 District shall adhere to the
following standards:
         a.   Aggregate area of outdoor sales and display shall be limited to
an area not more than forty percent (40%) of the finished square feet of the
principal building. The forty percent (40%) outdoor sales and display area may
be exceeded for up to a four (4)-day period through an administrative permit
approved by the Zoning Administrator. No business shall receive more than
twelve (12) permits per calendar year.
         b.   There shall be no display of automobiles or recreation vehicles.
         c.   Except while loading, unloading, or rendering a service in a
designated loading area, no commercial trucks, truck-tractor, or semitrailer
combinations are permitted to be parked and/or stored longer than forty-eight
(48) hours. The principal use of a semitrailer may not be for outdoor sales.
Semitrailers that are principally used for education, training, and
demonstration to the customer in the use or care of a product where sales are a
secondary use of the trailer may be permitted. These educational and
demonstration semitrailers are to be limited to a period not to exceed ninety-
six (96) hours.
      4.   In addition to the standards listed in subsections B.1 and B.2
above, outdoor display or sales in the MX-2 District shall adhere to the
following standards:
         a.   Outdoor display or sales is limited to an area equal to forty-
five percent (45%) of the gross floor area of the principal building.
         b.   Outdoor display or sales may be allowed in the following
locations:
         (1)   On the private sidewalk immediately in front of the principal
building, provided that the area does not exceed four (4) feet in height.
         (2)   At the pump island of an automobile fuel station, as specified
in section
11-6-3 "Principal Uses, Commercial."
         (3)   Within an enclosure constructed of materials compatible to the
building's architecture such as decorative fencing or a building wall, provided
that:
            (a)   The enclosure shall provide a minimum ninety percent (90%)
opacity screen.
            (b)   The square footage of the outdoor display area(s) shall be
included in calculation of required off street parking for the use.
      5.   In addition to the standards listed in subsections B.1 and B.2
above, outdoor display or sales in the B-2 and I-1 districts shall adhere to
the following standards:
         a.   The outdoor display/storage or sales area is limited to an area
equal to thirty percent (30%) of the gross area of the site.
         b.   The outdoor display or sales area shall only be located in a side
or rear yard.
         c.   Any outdoor display or sales area shall be completely enclosed by
screening as follows:
         (1)   Any portion of an outdoor display/storage or sales area adjacent
to a public right-of-way or nonindustrial use or district shall be screened
from eye level view from the public right-of-way or nonindustrial use or
district by a one hundred percent (100%) opacity screen to a height equal to
the items being screened but not more than thirty-five (35) feet. Screening
shall be accomplished by buildings, landscaping and berming, natural
topography, screening walls or a combination thereof. Any screening wall shall
be made of the same materials as the principal building and shall not extend
more than seventy (70) feet without a change in architecture to reduce its mass
and appearance.
         (2)   The portion(s) of outdoor display/storage or sales area(s)
adjacent to an industrial use or district shall be required to be screened from
eye level view from other industrial uses or districts by at least a fifty
percent (50%) opacity screen to a height equal to the items being screened but
not more than thirty-five (35) feet. Screening shall be accomplished by any of
the items listed in subsection 11-7-6 B "Screening" of this title or fencing.
         d.   The square footage of the outdoor display or sales area(s) shall
be included in calculation of required off street parking for the use.
         e.   The perimeter measurement of the outdoor display/storage or sales
area shall be included in the calculation of required foundation plantings.
   C.   Outdoor Industrial Equipment:
      1.   I-1 District:
         a.   Functioning structures such as conveyor belt systems, cooling
towers, storage silos or the like that are accessory and integral to the
principal use of the site may be allowed, subject to the following:
         (1)   The applicant shall demonstrate that the outdoor structure or
equipment cannot be integrated into a building design.
         (2)   The site and building(s) shall be designed to screen and limit
the effects of the outdoor structure or equipment on adjacent properties and
public right(s)-of-way.
         (3)   Each property may have up to four (4) outdoor structures or
equipment clustered together in a total aggregate area not to exceed five
thousand (5,000) square feet.
         (4)   The height of outdoor structure or equipment shall not exceed
sixty (60) feet.
         (5)   The outdoor structure or equipment shall not take up, encroach
upon or interfere with access to any required yard, parking, loading,
maneuvering or pedestrian area.
         (6)   The outdoor structure or equipment shall be located on an
approved surface.
         (7)   The city may exempt outdoor structure or equipment from the site
and building performance standards in chapter 7 "Development Standards" of this
title; however, all such structures or equipment must be functional and shall
be made of high- quality long-lasting material compatible with both adjacent
properties and other buildings in the I-1 District.
      2.   I-1 District:
         a.   Functioning structures such as conveyor belt systems, cooling
towers, storage silos or the like that are accessory and integral to the
principal use of the site may be exempt from the outdoor storage requirements
in subsection
11-6-8D of this section, subject to the following:
         (1)   The applicant shall demonstrate that the outdoor structure or
equipment cannot be integrated into a building design.
         (2)   The site and building(s) shall be designed to screen and limit
the effects of the outdoor structure or equipment (noise, vibrations,
illumination, particulate, or the like) on adjacent properties and public right
(s)-of-way.
         (3)   The outdoor structure or equipment shall be located on an
approved surface in a remote location that is not adjacent to any public right-
of-way or nonindustrial use or district.
         (4)   The aggregate area for outdoor structure or equipment shall be
limited to an area equal to fifteen percent (15%) of the gross floor area of
the principal building and to a height not to exceed seventy (70) feet. Larger
areas or taller structures or equipment may be approved by the city through a
conditional use permit.
         (5)   The outdoor structure or equipment shall not take up, encroach
upon or interfere with access to, any required yard, parking, loading,
maneuvering or pedestrian area.
         (6)   The city may exempt outdoor structure or equipment from the site
and building performance standards in chapter 7 "Development Standards" of this
title; however all such structures or equipment must be functional and shall be
made of high quality long lasting material compatible with both adjacent
properties and other buildings in the I-1 District.
         b.   Up to two (2) fuel storage tanks with a maximum capacity of one
thousand one hundred (1,100) gallons each and a thirty (30)-foot setback from
all properties, may be allowed on properties located west of County Road 73.
   D.   Outdoor Storage:
      1.   Outdoor storage in all districts shall adhere to the following
standards:
         a.   The storage area shall not take up, or interfere with access to,
any required parking, loading, maneuvering, or pedestrian area.
         b.   The storage area shall be maintained in a neat and orderly
fashion.
         c.   The outdoor display/storage or sales area shall be clearly
identified on the approved site plan for the project, may only be located in
either a side or rear yard, and shall not encroach into any required setback.
         d.   The square footage of the outdoor storage area (except those
areas used for vehicle storage and not considered a required parking area)
shall be included in calculation of required off-street parking for the use.
         e.   The perimeter measurement of the outdoor storage area shall be
included in the calculation of required foundation plantings.
         f.   Outdoor storage of woodpiles is allowed as follows:
         (1)   Firewood shall not be stored in the front yard or nearer the
front lot line than the principal building or less than five (5) feet from a
lot line.
         (2)   Firewood shall be stacked on an impervious surface or be
elevated at least four (4) inches off the ground.
         (3)   Stacks shall not exceed six (6) feet in height.
         g.   Storage of junked motor vehicles:
         (1)   Outdoor storage of any junked motor vehicle is prohibited on any
public or private property with the exception of property lawfully zoned and
operated as a recycling operation.
         (2)   It is unlawful for any person to park, store or leave any junked
motor vehicle, whether attended or not, upon any public or private property
within the city, or for any person, as an owner of or an occupant having
control of private property within the city to permit the parking, storing or
leaving of any junked vehicle upon such private property unless such junked
motor vehicle is within an enclosed building or structure.
      2.   In addition to the standards listed in subsection 1, outdoor storage
in the B-2 District shall adhere to the following standards:
         a.   The outdoor storage area is limited to an area equal to thirty
percent (30%) of the gross area of the site.
         b.   The outdoor storage area shall be surfaced with concrete or an
approved equivalent to control dust.
         c.   Any outdoor storage area shall be completely enclosed by
screening as follows:
         (1)   Any portion of an outdoor storage area adjacent to a public
right-of-way or nonindustrial use or district shall be screened from eye level
view from the public right-of-way or nonindustrial use or district by a one
hundred percent (100%) opacity screen to a height equal to the items being
screened but not more than thirty-five (35) feet.
            (a)   Screening shall be accomplished by buildings, landscaping and
berming, natural topography, screening walls or a combination thereof.
            (b)   Any screening wall shall be made of the same materials as the
principal building and shall not extend more than seventy (70) feet without a
change in architecture to reduce its mass and appearance.
         (2)   The portion(s) of outdoor storage area adjacent to an industrial
use or district shall be required to be screened from eye level view from other
industrial uses or districts by at least a fifty percent (50%) opacity screen
to a height equal to the items being screened but not more than thirty-five
(35) feet.
            (a)   Screening shall be accomplished by any of the items listed in
section
11-7-6 "Landscaping, Screening, and Buffering Standards" of this title or
fencing.
      3.   In addition to the standards listed in subsections 1 and 2 above,
outdoor storage in the I-1 District shall adhere to the following standards:
         a.   Outdoor storage uses are exempt from the site and building
standards outlined in section
11-7-2 "Architectural Standards" of this title.
         b.   The outdoor storage area shall be designed to limit its effects
on adjacent properties and public right(s)-of-way.
         c.   The storage area shall be surfaced with paving, porous paving,
gravel, vegetation, or a combination thereof. If necessary, this covering shall
include additional materials so as to comply with subsection
11-7-1 "Performance Standards" of this title.
         d.   No public address system shall be audible from a noncommercial or
nonindustrial use or district. This subsection shall not be read to prohibit or
proscribe safety alarms or sirens.
         e.   All outdoor storage areas shall be set back and screened by
buildings, structures, landscaping and berming, natural topography, screening
wall, or a combination thereof. In no case shall any outdoor storage area be
located within seventy-five (75) feet of any public right-of-way or property
line.
         (1)   Screening for the outdoor storage area shall be established
equal to the height of the items being screened, but not more than thirty-five
(35) feet.
         (2)   Outdoor storage areas located between seventy-five (75) feet and
three hundred (300) feet from a public right-of-way or property line:
            (a)   Shall be screened from eye level view from the public right-
of-way by a one hundred percent (100%) opacity screen.
            (b)   Screening walls shall be made of masonry material and shall
include a change in architecture every one hundred (100) linear feet to reduce
its mass and appearance.
         (3)   Outdoor storage areas located between three hundred (300) and
one thousand (1,000) feet from a public right-of-way or property line:
            (a)   Shall be screened from the eye level view from the public
right-of-way by a seventy-five percent (75%) opacity screen.
            (b)   Screening walls shall be made of masonry material and shall
include a change in architecture every three hundred (300) linear feet to
reduce its mass and appearance.
         (4)   If an outdoor storage area is located more than one thousand
(1,000) feet from a public right-of-way or property line, no screening shall be
required.
   E.   Recreational Amenity, Private:
      1.   Recreational amenities shall not be located in front of a principal
structure.
      2.   Recreational amenities shall meet accessory structure setback
requirements for zoning district in which they are placed.
      3.   Swimming pools shall be subject to section
5-3-1 "Swimming Pools" of this Code.
   F.   Recreational Vehicle Parking Or Storage:
      1.   See section
8-2-5 "Parking and Storage of Recreation Vehicles" of this code.
   G.   Residential Swimming Pool:
      1.   See regulations listed in title 5 chapter 3 "Swimming Pools" of this
Code.
   H.   Sacred Community:
      1.   Any sacred community use shall meet all requirements listed in Minn.
Stat. 327.30.
   I.   Sales Office, Temporary:
      1.   All temporary sales offices shall receive a building permit.
      2.   The temporary sales office shall be removed within thirty (30) days
of the certificate of occupancy for the development's model unit or leasing
office, or within six (6) months of the issuance of the building permit for the
temporary sales office, whichever occurs first. If requested in writing prior
to expiration of the original six (6) month period, six (6) month extensions
may be granted by staff. Said extensions shall also expire within six (6)
months or thirty (30) days of the certificate of occupancy for the
development's model unit or leasing office, whichever occurs first.
      3.   Each development project shall be limited to one (1) temporary sales
office.
      4.   All temporary sales offices shall be required to meet the standards
of the current Minnesota state building code and Americans with Disabilities
Act (ADA).
      5.   All temporary sales offices shall meet the setback standards as
required for any structure within the applicable zoning district.
      6.   Temporary sales offices shall have skirting around the entire base
of the unit.
      7.   Prior to use by the public, all temporary sales offices shall
provide at least six (6) off-street parking stalls for every one thousand
(1,000) square feet of gross floor area. In addition, the surface of the
parking area shall at a minimum consist of class V crushed rock. Should the
temporary sales office exist longer than one (1) year, the off-street parking
area shall be paved. Each parking stall shall be delineated by a concrete
parking stop, sign or landscape planter.
      8.   Temporary sales offices shall be permitted only for residential
subdivisions for which a final plat has been approved by the city council.
Additionally, a temporary sales office shall be located on the property for
which the final plat was approved. No off-site temporary sales offices will be
permitted.
      9.   All temporary sales trailers shall have access from a public or
private paved street.
   J.   Satellite Dish:
      1.   Satellite dishes shall not be closer than ten (10) feet from a side
or rear lot line and shall not be placed in front or street front yards.
      2.   Exception: Satellite dish antennas less than one meter (39.7") in
diameter are exempted from this requirement.
   K.   Short-Term Vacation Rental (STVR):
      1.   The maximum number of overnight guests will be limited to two (2)
times the number of bedrooms rented plus one (1).
      2.   Dwelling requirements:
         a.   Rooms used for sleeping shall have an egress window and
functioning smoke detectors.
         b.   The guest(s) must have access during their entire stay to a full
bathroom, including sink, toilet, and tub or shower.
      3.   Parking:
         a.   All STVR parking shall be accommodated on improved surfaces on
the premises. No on-street parking is allowed for guests.
         b.   Where the property owner resides on the premise, additional off-
street parking shall be provided to accommodate both the principal use and the
STVR use.
      4.   If not residing on the property, the property owner or manager/
representative must be located within thirty (30) miles of the property. The
property owner shall maintain with the city the contact information for the
local contact or managing agent for the property.
      5.   A guest record shall be maintained, including the name, address,
phone number, and vehicle license plate information for all guests. This record
must be provided to the city within forty-eight (48) hours of a request for the
guest record.
      6.   Guest disclosures. The property owner must disclose in writing to
their transient guests the following rules and regulations. This disclosure
shall be conspicuously displayed in the home:
         a.   The name, phone number and address of the owner, operating lessee
or managing agent/representative;
         b.   The maximum number of guests allowed at the property;
         c.   The maximum number of vehicles allowed at the property and where
they are to be parked;
         d.   City nuisance ordinances requirement that noise levels be reduced
between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and midnight to 7:00 a.m. on
weekends and that this will be enforced by the Rosemount Police Department; and
         e.   Property rules related to use of outdoor features, such as decks,
patios, grills, recreational fires, saunas, and other recreational facilities.
      7.   All garbage must be kept in rubbish containers issued by a
contracted collection service.
      8.   Signage shall be limited to a four square foot, non-illuminated name
plate attached to the building entrance.
   L.   Small-Scale Solar Energy System, Ground-Mounted:
      1.   Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall comply with all general
requirements for solar energy systems listed in section
11-6-5 "Principal Uses, Agriculture, Open Space, and Natural Resources."
      2.   Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall comply with the accessory
structure setback standards for the applicable zoning district in which they
are located.
      3.   Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall not exceed fifteen (15)
feet in height.
      4.   The surface area of ground mounted systems shall not exceed the
maximum lot coverage standard of the applicable zoning district.
      5.   Ground mounted solar energy systems shall be screened from view of
the public right-of-way to the extent possible without reducing their
efficiency by setback, berming, landscaping, walls or a combination thereof.
   M.   Small-Scale Solar Energy System, Roof-Mounted:
      1.   Roof-mounted solar energy systems shall comply with all general
requirements for solar energy systems listed in section
11-6-5 "Principal Uses, Agriculture, Open Space, and Natural Resources."
      2.   Roof-mounted solar energy systems shall comply with the setback
requirement for the applicable zoning district and structure type (principal or
accessory) on which they are mounted and may encroach those setbacks per
section
11-2-5 "General Lot, Building, and Yard Provisions" of this title.
      3.   Roof mounted solar energy systems shall comply with the height
standards of the applicable zoning district.
         a.   Roof mounted solar energy systems may be mounted at an angle to
the roof to improve their efficiency; however, the highest point of a solar
panel in any residential district shall not be more than three (3) feet,
measured in a straight line, above the roof upon which the panel is mounted.
         b.   This three (3)-foot height limitation does not apply to roof
mounted solar energy systems located in nonresidential districts or on
nonresidential uses.
      4.   Roof-mounted solar energy systems shall not cover more than eighty
percent (80%) of the south facing or flat roof upon which the panels are
mounted and shall be set back a minimum of one (1) foot from the edge of the
roof.
      5.   Roof-mounted solar energy systems shall be designed to blend into
the architecture of the building, provided that design considerations shall not
diminish energy production. The color of the solar collector is not required to
be consistent with other roofing materials. Reflection angles from collector
surfaces shall be oriented away from neighboring windows. Where necessary,
screening may be required to address glare.
      6.   Roof-mounted solar energy systems located in nonresidential
districts or on nonresidential uses shall be screened in accordance with the
requirements of subsection 11-7-6 B "Screening" of this title and the screening
requirements of the applicable zoning district to the extent possible without
reducing their efficiency.
   N.   Spent Bauxite Disposal Facility:
      1.   Permits for spent bauxite disposal facilities shall only be issued
if the following standards are met or exceeded:
         a.   The facility shall represent the best available technology for
land disposal of spent bauxite.
         b.   The operator and staff shall have sufficient experience in the
operation of such facilities to ensure competent operation.
         c.   The design, construction and operation of the facility shall
minimize negative environmental impacts and must mitigate such impacts to the
fullest extent possible.
         d.   Public health, safety and welfare shall be ensured.
         e.   Adequate closure, postclosure and contingency plans shall be
established.
         f.   An emergency response plan shall be established and accepted by
the city.
         g.   All environmental studies required shall be completed and
declared adequate by the responsible governmental units.
         h.   There shall be adequate access to the site.
         i.   The proposed project shall be compatible with surrounding land
uses.
         j.   The applicant provides financial security sufficient to guarantee
compliance with the terms of the permit.
         k.   The economic benefits, incentives and other advantages to the
city and community must outweigh any known or potential negative aspects of the
facility.
         l.   The applicant shall demonstrate that reuse or recycling of spent
bauxite is not feasible during the term of the permit and that land disposal is
the only practical alternative.
         m.   An interim use permit shall not be issued until all required
local, state and/or federal permits have been obtained by the applicant.
   O.   Transient Merchant Sales Lot:
      1.   See regulations listed in title 3, chapter 5 "Licensing of Peddlers,
Solicitors and Transient Merchants" of this code.
   P.   Uses Accessory To Large-Scale Mineral Extraction:
      1.   A separate Interim Use Permit or approval is not required for an
accessory use.
      2.   Accessory uses shall meet the same performance standards as the
large-scale mineral extraction operation listed in section
11-6-4 "Principal Uses, Industrial."
   Q.   Uses Accessory To Small-Scale Mineral Extraction:
      1.   A separate Interim Use Permit or approval is not required for an
accessory use.
      2.   Accessory uses shall meet the same performance standards as the
small-scale mineral extraction operation listed in Section
11-6-4 "Principal Uses, Industrial." (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
CHAPTER 7
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
11-7-1: Performance Standards
11-7-2: Architectural Standards
11-7-3: Off-Street Parking And Loading Standards
11-7-4: Pedestrian Circulation Standards
11-7-5: Fencing Standards
11-7-6: Landscaping, Screening, And Buffering Standards
11-7-7: Tree Preservation Standards
11-7-8: Lighting Standards
11-7-1: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
      A.   Uses which because of the nature of their operation are accompanied
by excess of noise, vibration, dust, dirt, smoke, odor, noxious gases, glare or
wastes shall not be permitted. These residual features shall be considered
"excessive" when they either exceed or deviate from the limitations set forth
in the following performance standards:
         1.   Noise: Noise shall be muffled so as not to become objectionable
due to intermittence, beat frequency, shrillness or intensity. Noise levels
shall be regulated by the standards of the Minnesota pollution control agency
(MPCA).
         2.   Vibration: No activity or operation shall at any time cause earth
vibrations perceptible beyond the limits of the immediate site in which the
operation is conducted. Temporary vibrations resulting from normal construction
or reconstruction projects may be excepted.
         3.   Dust, Dirt, Smoke, Odor, Gases: The release of solid and liquid
particulates, smoke, gases, toxic or noxious materials and other materials or
odors shall be regulated by the standards of the MPCA.
         4.   Glare: Glare from high intensity lighting or high temperature
processes, whether direct or indirect, and as differentiated from street
lighting or general illumination, shall not be visible beyond the limits of the
immediate site from which it originates. General lot lighting or security
spotlighting shall be directed away from adjacent properties, eliminating or
reducing the illumination generated on the site.
         5.   Waste:
            a.   All solid waste materials, debris, rubbish, junk, refuse or
garbage shall be kept within a completely enclosed building or properly
contained within a closed container specifically designed for such purpose. The
containers shall be kept in an enclosed area between days of scheduled pick up.
         b.   In no case shall noxious or odorous refuse or garbage be kept
outside of a completely enclosed building for a period of time exceeding the
average interval of refuse collection by commercial rubbish haulers.
            c.   Hazardous wastes generated from any activity or operation
shall be properly contained, labeled and stored for transfer to an authorized
processing, storage or burial facility, according to the laws of the state of
Minnesota.
            d.   All waste storage shall comply with sections
5-1-2 and
5-1-3 of this code.
         6.   Explosives:
            a.   Any activity or operation requiring the use, storage or
manufacturing of explosives shall be located no closer than five hundred (500)
feet from any residential district, provided further that the location of said
activity or operation is such that damage from explosion, including flying
debris, vibration or smoke, is limited to the site on which the activity or
operation is permitted. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-7-2: ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS:
   A.   Buildings in all zoning districts shall maintain a high standard of
architectural and aesthetic compatibility with surrounding properties to ensure
that they will not adversely impact the property values of the abutting
properties or adversely impact the community’s public health, safety, and
general welfare.
   B.   Exterior Wall Materials And Colors:
      1.   Unadorned concrete as an exterior material shall be prohibited in
all districts.
      2.   No galvanized or unfinished steel, galvalume, or unfinished aluminum
buildings (walls or roofs), except those specifically intended to have a
corrosive designed finish such as Cor-ten steel shall be permitted in any
zoning district, except in association with farming activities. Metal siding
with exposed panels exceeding sixteen (16) inches in width is prohibited.
      3.   For single-unit detached dwellings, except for earth sheltered
homes, all exterior vertical surfaces of principal and accessory structures
shall be treated as a front and have an equally attractive, or the same,
fascia. Any exterior building finish shall consist of a combination of the
following materials: wood, brick, natural stone, aluminum and glass, steel, or
vinyl siding. Steel siding with exposed panels exceeding sixteen (16) inches in
width, shall not be permitted.
      4.   For single-unit attached and townhome dwellings, all exterior
vertical surfaces of principal and accessory structures shall be treated as a
front and have an equally attractive or the same fascia. At least fifty percent
(50%) of any exterior building finish shall consist of a combination of
materials which are noncombustible, nondegradable and maintenance free (for
example, base brick, natural stone, glass and aluminum, steel or vinyl siding)
or those comparable in grade and quality. No exterior building finish shall be
sheet aluminum, asbestos, iron, steel, corrugated aluminum or untreated block.
      5.   Exterior building finishes for any multi-unit residential or non-
residential structure shall consist of materials comparable in grade and
quality to the following:
         a.   Brick.
         b.   Natural stone.
         c.   Decorative concrete block - “rock face”, “breakaway” or other
types of decorative block.
         d.   Cast in place concrete or precast concrete panels.
         e.   Wood, provided the surfaces are finished for exterior use and
wood of proven exterior durability is used, such as cedar, redwood, cypress.
         f.   Curtain wall panels of steel, fiberglass and aluminum
(nonstructural, nonload bearing), provided such panels are factory fabricated
and finished with a durable nonfade surface and their fasteners are of a
corrosion resistant design.
         g.   Glass curtain wall panels.
         h.   Stucco.
      6.   Color of exterior wall materials shall be compatible and
complementary with brick and stone colors naturally occurring in the Upper
Midwest.
         a.   Non-earth tone materials shall be limited to architectural
accents or signs.
         b.   The color of the non-brick or stone portion of the building shall
match the predominant brick or stone color portion.
      7.   While variation in materials and colors that support the general
theme may be allowed, the overall building shall have “360 degree”
architecture. All side and rear wall surfaces shall use similar materials,
colors, and architectural elements as the front wall surfaces.
         a.   Any variations shall focus the highest level of architectural
detail, material variation, façade articulation, or roofline enhancements on
those elevations that face a public right-of-way.
      8.   Lots with multiple right-of-way frontages shall have all façades
facing the rights-of-way treated equally in their level of architecture.
      9.   In the MX-1 District, the following standards shall apply:
         a.   Exterior Walls Facing Public Right-of-Way:
         (1)   Exterior wall surfaces excluding doors and windows shall be a
minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) brick or natural stone.
         (2)   A maximum of twenty percent (20%) specialty integral colored
concrete block (including textured, burnished, and rock faced block) may be
used for the base of the exterior wall.
         (3)   A maximum of ten percent (10%) EIFS, masonry stucco, or similar
products may be used for architectural details such as cornices, dentil
molding, parapets, or sign bands. Any other material used shall be compatible
with the materials commonly used in the architectural style of the building
(i.e. tile or polished metal for art deco style buildings).
         b.   Exterior Walls Not Facing Public Right-of-Way:
         (1)   Exterior wall surfaces excluding doors and windows shall be a
minimum of sixty percent (60%) brick or natural stone.
         (2)   The remaining forty percent (40%) of the exterior wall surface
may be specialty integral colored concrete block (including textured,
burnished, and rock faced block), tile (masonry, stone or clay), architectural
textured concrete panels cast in place, or better.
         (3)   A maximum of ten percent (10%) EIFS, masonry stucco, or similar
products may be used for sign bands or architectural accents.
      10.   In the MX-2, B-1, and PI districts, the following standards shall
apply:
         a.   Exterior wall surfaces except for doors and windows shall be a
minimum of fifty percent (50%) brick or natural stone.
         b.   The remaining fifty percent (50%) of the exterior wall surface
may be specialty integral colored concrete block (including textured,
burnished, and rock faced block), tile (masonry, stone or clay), architectural
textured concrete panels cast in place, or better.
         c.   EIFS or masonry stucco may be used for the sign band areas and/or
architectural accents totaling no more than ten percent (10%) of the non-glass,
brick, or stone portion of the building.
      11.   In the B-2 and I-1 districts, the following standards shall apply:
         a.   Exterior wall surfaces facing a public right-of-way or
residential uses or residential districts shall be constructed of a combination
of glass, brick, natural stone, specialty integral colored concrete block
(including textured, burnished, and rock faced block), tile (masonry, stone or
clay), architectural textured concrete panels cast in place, precast concrete
panels or better.
         b.   All other wall surfaces shall be constructed of a minimum of
forty percent (40%) of these materials. The remaining sixty percent (60%) of
these exterior wall surfaces may be finished steel or aluminum.
   C.   Façade Articulation:
      1.   Façades shall be articulated to reduce their mass and scale and
provide visual interest consistent with Rosemount’s identity, character, and
scale.
      2.   In the MX-1, MX-2, B-1, and PI districts, any wall more than one
hundred (100) feet in length shall be divided into increments of no more than
thirty (30) feet through the articulation of the façade.
      3.   In the B-2 District, any wall more than one hundred (100) feet in
length shall be divided into increments of no more than thirty-five (35) feet
through the articulation of the façade.
      4.   In the I-1 District, any wall more than one hundred (100) feet in
length shall be divided into increments of no more than fifty (50) feet through
the articulation of the façade.
   D.   Architectural Elements:
      1.   In the MX-1 District, the following architectural elements are
required:
         a.   Façades facing a public right-of-way shall include a minimum of
four (4) architectural detail and variation elements, listed in subsection c.
below, across the entire façade.
         b.   Façades not facing the public right-of-way shall include a
minimum of one architectural detail and variation element, listed in subsection
c. below, across the entire façade.
         c.   The following architectural detail and variation elements or
similar elements may be used to increase the interest and compatibility of
buildings:
         (1)   Roofline Elements:
            (a)   Commercial And Civic Buildings:
            (i)   Parapets;
            (ii)   Cornices;
            (iii)   Entablature;
            (iv)   Dentil molding; and
            (v)   Pediments.
            (b)   Residential Buildings:
            (i)   Dormers;
            (ii)   Mansard roofs;
            (iii)   Hip roofs; and
            (iv)   Clipped gables.
         (2)   Window Elements:
            (a)   Lintels, pediments;
            (b)   Rounded pediments;
            (c)   Hoodmolds;
            (d)   Foils; and
            (e)   Chicago style windows.
         (3)   Building Corner, Doorway, Or Sub-façade Edge Elements:
            (a)   Rusticated corners; and
            (b)   Gibbs surrounds.
         (4)   Multiple-Story Façade Elements:
            (a)   Pilasters;
            (b)   Window columns; and
            (c)   Stone bases.
         (5)   Single-Story Or First Floor Commercial Elements:
            (a)   Transom windows;
            (b)   Clerestories;
            (c)   Awnings;
            (d)   Heighted parapet walls;
            (e)   Arcades; and
            (f)   Colonnades.
      2.   In the MX-1, MX-2, B-1, B-2, and PI districts, the following
standards apply to architectural elements around entryways:
         a.   Primary building entrances facing a public right-of-way or
abutting a required parking area shall be accented by visually pleasing entry
elements. This element shall extend a minimum three hundred (300) square feet
around a single entrance.
         b.   Should the building have more than one entrance facing a public
right-of-way or abutting a required parking area, this element shall extend a
minimum one hundred fifty (150) square feet around each individual entrance.
   E.      Roofs in the agricultural and residential districts shall have the
following minimum standards:
      1.   In the A-1, A-2, and RR districts, the main roofs shall have a
minimum pitch of five to twelve (5:12) per definition of the applicable
building code.
      2.   In the R-1 district, the main roofs shall have a minimum pitch of
three to twelve (3:12) per definition of the applicable building code.
      3.   Roofing materials shall consist of either asphalt, wood, tiles, sod,
standing seam metal or other comparable materials as approved by the applicable
building code. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024; amd. Ord. B-317, 11-19-2024)
11-7-3: OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: It is the intent of these regulations that off-
street parking be provided and maintained by each property owner for the use of
occupants, employees and patrons. These regulations are further intended to
promote the safe and efficient storage, circulation, and channelization of
motor vehicles on site to avoid undue congestion of the public streets.
   B.   Driveways:
      1.   All driveways shall be surfaced with concrete or asphalt, and shall
be defined by continuous concrete perimeter curbing.
      2.   Except for single-unit detached residential driveways, no driveway
from private property entering a public or private street shall be less than
twenty-four (24) feet nor more than thirty-six (36) feet in width (not
including medians).
         a.   One-way driveways shall be no less than twelve (12) feet wide.
      3.   Single-unit detached residential driveways are subject to the
following requirements when connecting to and within the street right-of-way:
         a.   Maximum Width: They shall not exceed twenty-two (22) feet in
width (curb cut radii excluded).
         b.   Encroachment: Curb cut radii shall not encroach upon the
boulevard of abutting properties.
         c.   Number Of Curb Cuts: Only one curb cut shall be permitted from a
street, provided:
         (1)   The required driveway setback shall be a minimum of five (5)
feet from interior lot lines, and the greater of the applicable front yard
setback or the required sight triangle from the street side yard property line
on corner lots. In the event that a lot of record does not have sufficient
width to meet the applicable driveway standards, the width and placement of the
required driveway shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer.
         (2)   The proposed curb cut is in compliance with subsection 11-7-
3 B.4 below of this title.
         (3)   All district setback regulations for surface parking and
impervious surface limitations are met.
         (4)   A single-unit lot of record in the RR District may have a
horseshoe or loop driveway, with no more than two (2) curb cuts, subject to the
following criteria:
            (a)   The driveway must be constructed in accordance with the
standards established by the City Engineer.
            (b)   The property shall have a minimum width of two hundred (200)
feet.
            (c)   The top inner arc of the drive shall be located a minimum of
ten (10) feet from the front property line.
            (d)   No access shall be allowed to a non-city road where there is
at least one other existing access to the property.
      4.   Requirements For Developments Along Major Roadways:
         a.   One-unit and two-unit dwellings located on any street listed in
subsection 11-7-3 B.4.c below shall be provided with, and shall maintain, a
driveway that has a paved turnout or turnaround area that is so designed and
located as to allow the safe and convenient turning of vehicles on the lot of
the dwelling so that cars may avoid backing into such streets.
         (1)   No certificate of occupancy will be issued for any such dwelling
until such driveway is completed.
         (2)   The requirement of this subsection applies to dwellings that
have not been issued a certificate of occupancy before the effective date
hereof.
         b.   Driveways for one- and two-unit dwellings on corner lots having
one side on a street listed in subsection 11-7-3 B.4.c below and one side on a
street having a lower volume of traffic shall be constructed and maintained to
the street with the lower volume of traffic and no closer than sixty-three (63)
feet from the corner of the lot nearest the intersection of the two streets.
         c.   Major roadways within the city include:
         (1)   Auburn Avenue.
         (2)   Bacardi Avenue.
         (3)   Bloomfield Path.
         (4)   Chippendale Avenue.
         (5)   Connemara Trail.
         (6)   County Road 38.
         (7)   County Road 42/150th Street.
         (8)   County Road 46.
         (9)   County Road 73/Akron Avenue.
         (10)   Diamond Path.
         (11)   Emery Avenue.
         (12)   Evermoor Parkway.
         (13)   Fahey Avenue.
         (14)   Fischer Avenue.
         (15)   McAndrews Road.
         (16)   Pine Bend Trail.
         (17)   Rich Valley Boulevard.
         (18)   Shannon Parkway.
         (19)   South Robert Trail.
         (20)   STH 3.
         (21)   STH 52.
         (22)   STH 55.
         (23)   126th Street W.
         (24)   130th Street W.
         (25)   140th Street W.
         (26)   145th Street W.
         (27)   160th Street W.
   C.   Off-Street Parking Requirements:
      1.   Compliance Required: In all districts except where exempt by
subsection 5.c of this section, off street parking shall be provided as
follows:
         a.   New Construction: Full off-street parking compliance is required
for all newly erected buildings.
         b.   Enlargement: Whenever a use or building requiring off-street
parking is increased in floor area or when interior building modifications or
structural alterations result in an increase in effective capacity for any use,
additional parking shall be provided in proper ratio to the increase in floor
area or capacity.
         c.   Change In Use: Whenever a building or use or part thereof is
changed in usage such that the new use requires more parking than the old, the
extent to which the use is changed shall be required to comply fully with the
provisions of this title.
         d.   Parking Lot Construction And Expansion: All new parking lots and
improvements and extensions to existing lots shall comply fully with the
requirements of this title.
      2.   Permits And Improvement Guarantees Required:
         a.   Permits: Building permits shall be required for parking lot
construction in all districts except for one- and two-unit dwellings.
         b.   Improvement Guarantees: For any parking improvement for which a
building permit is required, a performance bond, letter of credit or other
financial guarantee, as approved by the city attorney, in the amount of one
hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the estimated construction cost shall be
submitted prior to issuance of a building permit and retained until said
parking improvement is completed and acceptable to the city. Where plant
materials are used in lieu of a masonry screen wall, this portion of the
financial guarantee shall remain in effect for a period of not less than one
year after planting to ensure plant material life.
      3.   Limitations On Use:
         a.   No commercial repair work or service of any kind, or sale or
display thereof, or the storage of new or used vehicles which are not for the
use of the occupant, employees, and patrons shall be conducted in such parking
area.
         b.   Off street parking once designated as required off-street parking
shall not be changed to any other use until equal facilities as required by
this code are provided elsewhere.
         c.   Off-street parking existing at the date of adoption hereof in
connection with the operation of an existing building or use shall not be
reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required for a similar new building
or use.
         d.   Except while loading, unloading, or rendering a service in a
designated loading area, no commercial trucks, truck-tractor, or semitrailer
combinations shall be parked and/or stored longer than twenty-four (24) hours.
Semi-trailers may not be used for outdoor sales, storage or display.
      4.   Location: All off-street parking required by this chapter shall be
located on the same lot and in the same district as the use of the property
intended to be served. In the R districts, all required parking shall be
located on the lot it is intended to serve.
      5.   Off Street Parking Spaces Required:
         a.   Fractional Spaces: When determining the number of required
parking spaces results in a fractional space, any fraction up to and including
one-half (1/2) shall be disregarded and fractions over one-half (1/2) shall be
rounded to require one (1) additional space.
         b.   The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required shall be
as follows:
   Table 7.1. Parking Spaces Required
Use Minimum Parking Spaces Required
Use                                   Minimum Parking Spaces Required
Residential
Assisted living facility              1 per 4 client rooms
Continuing care senior facility       Parking provided to meet each use
                                      included in the facility
Cottage courtyard development         1.5 per unit
                                      1.25 per studio or 1 bedroom unit
                                      1.75 per 2 bedroom unit
Dwelling, apartment                   2 per 3+ bedroom unit
                                      1 additional guest space for every 5
                                      units is required
Dwelling, apartment mixed use         1 enclosed space per unit
Dwelling, attached townhouse or       2 enclosed spaces per unit plus 0.5 space
rowhouse                              per unit within the common space for
                                      visitor parking
Dwelling, live/work                   1 per unit plus 1 per 1,000 square feet
                                      of nonresidential GFA
Dwelling, single unit detached        2 enclosed spaces per unit
(includes manufactured home)
Dwelling, three- to four-unit         2 enclosed spaces per unit
Dwelling, twinhome or two-unit        2 enclosed spaces per unit
Hotel or motel                        1.25 per guestroom
Long-term or transitional care        1 per 5 client rooms
facility
Manufactured home park                2 per unit
Residential care facility, licensed   1 per 3 client rooms
in- home
Senior (55+) independent living       0.5 per bedroom plus 1 additional guest
                                      space for every 5 units
Public, Social, & Institutional
                                      1 per classroom, plus additional spaces
                                      necessary to accommodate the parking of
Day care center                       vans and buses used for client transport
                                      by the center and 1 off-street loading
                                      space per 5 children
Educational services                  1 per 4 persons of the maximum occupancy
Funeral home                          1 per 4 persons of the maximum occupancy
Hospital                              1 per 400 square feet GFA
Place of worship                      1 per 4 persons of the maximum occupancy
Public assembly                       1 per 4 persons of the maximum occupancy
Public or governmental services       1 per 300 square feet GFA
Medical or dental clinic or office    5 per doctor plus 1 per 300 square feet
                                      GFA
Municipal social, cultural, or        1 per 4 persons of the maximum occupancy
recreational facility
                                      1 space for each classroom plus 1
School, elementary                    additional space for each 50 student
                                      capacity
                                      1 space for each classroom plus 1
School, middle                        additional space for each 50 student
                                      capacity
School, secondary                     1 per classroom plus 1 per 20 students
School, post-secondary                1 per classroom plus 1 per 5 students
Commercial
Adult establishment                   1 per 4 persons of the maximum occupancy
Animal boarding, shelter, or daycare  1 per 300 square feet used for office
center                                space
Use                                   Minimum Parking Spaces Required
Animal/veterinary clinic or hospital  1 per 400 square feet GFA
Art studio                            1 per 1,000 square feet GFA
Automobile fuel station               1 per 2 gas pumps
Automotive repair and service, major  1 per 300 square feet GFA plus 1 per
                                      repair bay
Automotive repair and service, minor  1 per 300 square feet GFA plus 1 per
                                      repair bay
Bar or drinking place                 1 per 4 persons of the maximum occupancy
Brewpub                               1 per 4 persons of the maximum occupancy
Restaurant                            1 per 4 persons of the maximum occupancy
Specialty food or coffee shop         1 per 4 persons of the maximum occupancy
Recreation facility, indoor           1 per 4 persons of the maximum occupancy
Recreation facility, outdoor          50 per field or sports court plus 1 per 3
                                      fixed seats for spectator area
Business or professional office       1 per 300 square feet GFA
Car wash                              6 stacking spaces per car wash
Commercial center                     1 per 300 square feet GFA
Commercial event center               1 per 2 persons of the maximum occupancy
                                      plus 7 stalls
General repair, excluding automotive  1 per 300 square feet GFA
repair
Health and athletic club facility     1 per 4 persons of the maximum occupancy
                                      1 per 300 square feet of office space,
Landscape and horticultural service   plus 1 for each company-owned truck (if
                                      stored outdoors)
                                      1 per 300 square feet of office space,
Off-site service business             plus 1 for each company-owned truck
                                      stored outdoors
Production studio, including motion
picture, recording, television, and   1 per 300 square feet GFA
radio
Showroom                              1 per 500 square feet GFA
Standalone retail or service business 1 per 300 square feet GFA
Testing or research laboratory use    1 per 500 square feet GFA
Vehicle sales or rental               1 per 400 square feet GFA
Industrial
Brewery, winery, or distillery        1 per 500 square feet GFA
Commercial bakery                     1 per 300 square feet of office space
                                      plus 1 per 2,000 square feet
Data center                           1 per 3,500 square feet GFA
Manufacturing                         1 per 1,000 square feet GFA
                                      1 per 200 square feet of office space
Scrap or salvage yard                 plus 1 per 2,000 square feet of outdoor
                                      yard space
Self-service storage facility         1 per 6,000 square feet of indoor storage
                                      area plus 2 visitor spaces
Storage and sale of machinery and     1 per 300 square feet of office space
equipment                             plus 1 space per 2,000 square feet of
                                      outdoor yard space
Warehouse and distribution facility   1 per 2,000 square feet GFA
Wholesale trade establishment         1 per 2,000 square feet GFA
Agriculture, Open Space, & Natural Resources
Agriculture research and testing      1 per 200 square feet of office space
facility
                                      1 per 250 square feet of retail GFA, plus
Commercial greenhouse or nursery      1 space per 2,000 square feet of outdoor
                                      display area
Commercial horse stable               1 per 200 square feet of office space
                                      plus 2 visitor spaces
Utilities & Transportation
Truck stop                            1 per 300 square feet GFA
Use                                   Minimum Parking Spaces Required
                                      1 per 200 square feet of office space
Truck terminal                        plus 1 for each 1,250 square feet of
                                      outdoor yard space
1   GFA = gross floor area.
2   Uses with multiple functions may be required to provide parking in
accordance with more than 1 minimum standard.
3   Off-street parking requirements for uses not specifically mentioned herein
shall be determined on an individual basis by the city council. Factors to be
considered in such determination shall include (without limitation) national
parking standards, parking standards for similar businesses or land uses, size
of building, type of use, number of employees, expected volume and turnover of
customer traffic and expected frequency and number of delivery or service
vehicles.
 
         c.   Off Street Parking Exceptions:
         (1)   Compact Cars: Up to fifteen percent (15%) of the parking
required for a given use may be designed specifically for compact cars,
provided:
            (a)   Signage is erected at appropriate locations indicating "For
Compacts Only".
            (b)   Compact stalls are located in one continuous area and signage
is erected at the parking lot entry showing directions to compact only parking.
            (c)   The minimum design and construction standards apply.
         (2)   Proof Of Parking Required: Establishments shall be capable of
providing the number of on-site parking spaces required by this chapter at any
time said parking is needed. However, all such required parking need not be
constructed initially if it is demonstrated by the owner to be in excess of the
real parking demand. Future parking sufficient in quantity to meet the
ordinance requirement shall be shown on the official site plan for which a
building permit request is made and said parking shall be constructed at the
discretion of the city if it proves to be needed later.
         (3)   Central Business District: Uses constructed in the MX-1 District
shall be exempt from this section except that all such parking provided shall
comply with the parking design standards in subsection C.7 below of this
section.
      6.   Joint Use Of Parking Areas:
         a.   Two (2) or more buildings or uses may collectively provide off
street parking in which case the required number of parking spaces shall not be
less than the sum of the requirements for the individual uses computed
separately.
         b.   In the case of the joint use of off-street parking spaces where
operating hours do not overlap, the board of appeals and adjustments may grant
an exception to allow the total parking required to be reduced below the sum
total of the individual uses provided a copy of an agreement between joint
users is filed with the application.
      7.   Off-Street Parking Design And Construction Standards:
   Table 7.2. Minimum Parking Construction Standards
Minimum Requirements
Parking Angle (Degrees) 0°30°45°60°75°90°
Minimum Requirements
Parking Angle (Degrees) 0°   30° 45° 60° 75° 90°
Full size cars:
Maneuvering lane width  12'   12'  14'  18'  21'  24'
Parking space width     8'    8.5' 8.5' 8.5' 8.5' 8.5'
Parking space length    22'   18'  18'  18'  18'  19'
Bay dimension (1 tier)  20'   29'  41'  38'  41'  43'
Bay dimension (2 tiers) 28'   46'  61'  58'  61'  62'
Compact cars:
Maneuvering lane width  12'   12'  12'  16'  19'  22'
Parking space width     7.5'  8'   8'   8'   8'   8'
Parking space length    20'   16'  16'  16'  16'  17'
Bay dimension (1 tier)  19.5' 27'  29'  34'  37'  39'
Bay dimension (2 tiers) 27'   42'  46'  52'  55'  56'
 
         a.   Handicapped parking shall be provided as required by the
applicable building code.
         b.   Bumper Overhang: The minimum parking space length may be
decreased by up to two (2) feet for spaces which allow the bumper of the auto
to project beyond the terminus of the parking space without obstructing other
parking spaces or vehicle circulation.
         c.   Maneuvering Lanes: All maneuvering lanes shall permit only one-
way traffic movements with the exception of the ninety degree (90°) pattern
where two-way traffic may be permitted. Each parking space shall have direct
unimpeded access to a maneuvering lane and dead end maneuvering lanes shall
only be permitted with the ninety degree (90°) pattern which is designed to
accommodate two-way traffic.
         d.   Driveways and surface parking shall be set back from adjacent
property lines in Table 7.3 below:
   Table 7.3 Required Parking Setbacks
District Required Setbacks (ft.)
         Front Side Rear
District Required Setbacks (ft.)
         Front Side                           Rear
A-1      50    5                              5
A-2      50    5                              30
RR       40    5                              5
R-1           5                              5
               5'                             5'
R-2      30    Townhouses and non-residential Townhouses and non-residential
               uses: 10'                      uses: 10'
R-3      30    10                             10
R-4      30    10                             10
MX-1                                         
MX-2     20    10                             10
B-1      20    10                             10
B-2      20    10                             10
I-1      40    25                             50
I-2      75    75                             75
PI       20    10                             10
 
         e.   Driveways and surface parking shall have increased setbacks when
located adjacent to freeways and arterial highways as designated by the
transportation element of the comprehensive plan to provide space for earthen
berms, buffer yards, or planting strips as follows:
         (1)   Ten (10) feet from a minor arterial highway; and
         (2)   Twenty (20) feet from a principal arterial (freeway).
         f.   Surfacing: All parking lots and drives other than for a single-
unit detached residence without public sewer shall be paved with a concrete or
bituminous surface in accordance with standards as established by the city. All
parking spaces shall be striped with suitable paint in accordance with approved
plans except for single-unit detached residences.
         g.   Curb And Gutter And/Or Barriers: All parking lots, access roads,
driveways, alleys, circulation drives, loading, stacking, and maneuvering areas
shall have concrete curb and gutter not less than six (6) inches above the
adjacent pavement surface grade on the edges of all pavement surfaces to
channelize the flow of traffic, define parking utilization and conflict
minimization, and to facilitate drainage and provide maximum protection to
pavement integrity.
         h.   Drainage: All parking lots shall have a drainage system which is
approved by the city.
         i.   Screening: When a required off street parking lot for six (6) or
more cars is located adjacent to an R district, landscaping and berming to meet
ninety percent (90%) opacity year-round must be provided along the R district
property line. In certain situations, the city may consider, but not
necessarily approve, installation of a fence or screen wall not more than six
(6) feet in height but not within the required front yard.
         j.   Lighting: Lighting shall be so arranged to deflect the light away
from R districts and public streets.
         k.   Maintenance: It shall be the joint responsibility of the operator
and owner of any principal use to maintain, in a neat and aesthetic manner, the
parking space, accessway, landscaping and required fences and walls.
         l.   Exception: The off-street parking and design and construction
standards may be waived by the city upon issuance of an interim use permit
(IUP) for temporary buildings in the I- 1 District.
   D.   Off-Street Loading Requirements:
      1.   Loading facilities shall be provided for every retail establishment,
warehouse, manufacturing or industrial use, in excess of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet gross floor area, with a general requirement of one dock or berth
per seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet gross floor area (loading
facilities include docks, berths and maneuvering area).
      2.   All docks shall be located within the perimeter of the structure
housing the principal or accessory use and shall be completely enclosed.
      3.   Off street loading spaces shall be equal to at least ten (10) feet
by forty (40) feet, excluding maneuvering area.
      4.   At no time shall any vehicle be permitted to extend into a
pedestrian way or public right-of-way while loading or unloading.
      5.   All berths shall be screened from view of all dissimilar abutting
zoning districts by plant materials, walls, earthen berms, fences or
combinations thereof. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024; amd. Ord. B-315, 9-17-2024)
11-7-4: PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION STANDARDS:
   A.   In all non-residential districts, appropriate provisions shall be made
to protect pedestrian areas from encroachments by parked or moving vehicles:
      1.   Clear and well lighted walkways shall extend throughout the site and
parking area(s) connecting building entrances to adjacent public sidewalks and
any parking facilities located on the site.
      2.   A walkway at least six (6) feet wide shall extend along any façade
featuring a building entrance and any façade abutting a required parking area.
      3.   Concrete sidewalks, five (5) feet in width, shall be provided along
any collector or arterial street.
      4.   Walkway(s) shall be made of high quality, long lasting, and
decorative materials and incorporate architectural themes present in the
surrounding building. Bituminous or asphalt materials are prohibited. (Ord.
2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-7-5: FENCING STANDARDS:
   A.   General Provisions:
      1.   All fences shall require a fence permit from the city unless
otherwise specified in this section.
      2.   All fences shall be maintained in accordance with section
9-4-7, "Public Nuisance Defined", of this code and all other applicable
sections of this code.
      3.   All fences located in recorded easements are the sole risk of the
property owner; and the cost of any removal, relocation, or placement of said
structures caused by any activity permitted in said easements is the sole
responsibility of the property owner.
      4.   Fences may be installed up to but not on the property line.
   B.   Fence Height:
      1.   Fences and walls in residential districts shall be subject to the
following maximum heights:
         a.   Six (6) feet in the rear or side yard.
         b.   Forty-two (42) inches in the front yard.
         c.   Forty-eight (48) inches in street side yards of corner lots that
abut another front yard, provided that no structure shall interfere with sight
distances for vehicles approaching intersections.
   Figure 7.1. Fence Height Standards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4b51a377144822298e340f2016f76ebbfa73789c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1711.jpg]
      2.   Fences and walls in non-residential districts shall not exceed eight
(8) feet in height. Along property lines adjacent to residential districts, the
appropriate maximum fence height for residential districts shall apply.
   C.   Materials And Construction:
      1.   Every fence shall be constructed in a workmanlike manner of
substantial materials widely accepted in the fencing industry and reasonably
suited for the purpose for which the fence is intended.
      2.   The side of any fence considered to be its "face" (i.e., the
finished side having no structural supports) shall face the abutting property
or street right- of-way.
      3.   No plywood boards, canvas, plastic sheeting, metal sheeting or
similar materials shall be used for any fence construction.
      4.   Link fences shall be constructed in a manner that no barbed ends
shall be at the top.
      5.   Barbed wire and electric boundary fences not exceeding six (6) feet
in height shall only be permitted in the AG, AG-P, and RR districts when
related to agricultural or permitted uses relative to animal husbandry.
   D.   Security Fences:
      1.   Security fences not exceeding eight (8) feet in height are permitted
in the I-2 District and may be permitted in the PI District with a conditional
use permit. Said security fences are subject to the applicable standards listed
below and throughout this title:
         a.   Security fences in the PI district shall meet the conditional use
standards in
11-9-3 of this title.
         b.   Barbed wire may be permitted on top of a security fence where the
applicant demonstrates the barbed wire is necessary for greater security and
will not be harmful to the health, safety, or welfare of the community.
         c.   The barbed wire portion of the fence may not have more than three
(3) strands, the lowest of which shall be at least six (6) feet from finished
grade.
         d.   No portion of the barbed wire shall project over the public
right-of-way or any adjacent public or private property.
      2.   No security fence (with or without barbed wire) shall be constructed
without issuance of the applicable city permit.
   E.   Temporary Or Seasonal Fences: Temporary or seasonal fences (such as
snow fences, erosion control fences, fences to protect newly seeded areas and
the like) are allowed without a permit provided:
      1.   No such fence may be left in place for more than six (6) months
without written city approval; and
      2.   Any such fence must be removed within fifteen (15) days of the city
providing written notice to the landowner that the city has determined the
fence no longer serves its originally intended temporary or seasonal purpose.
(Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-7-6: LANDSCAPING, SCREENING, AND BUFFERING STANDARDS:
   A.   Landscaping:
      1.   General:
         a.   Landscaping Required:
         (1)   All areas of land other than those occupied by building or
hardcover shall be landscaped with a combination of sod and plantings.
            (a)   Rock or mulch may only be used as an accent material around
sod or plantings.
            (b)   Trees, shrubs, flowers, and ground cover needed in these
areas shall be in addition to the minimum number of trees and foundation
plantings required by subsection 2 below.
         (2)   Portions of the site may be exempt from these requirements with
city approval where future development or expansion is planned within a
reasonable period of time.
            (a)   These areas shall either be graded and seeded with native
vegetation or maintained grass in accordance with the City of Rosemount grading
requirements or remain as undisturbed natural areas containing existing viable
natural vegetation that can be maintained free of foreign and noxious plant
material and will not produce soil erosion due to potential increases in
stormwater runoff.
         b.   Detailed landscaping plans shall be required in all development
proposals requiring site plan review. Landscaping plans shall be prepared
consistent with the general site plan requirements in section
11-9-1 of this title.
         c.   Grade: Final grades in all developments shall not exceed a three
to one (3:1) ratio unless plans for retaining walls, terraces, or similar
controls have been approved by the city.
         d.   Planting Materials: All planting materials used in site
developments shall be indigenous to the appropriate hardiness zone and physical
characteristics of the site.
         e.   Standards: All stock to be planted (shade and flowering trees,
deciduous shrubs, coniferous evergreens, broad leaf evergreens, roses, vines
and ground covers and fruit trees) must follow the standards set forth by the
“American Standards for Nursery Stock” as adopted by the American Association
of Nurserymen.
         f.   Materials In Healthy Condition: All planting materials shall be
disease free and able to survive in assigned locations in a healthy condition
with the benefit of only minor maintenance.
         g.   Boulevard Trees: All boulevard trees proposed to satisfy the
minimum requirements shall be long lived hardwood species and guaranteed for no
less than one full growing season from completion of site planting.
         h.   Shade Trees: When entire streets or blocks are proposed for
development, shade tree species must be diversified so each side of a city
block would contain at least three (3) different varieties of tree genera with
at least two (2) different species (if same genus used more than once).
         i.   Exception: The required plantings may be waived by the city
council upon issuance of an interim use permit (IUP) for temporary buildings in
the general industrial district.
         j.   Damaged, diseased, or dead landscape materials shall be replaced
so that the requirements of this chapter are met at all times. This requirement
shall run with the land and be binding upon all future property owners.
      2.   Required Tree And Foundation Plantings:
         a.   All residential one- and two-unit developments shall require one
deciduous tree per street frontage.
         (1)   This tree shall be placed within the street side yard.
         (2)   The trees must be planted before the issuance of an occupancy
permit. If occupancy occurs during the non-planting season, a bond or other
guarantee acceptable to the city in an amount determined by the city may be
posted for landscaping installation.
         b.   All multi-unit residential, mixed-use, and non-residential uses:
         (1)   Multi-unit residential sites that contain buildings that are one
(1) or two (2) stories shall provide a minimum of eight (8) overstory or
coniferous trees plus one (1) tree per unit and multi-unit residential sites
that contain buildings that are three (3) stories or higher shall provide a
minimum of eight (8) overstory or coniferous trees plus one (1) tree per two
(2) units. Spacing between the trees shall be a maximum of fifty (50) feet
along the perimeter of the site adjacent to any roadway.
         (2)   Each mixed-use or non-residential site shall provide a minimum
of one (1) overstory tree per three thousand (3,000) square feet of land area.
         Spacing between the trees shall be a maximum of fifty (50) feet along
the perimeter of the site adjacent to any roadway.
         (3)   One linear foot of foundation planting per ten (10) linear feet
of any principal or accessory structure perimeter.
         (4)   At least fifty percent (50%) of the total number of required
overstory trees shall be deciduous. All trees planted along the site perimeter
adjacent to a roadway shall be of shade or flowering tree types.
         (5)   All landscaped areas shall be irrigated.
         c.   Credit For Existing Trees: Credit for the retention of existing
trees which are of acceptable species, size and location may be given to
satisfy the minimum number of requirements set forth in this section.
      3.   Minimum Planting Standards. All trees installed to meet the
requirements of this section shall meet the minimum planting size as identified
in Table 7.3.
   Table 7.4. Minimum Planting Size at Installation
 
Vegetation Type               Minimum Planting Size at Installation
Overstory deciduous tree      2.5 caliper inches
Overstory coniferous tree     6 feet in height
Foundation plantings - shrubs 1/3 the mature spread and height
 
      4.   Planting Location: Planting materials within landscape designs shall
be compatible with planned site use. As a result, trees and shrubs (except low
creeping shrubs) shall not be planted:
         a.   Under existing or planned utility lines when the mature height
and spread of the planting may conflict with utility lines.
         b.   Over existing or planned utility lines so that upon plant
maturity the root system conflicts with the utility lines.
         c.   So that upon mature height and width of plant growth its form
conflicts with local vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
         d.   So that upon mature height and width of the plant its growth
habits would conflict with any public service or safety device such as stop
signs, traffic lights, streetlights, etc.
         e.   Any closer than fifteen (15) feet from any fireplug.
         f.   Any closer than thirty (30) feet from any intersection as
measured from the back of the curb line.
      5.   Parking Lot Landscaping:
         a.   All parking areas for multi-unit residential, mixed-use, and non-
residential developments (including driveways and drive aisles) shall be
screened and landscaped subject to Planning Commission review to reduce the
impact of large expanses of paved surfaces, provide a more pedestrian friendly
environment and provide adequate room for snow storage.
         b.   Trees, shrubs, flowers, and ground cover needed in these areas
shall be in addition to the minimum number of trees and foundation plantings
required by this title.
         c.   Required Landscaping:
         (1)   In the MX-1, MX-2, B-1, and PI districts, a minimum of ten
percent (10%) of the parking area shall be landscaped.
         (2)   In the B-2 and I-1 districts, a minimum of five percent (5%) of
the parking area shall be landscaped.
         (3)   This landscaping shall be located on islands or peninsulas
within the parking area or along its perimeter.
            (a)   The islands or peninsulas shall be a minimum eight and one-
half (8½) feet wide with a minimum area of three hundred twenty-four (324)
square feet. These dimensions may be altered to provide sufficient area for the
proposed landscaping to mature.
            (b)   To ensure this landscaping is properly dispersed, a minimum
of one island, peninsulas or the like shall be located within each six thousand
(6,000) square feet of vehicular use area.
         (4)   A minimum of one tree meeting the standards in subsection A.3
above shall be required for each ten (10) parking spaces. The remaining area
shall be landscaped with shrubs or ground cover (not to include rocks or gravel
except as a mulch around shrubs and ground cover) not to exceed two (2) feet in
height.
      d.   When the internal planting islands are required, the island
boundaries shall be constructed of concrete non-degradable material. The
interior depth and total area of the island must allow the root zone of all
planted materials to develop to their natural growth potential.
      6.   Landscaping Performance Security: The city may, at its option,
withhold occupancy certification or require cash, a letter of credit or a bond
satisfactory to the city in the amount of one hundred and ten percent (110%) of
the value of the landscaping, securing the full performance of landscaping
requirements. The amount of the security shall be determined by the contract
value of the required improvements and may be held by the city for one full
year from the date improvements were completed.
   B.   Screening:
      1.   Screening shall be used to provide a visual and noise separation of
more intensive uses from less intensive uses.
         a.   Where natural materials such as trees, hedges, or berms are
approved in lieu of required screening by means of walls or fences, the density
and species of such plantings shall be such to achieve ninety percent (90%)
opacity year-round at a height of six (6) feet.
         b.   Conifers used for screening must meet overstory planting
requirements.
      2.   For all multi-unit residential, mixed-use, and non-residential uses,
the following site elements shall be screened from public streets and adjacent
R-1 and R-2 districts in compatibility with the design elements, materials, and
colors used elsewhere on the site:
         a.   Parking Areas:
         (1)   Landscaping and berming shall be a primary source for screening
parking areas. Should landscaping and berming be found ineffective by the city,
the city may approve screening walls and/or decorative fencing as an
alternative.
            (a)   Screening walls shall be constructed of the same materials as
the principal building.
            (b)   In the MX-1, MX-2, B-1, and PI districts: Screening walls
shall not extend more than twenty-five (25) feet without a change in
architecture or landscaping accent to reduce their mass and appearance.
            (c)   In the B-2 district, screening walls shall not extend more
than thirty-five (35) feet without a change in architecture or landscaping
accent to reduce their mass and appearance.
            (d)   In the I-1 district, screening walls shall not extend more
than seventy (70) feet without a change in architecture or landscaping accent
to reduce their mass and appearance.
         (2)   Parking area screening shall provide a minimum fifty percent
(50%) opacity screen to a height of at least four (4) feet.
         b.   Loading Areas:
         (1)   In B-2 and I-1 districts, the above screening standards also
apply to loading areas. In addition, no loading area may face a public right-
of-way or nonindustrial use or district.
         (2)   Loading area screening shall provide a minimum ninety percent
(90%) opacity screen to a height of at least eighteen (18) feet.
         c.   Rooftop Utilities:
         (1)   The ground level view of all rooftop equipment, including, but
not limited to, rooftop structures related to elevators and other mechanical
utilities, shall be screened from public right-of-way and adjacent or nearby
residential uses and districts.
         (2)   Screening should be accomplished by incorporating architectural
building design features such as a parapet wall or sloping roof structures.
         (3)   Wood fencing shall not be permitted.
         (4)   If due to factors unique to the property or the project, it is
physically impossible or impractical to screen these utilities, the City’s
Planning Commission may approve alternative solutions that render them
aesthetically compatible with the building.
         d.   Refuse and recycling containers.
   C.   Buffering:
      1.   Buffering In The MX-1 District:
         a.   Where the MX-1 District abuts a residential district, a ten (10)-
foot-wide buffer yard shall be required.
         b.   This buffer shall contain no structures, shall not be used for
parking, off street loading or storage, and shall be landscaped.
         c.   Landscaping shall include sod or seeded grass or native
vegetation and planting of trees and shrubbery.
      2.   Buffering In The MX-2, B-1, B-2, I-1, And PI Districts:
         a.   In the MX-2, B-1, B-2, I-1, and PI districts, a buffer yard equal
to thirty (30) feet or two times the height of the building, whichever is
greater, shall be required along any side or rear property line abutting any
residential or institutional use or district. Institutional uses abutting
institutional uses or districts shall not be required to provide a buffer.
         (1)   The minimum buffer yard for any single occupancy building with a
footprint equal to or larger than forty thousand (40,000) square feet, but not
greater than one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet, shall be increased by
fifty percent (50%) of the required buffer yard.
         (2)   Buffer yards for buildings with a footprint exceeding one
hundred thousand (100,000) square feet shall be increased by one hundred
percent (100%).
         b.   This area shall contain landscaping and berming to provide a
ninety percent (90%) opacity screen to a height of at least six (6) feet and
shall not contain any structures, parking, off street loading, or storage.
         c.   Should landscaping and berming be found ineffective by the city,
the city may approve screening walls and/or decorative fencing as an
alternative.
         (1)   Screening walls shall be constructed of the same materials as
the principal building.
         (2)   Screening walls in the MX-2, B-1, and PI districts shall not
extend more than twenty-five (25) feet without a change in architecture to
reduce their mass and appearance.
         (3)   Screening walls in the B-2 and I-1 districts shall not extend
more than thirty-five (35) feet without a change in architecture to reduce
their mass and appearance. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024; amd. Ord. B-317, 11-19-
2024)
11-7-7: TREE PRESERVATION STANDARDS:
   A.   Findings And Purpose Statement: The city council finds it is in the
best interest of the city to protect, preserve, and enhance the natural
environment of the community and to encourage a resourceful and prudent
approach to the development and alteration of wooded areas. In the interest of
achieving these objectives, the city has established the comprehensive tree
preservation regulations herein to promote the furtherance of the following:
      1.   Protection and preservation of the environment and natural beauty of
the city;
      2.   Assurance of orderly development within wooded areas to minimize
tree and habitat loss;
      3.   Evaluation of the impacts to trees and wooded areas resulting from
development;
      4.   Establishment of minimal standards for tree preservation and the
mitigation of environmental impacts resulting from tree removal;
      5.   Provision of incentives for creative land use and environmentally
compatible site design which preserves trees and minimizes tree removal and
clear cutting during development; and
      6.   Enforcement of tree preservation standards to promote and protect
the public health, safety and welfare of the community.
   B.   Application: The provisions of this section shall apply to all
subdivision, grading permits, or construction, except for preliminary plats
approved by the city prior to the adoption hereof.
   C.   Process:
      1.   For Developers: Unless otherwise determined by the city council, the
following process for preserving trees shall be required from the developer:
         a.   Prepare a tree preservation plan which shall be incorporated on
the grading plan.
         b.   Implement the tree preservation plan prior to and during site
development.
         c.   Submit a performance of financial guarantee for compliance with
the approved tree preservation plan.
         d.   Comply with the city's tree replacement procedure.
         e.   The tree preservation plan shall be submitted with preliminary
plat plans or as part of the application for a grading permit. The tree
preservation plan must be certified by a forester, landscape architect, or
nurseryman retained by the developer.
         f.   The plat and grading plans will not be approved by the city
without an approved tree preservation plan. In the case of grading permit
applications, the tree preservation plan will be approved by the Zoning
Administrator. This decision may be appealed directly to the city council.
      2.   For Home And Business Owners: The following process for preserving
trees shall be required from the home and business owner if trees are being
removed during grading or construction:
         a.   Identify:
         (1)   The significant trees and heritage trees on the property.
         (2)   The significant trees and/or heritage trees to be removed due to
grading or construction.
         (3)   Protection measures used to protect the preserved trees during
grading or construction.
         b.   Comply with the city's tree replacement procedure.
         c.   The tree preservation plan shall be submitted with the grading
permit or building permit application. The tree preservation plan may be
prepared by the applicant of the grading permit or the building permit. The
tree preservation plan will be approved by city staff. This decision may be
appealed directly to the board of appeal and adjustments.
   D.   Tree Preservation Plan:
      1.   The developer shall be responsible for implementing the tree
preservation plan prior to and during site grading and plan development.
      2.   The tree preservation plan will be reviewed by the Zoning
Administrator to assess the best overall design for the project taking into
account significant trees and ways to enhance the efforts of the developer to
mitigate corresponding damage.
      3.   The developer is encouraged to meet with staff prior to submission
of the preliminary plat application or prior to application for the grading
permit, whichever is sooner, to determine the placement of buildings, parking,
driveways, streets, storage and other physical features which result in the
fewest significant trees being destroyed or damaged.
   E.   Mandatory Protection: Measures to protect significant trees shall
include:
      1.   Installation of snow fencing, silt fence, or polyethylene laminate
safety netting placed at the drip line of significant trees to be preserved.
      2.   Identification of any oak trees requiring pruning between April 15
and July 1; any oak trees so pruned shall be required to have any cut areas
sealed with an appropriate tree wound sealant.
   F.   Discretionary Protection: Measures to preserve or protect significant
trees, which may be required by the city, include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Installation of retaining walls or tree wells to preserve trees by
eliminating the filling or cutting of soil within drip zones.
      2.   Placement of utilities in common trenches outside of the drip line
of significant trees, or use of tunneled installation.
      3.   Prevention of change in soil chemistry due to concrete washout and
leakage or spillage of toxic materials, such as fuels or paints.
      4.   Use of tree root aeration, fertilization, and/or irrigation systems.
      5.   Transplanting of significant trees into a protected area for later
moving into permanent sites within the construction area.
      6.   Safety pruning.
   G.   Significant Tree Removal:
      1.   Heritage Trees:
         a.   Heritage trees are unique trees to Rosemount due to their size
and age.
         b.   All possible measures shall be taken to preserve these trees.
         c.   Heritage tree removal may occur only when there is not a
practical alternative, such as the alignment of a collector or arterial street
or the installation of a trunk utility corridor. There is a zero percent (0%)
removal threshold on heritage trees, meaning every caliper inch of heritage
tree removed will require replacement in accordance with the standards of
subsection I below.
      2.   Significant Tree Removal For Developments:
         a.   Applicant shall retain the maximum amount of significant trees
possible.
         b.   Twenty-five percent (25%) of the existing caliper inches of
significant trees may be removed during development without obligation of
replacement.
         c.   Any removal beyond twenty-five percent (25%) will require
replacement as described in subsection I below.
      3.   Significant Tree Removal For Home And Business Owners:
         a.   Ten percent (10%) of the existing caliper inches of trees may be
removed during home or business construction without obligation of replacement.
         b.   Any removal beyond ten percent (10%) will require replacement as
described in subsection I below.
      4.   Trees Exempt From Replacement: The following types of trees shall
not be included as part of the tally of tree removals and shall not be required
to be replaced:
         a.   Dead, diseased, or dying trees;
         b.   Invasive species;
         c.   Trees that are transplanted from the site to another appropriate
area within the city; or
         d.   Trees that were planted as part of a commercial business such as
a tree farm or nursery.
   H.   Financial Guarantee: Refer to subsection
11-7-6A.6 above.
   I.   Tree Replacement:
      1.   Tree Replacement Formula: Replacement of removed or disturbed trees
in excess of the percentage allowed by this subsection shall be according to
the following guidelines:
         a.   For development which exceeds the percentage of allowable removal
of significant trees, all significant trees shall be replaced at the ratio of
one-half (0.5) caliper inch per one caliper inch removed.
         b.   For each heritage tree removed by the developer, all heritage
trees shall be replaced at the ratio of one caliper inch per one caliper inch
removed.
      2.   Size, Types, And Diversification Of Replacement Trees: Replacement
trees shall be of a similar species to those that are removed, but also shall
be a minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) conifers and twenty-five percent
(25%) deciduous hardwoods. Required heritage tree replacement must be of the
same species as the heritage tree removed. Replacement trees must be no less
than the following sizes:
         a.   Deciduous trees shall be no less than two and one-half (2.5)
caliper inches; and
         b.   Coniferous trees shall be no less than six (6) feet high.
      3.   Acceptable Tree Replacement Species: The following list of trees are
acceptable for tree replacement species. The city may, at its discretion,
approve additional species if circumstances such as soil conditions, hydrology,
topography, or recent tree diseases warrant.
         a.   Black cherry;
         b.   Cedar;
         c.   Fir;
         d.   Hickory;
         e.   Linden;
         f.   Maple (except silver maples);
         g.   Oak;
         h.   Pine;
         i.   Spruce; and
         j.   Walnut.
      4.   Other Replacement Tree Requirements: Choice of replacement trees
species and location of the trees should also be contingent on the following
information:
         a.   Soil Composition: Comparisons should be made between soil
conditions and the ecology of the proposed species to make sure they are
compatible.
         b.   Spatial Requirements: The potential height and crown spread of
the proposed replacement trees should be known. Usually, half of the adult tree
crown diameter is the amount of distance a tree should be planted from any
aboveground objects.
         c.   Diseases And Insect Problems: Appropriate replacement choices
shall also consider insect and disease problems that may be common with
particular species in the part of the state in which the City of Rosemount is
located.
      5.   Fee In Lieu Of Tree Replacement Or Replacement Trees Planted In
Public Areas: The city recognizes that there may be instances where the total
amount of tree replacement required cannot occur on site or that there are some
land uses (such as refining) that are not compatible with trees. In those
instances, the city may, at its option, accept a fee in lieu of tree placement
or allow the planting of replacement trees in public areas. Tree replacement is
encouraged to happen on site as much as possible and fee in lieu of tree
replacement should be used only when replacement cannot occur on site. The fee
in lieu of tree replacement will be determined annually by the City Council
through the City fee schedule. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-7-8: LIGHTING STANDARDS:
   A.   Lighting shall be consistent in character throughout the entire
property site, in both design and bulb type.
   B.   Any light fixture must be placed in such a manner that no light
emitting surface is visible from any residential area or public/private
roadway, walkway, trail or other public way when viewed at ground level.
   C.   Light shall be directed toward the ground. Externally lit signs,
display, building, and aesthetic lighting must be lit from the top and shine
downward. Lighting must be shielded to prevent direct glare.
   D.   The level of lighting shall not exceed 0.5 lumens at any residential
property line or 1.0 lumen at any nonresidential property line.
   E.   All nonessential lighting will be required to be turned off after
business hours, leaving only the necessary lighting for site security.
   F.   Maximum Height:
      1.   The maximum height for exterior lighting is thirty (30) feet. The
maximum height for exterior lighting within one hundred (100) feet of a
residential use or district shall be twenty (20) feet.
      2.   In the PI district, the maximum height for ball field lights is
eighty (80) feet. The minimum setback for such lights shall be no less than the
height of the light. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
CHAPTER 8
SIGNAGE
SECTION:
11-8-1: Purpose
11-8-2: Administration And Enforcement
11-8-3: General Regulations
11-8-4: Prohibited Signs
11-8-5: Exempt Signs
11-8-6: Temporary Signs
11-8-7: District Regulations
11-8-8: Dynamic Signs
11-8-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   It is not the purpose or intent of this sign chapter to regulate the
message displayed on any sign nor is it the purpose or intent of this chapter
to regulate any building design or any display not defined as a sign or any
sign which cannot be viewed from outside a building.
   B.   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to:
      1.   Regulate the number, location, size, type, illumination and other
physical characteristics of signs within the city in order to promote the
public health, safety and welfare.
      2.   Maintain, enhance and improve the aesthetic environment of the city
by preventing visual clutter that is harmful to the appearance of the
community.
      3.   Improve the visual appearance of the city while providing for
effective means of communication consistent with constitutional guarantees and
the city's goals of public safety and aesthetics.
      4.   Provide for fair and consistent enforcement of the sign regulations
set forth herein under the zoning authority of the city.
      5.   Promote the economic development and welfare of the city and its
residents by allowing for the temporary promotion of the sale and use of real
estate.
      6.   Protect individual property rights consistent with constitutional
guarantees.
      7.   Safeguard and enhance property values.
      8.   Encourage signs which by their design are integrated with and
harmonious to the surrounding environment and the buildings and sites they
occupy.
      9.   Control nuisances.
      10.   Eliminate or minimize hazards to motorists and pedestrians using
the public streets, sidewalks, and rights-of-way.
      11.   Promote the use of new and changing technology to enhance variety
and flexibility in signage, while maintaining certain restrictions to protect
the public safety and welfare. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-8-2: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Permit Required: Except as noted elsewhere in this chapter, no sign
shall be erected, altered, improved, reconstructed, maintained, or moved in the
city without first securing a permit from the city:
      1.   The content of the message or speech displayed on the sign shall not
be reviewed or considered in determining whether to approve or deny a sign
permit.
      2.   Application for a permit shall be filed by the property owner or
designated agent with the Zoning Administrator on forms provided by the city.
      3.   The application shall be accompanied by a fee as established by city
council resolution.
      4.   The community development department designee shall notify the
applicant, in writing, of an incomplete application within fifteen (15)
business days of the date of submission.
      5.   The community development department designee shall review the
application and related materials and shall determine whether the proposal is
in compliance with all applicable evaluation criteria, codes, ordinances, and
applicable performance standards set forth in this title within sixty (60) days
of submission of a complete application in accordance with Minn. Stat. § 15.99.
   B.   Nonconforming Signs And Uses:
      1.   Nonconforming Signs: A nonconforming sign lawfully existing upon the
effective date of this chapter shall be regulated in accordance with section
11-1-8 of this title.
      2.   Nonconforming Uses: When the principal use of land is legally
nonconforming under section 11-1-8 of this title, all existing or proposed
signs in conjunction with that land use shall be considered conforming if they
are in compliance with the sign provisions for the most restrictive zoning
district in which the principal use is allowed.
   C.   Enforcement And Penalties:
      1.   Administration: This chapter shall be administered and enforced by
the community development department designee. The Zoning Administrator may
institute in the name of the city appropriate actions or proceedings against a
violator.
      2.   Inspection: All signs for which a permit is required shall be
subject to inspection by the community development department designee.
      3.   Removal At Owner's Expense: The city reserves the right to require
the removal at the owner's expense of any sign when the requirements of this
section are not completely followed and adhered to, or if a sign is not
properly maintained or falls into a state of disrepair. The city shall not have
any obligation or liability to replace any sign when removed by the city.
      4.   Misdemeanor: Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with, or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined or penalized not more
than the maximum levels established by the state for misdemeanor offenses.
(Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024; amd. Ord. 2025-02, 1-21-2025)
11-8-3: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Construction And Placement:
      1.   No sign, except official signs, may be located within the public
right-of-way, a corner sight triangle, or any easement.
      2.   Except in the MX-1 District and as otherwise regulated herein, all
freestanding signs shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from any property
line.
      3.   No sign shall be erected in or overhang upon a public right-of-way
or otherwise interfere with safe pedestrian or vehicular movement, except
official signs.
      4.   No sign or sign structure shall be permitted to interfere with the
safe access to doors, windows or fire escapes. No sign or sign structure shall
be attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
      5.   Electrical signs shall be installed according to state electrical
codes and shall require underground wiring.
      6.   No sign may contain more than two (2) sides.
      7.   No sign shall be attached or be allowed to hang from any building
until all necessary wall and roof attachments have been approved by the Zoning
Administrator designee.
      8.   Illuminated signs shall be shielded to prevent lights from being
directed at oncoming traffic in such brilliance that it impairs the vision of
the driver and may not interfere with or obscure traffic signs or signals.
Lighting may not illuminate any adjacent properties, buildings or streets.
      9.   No sign shall be erected, placed, or located upon private property
without the permission of the property owner. This includes obtaining
permission of the adjacent property owner for any sign placed in the public
right-of-way.
   B.   All signs shall be maintained in a safe, presentable and good
structural condition at all times, including the replacement of defective
parts, cleaning and other items required for maintenance of the sign.
   C.   Landscaping:
      1.   Subject to the standards of the individual zoning district in which
the sign is placed, the area around freestanding signs shall be landscaped with
plantings and maintained in such a manner to accent and enhance the sign while
remaining sensitive to the natural features of the site.
      2.   Vegetation around, in front of, behind, and underneath the base of
ground signs for a distance of ten (10) feet shall be neatly trimmed and free
of weeds, and no rubbish or debris that would constitute a fire or health
hazard shall be permitted under or near the sign.
   D.   The Planning Commission and/or City Council may recognize separate sign
plans for a project, site, or multi-building PUD which will supersede this
chapter. The sign plans which have been approved by the city will have the
effect of a sign ordinance for the specific project, site, or multi-building
PUD. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-8-4: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following signs shall not be permitted, erected, or maintained on any
property within the City:
   A.   Hazardous Sign: Any sign or sign structure which:
      1.   Is structurally unsafe;
      2.   Constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation, or abandonment; or
      3.   Is not kept in good repair.
   B.   Traffic Hazard:
      1.   Any sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an
imitation of or resembles any official traffic control device or railroad sign
or signal, or emergency vehicle signs, or which attempts to direct the movement
of traffic or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any
official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal.
      2.   Any sign which contains colors, shapes, intermittent lighting or
words such as "stop", "warning", "caution", etc., which may be confused with
traffic signing or controls unless such signs are intended or approved for such
use.
   C.   Content classified as "obscene" as defined by Minn. Stat. § 617.241.
   D.   All signs over two hundred fifty (250) square feet in area.
   E.   Audio speakers or any form of pyrotechnics in association with any
sign.
   F.   Inflatable signs.
   G.   Off premises signs except those specifically allowed by this chapter.
   H.   Permanent freestanding or wall mounted signs supported by guywires.
   I.   Portable signs except as allowed by this chapter.
   J.   Roof signs.
   K.   Rotating signs.
   L.   Shimmering signs.
   M.   Signs which contain intermittent, flashing, or any other type of
lighting which changes in intensity or color when artificially illuminated.
   N.   Signs painted directly on the exterior surface of any building except
within the MX-1 District.
   O.   Signs painted, attached or in any other manner affixed to trees or
similar natural surfaces, or attached to utility poles, bridges, towers,
transit shelters, benches or similar public structures except official signs.
   P.   Signs which pivot, move, rotate, or display any moving parts. (Ord.
2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-8-5: EXEMPT SIGNS:
The following signs shall not require a permit and are allowed in addition to
those signs allowed by section 12-8-6 of this chapter. These exemptions,
however, shall not be construed as relieving the owner of the sign from the
responsibility of its erection and maintenance, and its compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, or any other law or ordinance regulating the same.
   A.   Painted Or Printed Signs: The changing of the display surface on a
painted or printed sign only. This exemption, however, shall apply only to
poster replacement and/or on-site changes involving sign painting elsewhere
than directly on a building.
   B.   Property address information visible from the street or road fronting
the property for public safety purposes:
      1.   Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals which contrast with their
background.
      2.   Numbers shall be a minimum of four inches high with a minimum stroke
width of one-half inch.
      3.   These numbers shall be affixed to the principal structure, except in
non-sewered areas where address numbers shall be affixed to mailboxes or a
separate structure plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting
the access to the property.
   C.   Official signs.
   D.   Flags:
      1.   Flags displayed in commercial and industrial districts shall not
exceed in surface area the maximum permitted for freestanding signs.
      2.   The display of more than three (3) flags shall be debited against
the total freestanding signage area permitted.
   E.   Warning and restrictive signs, such as "No Trespassing" and "No
Hunting" signs placed upon private property by the owner, not to exceed one (1)
square foot in area. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-8-6: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
Temporary signs are exempt from permit requirements unless otherwise specified,
but shall otherwise conform to the requirements of this chapter and all other
applicable zoning and building code standards:
   A.   On Premises Temporary Signs:
      1.   Signs specified in M.S. Ch. 211B.045 are allowed in all districts.
      2.   Signs in the MX-1, MX-2, B-1, B-2, I-1, I-2, or PI districts:
         a.   Each property may have one (1) temporary sign with the issuance
of a temporary sign permit.
         (1)   Each property may have one (1) temporary sign permit at any
given time.
         (2)   Permits for temporary signs may be issued a maximum of six (6)
times within a twelve (12)-month period for a maximum of fourteen (14) days per
permit.
            (a)   Permits shall not be issued for consecutive fourteen (14)-day
periods. There shall be a period of at least one (1) week between the
expiration of one permit and the beginning of another.
            (b)   Businesses only open to customers on an intermittent basis
may assign the fourteen (14)-day permit to the days they are actually open to
customers.
         (3)   Permits for searchlight signs may be issued a maximum of three
(3) times per year for a maximum of three (3) days per permit.
         b.   Portable changeable copy signs are prohibited in the MX-
1 District.
         c.   Temporary signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in
area or the maximum height of a permanent freestanding ground sign in the given
district.
         d.   Temporary signs shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from
any property line and shall not encroach upon any right of way, easement, or
sight triangle.
      3.   Noncommercial signs in the A-1, A-2, RR, R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-
4 districts:
         a.   Each lot may contain one noncommercial sign, subject to the
following:
         (1)   Such signs may not exceed six (6) square feet in area or four
(4) feet in height.
         (2)   Such signs shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from any
property line and shall not be located within the twenty-five (25)-foot sight
triangle of an intersection.
         (3)   Illumination: Such signs shall not be illuminated.
      4.   Properties for sale or lease:
         a.   In the A-1 and A-2 districts, each property shall be allowed one
sign per frontage on a public street limited to thirty-two (32) square feet and
six (6) feet in height.
         b.   In the RR, R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-3 districts, each property shall
be allowed one sign per site.
         (1)   Sites with multiple frontages along a public right-of-way will
be allowed one additional sign per right-of-way frontage provided that the
frontage faces another commercial or industrial use or a collector, minor
arterial, or principal arterial road as identified in the comprehensive plan.
         (2)   Each sign is limited to eight (8) square feet and eight (8) feet
in height.
         c.   Institutional uses or residential subdivisions containing five
(5) or more lots are allowed one sign per frontage on a public street of the
subdivision.
         (1)   Each sign is limited to thirty-two (32) square feet and six (6)
feet in height.
         (2)   These signs shall be removed once ninety percent (90%) of the
lots are sold.
         (3)   These signs shall be located on private property and shall not
be located within any sight triangle.
         (4)   Such signs, if illuminated, shall use only indirect light with
the light source fully diffused and aimed toward the ground.
         d.   In the MX-1, MX-2, B-1, B-2, I-1, and I-2 districts, each
property shall be allowed one sign per frontage on a public street limited to
thirty- two (32) square feet in area and six (6) feet in height.
   B.   Sidewalk Signs: Sidewalk signs are allowed in the MX-1 District,
subject to the following standards:
      1.   Signs shall be limited to two feet (2') in width and three and one-
half feet (3.5') in height, including support members.
      2.   Signs shall not limit the normal pedestrian use of the sidewalk, and
a minimum passable contiguous space of three feet (3') shall be maintained at
all times.
      3.   One sign is permitted for each building adjacent to the public
right- of-way, unless multiple businesses within one building allow separate
business signs to be spaced no closer than thirty (30) feet from another
sidewalk sign.
      4.   A business or building with two (2) right-of-way frontages may
display a sidewalk sign on either frontage.
      5.   All signs must be removed from the sidewalk at the end of each
business day.
      6.   No sidewalk sign shall be lighted by attached external or individual
internal lights.
   C.   Off-Premises Temporary Signs subject to the following:
      1.   These signs are limited to four (4) square feet in size and three
(3) feet in height.
      2.   These signs are allowed to be displayed from 4:30 P.M. on Thursdays
to 8:00 A.M. on Mondays.
      3.   Placement:
         a.   These signs shall not be placed farther than six (6) blocks or a
one and one-half (1.5) mile radius, whichever is greater, from the subject
property.
         b.   These signs shall be set back at least five (5) feet from the
street surface and shall not be located within the twenty-five (25)-foot sight
triangle of an intersection.
      4.   Number And Spacing:
         a.   These signs are limited to two (2) signs per property for sale or
lease per intersection.
         b.   These signs shall not be located closer than one block from
another sign containing information about the same property for sale or lease
except that these signs may be located on the opposite corners of the same
intersection.
      5.   These signs shall conform to all other applicable zoning and
building code standards. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-8-7: DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
The following signs are allowed by specific zoning district subject to the site
and building standards of the applicable district:
   A.   Signs Allowed By Permit In Agricultural Districts:
      1.   Two (2) signs per farm.
      2.   Each sign is limited to thirty-two (32) square feet.
   B.   Signs Allowed By Permit In Residential Districts:
      1.   Residential subdivisions having five (5) or more lots are allowed up
to two (2) freestanding monument signs per principal entrance to the
subdivision.
         a.   Each sign is limited to thirty-two (32) square feet and six (6)
feet in height.
         b.   These signs shall be located on private property and shall not be
located within any sight triangle.
         c.   Such signs, if illuminated, shall use only indirect light with
the light source fully diffused and aimed toward the ground.
      2.   Multi-unit buildings are allowed one freestanding monument sign per
site. Sites with multiple frontages along a public right-of-way will be allowed
one additional sign per right-of-way frontage provided that the frontage faces
a nonresidential use or a collector or arterial road as identified in the
comprehensive plan.
         a.   Each sign is limited to thirty-two (32) square feet and six (6)
feet in height.
         b.   These signs shall have a base made of decorative materials
compatible with the exterior materials of the principal structure on site. At a
minimum, the base width dimension shall be larger than fifty percent (50%) of
the greatest width of the sign.
         c.   These signs shall be located on private property and shall not be
located within any sight triangle.
         d.   Such signs, if illuminated, shall use only indirect light with
the light source fully diffused and aimed toward the ground.
      3.   Public and institutional uses may have signs subject to the
standards in subsection E below of this section.
   C.   Signs Allowed By Permit In MX-1, MX-2, And B-1 Districts: Signs should
be architecturally compatible with the style, composition, materials, colors
and details of the building which it identifies while differing from signs on
surrounding sites and providing a unique identity.
      1.   MX-1 and B-1 districts as follows:
         a.   Wall Signs:
         (1)   Permanent wall signs shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of
the total area of the wall on which the signs are affixed.
         (2)   Wall signage may be affixed to windows but shall not exceed
thirty percent (30%) of the window on which it is placed and is counted toward
the overall fifteen percent (15%) maximum wall signage.
         (3)   Wall signs may be located on any side of a commercial building
that faces another commercial or industrial use, a collector, minor arterial,
or principal arterial road as identified in the comprehensive plan, or a
parking area.
         (4)   Signage placed on a wall facing a parking area and abutting a
residential use shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the total area of the
wall on which it is placed and shall not be illuminated past 9:00 P.M. nor
before 6:00 A.M.
         (5)   All permanent wall signs shall be individual channel letters
mounted flush with the building or on a raceway. Channel letters shall have a
minimum depth of at least three (3) inches.
         (6)   Box or panel signs are prohibited.
         (7)   Wall signs constructed on structures with more than one sign
shall be designed according to an approved sign concept plan in which all signs
have complementary designs, similar shapes and sign areas. Consideration may be
made by PUD to permit variation in size and design of signs for major tenants
or anchor businesses in larger complexes.
         b.   Projecting Signs:
         (1)   In the MX-1 District only, properties may have a sign that
projects from the side of the building in addition to the maximum fifteen
percent (15%) wall sign standard.
         (2)   This sign may not exceed twelve (12) square feet in size or
three (3) feet in width.
         (3)   The maximum distance between sign and building face is one (1)
foot; however, at no time shall any projecting sign encroach the public right-
of-way.
         (4)   No portion of a projecting sign may extend beyond the second
floor of the building.
         (5)   No less than seven and one-half feet (7.5') of clearance shall
be provided between the sidewalk elevation and the lowest point of the
projecting sign.
         (6)   Signs shall not block or diminish design details, windows, or
cornices of the building upon which they are placed.
         c.   Freestanding Signs:
         (1)   One permanent freestanding sign is allowed per site.
         (2)   Sites with multiple frontages along a public right-of-way will
be allowed one additional sign per right-of-way frontage provided that the
frontage faces another commercial or industrial use or a collector, minor
arterial, or principal arterial road as identified in the comprehensive plan.
         (3)   Each sign is limited to forty (40) square feet and ten (10) feet
in height.
         (4)   Such signs, if illuminated, shall use only indirect light with
the light source fully diffused and aimed toward the ground.
         (5)   All permanent freestanding signs shall have a base made of
decorative materials compatible with the exterior materials of the principal
structure on site. At a minimum, the base width dimension shall be larger than
fifty percent (50%) of the greatest width of the sign.
         d.   Changeable Copy Signs:
         (1)   One changeable copy sign (but not including dynamic signs) shall
be allowed per site provided that the area of the sign does not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the allowable sign area or fifty (50) square feet, whichever
is less, for a freestanding or wall sign.
         (2)   On properties used for automobile fuel stations in the B-
1 District, an area not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet within a
freestanding sign shall be allowed for continuous display (no flashing,
scrolling or other animation) of electronic or non-electronic changeable copy
in accordance with Minn. Stat. § 239.751.
         e.   Dynamic Signs in the MX-1 District in accordance with section
11-8-8.
      2.   MX-2 District as follows:
         a.   Wall Signs:
         (1)   Permanent wall signs shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of
the total area of the wall on which the signs are affixed.
         (2)   Wall signs may be affixed to windows but shall not exceed thirty
percent (30%) of the window on which it is placed and is counted toward the
overall twenty percent (20%) maximum wall signage.
         (3)   Wall signs may be located on any side of a commercial building
that faces another commercial or industrial use or a collector, minor arterial,
or principal arterial road as identified in the comprehensive plan.
         (4)   All permanent wall signs shall be individual channel letters
mounted flush with the building or on a raceway. Channel letters shall have a
minimum depth of at least three (3) inches.
         (5)   Box or panel signs are prohibited.
         (6)   Wall signs constructed on structures with more than one sign
shall be designed according to an approved sign concept plan in which all signs
have complementary designs, similar shapes and sign areas. Consideration may be
made by PUD to permit variation in size and design of signs for major tenants
or anchor businesses in larger complexes.
         b.   Freestanding Signs:
         (1)   One (1) permanent freestanding sign is allowed per site.
         (2)   Sites with multiple frontages along a public right-of-way will
be allowed one additional sign per right-of-way frontage provided that the
frontage faces another commercial or industrial use or a collector, minor
arterial, or principal arterial road as identified in the comprehensive plan.
         (3)   Each sign is limited to one hundred (100) square feet and twenty
(20) feet in height.
         (4)   Such signs, if illuminated, shall use only indirect light with
the light source fully diffused and aimed toward the ground.
         (5)   All permanent freestanding signs shall have a base made of
decorative materials compatible with the exterior materials of the principal
structure on site. At a minimum, the base width dimension shall be larger than
fifty percent (50%) of the greatest width of the sign.
         (6)   Common Freestanding Sign Bonus:
            (a)   The city may approve up to a twenty-five percent (25%) size
bonus for adjoining properties with a common lot line that construct a common
freestanding ground sign.
            (b)   No property shall be part of more than one common
freestanding sign bonus, and the sign bonus is limited to one twenty-five
percent (25%) increase regardless of the number of participating properties.
            (c)   Properties eligible to participate in the common freestanding
sign bonus must directly adjoin the site on which the common freestanding sign
is constructed.
            (d)   The sign shall conform to all applicable performance
standards for the zoning district in which it is located, except that the size
of the sign may be up to one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the maximum
permanent freestanding ground sign size standard.
            (e)   The bonus sign area shall not increase the sign height.
            (f)   Should the sign include a dynamic sign, the dynamic portion
of the sign shall not exceed thirty-five (35) square feet, regardless of the
total area of the sign.
            (g)   All parties to the common freestanding sign shall enter into
an agreement addressing construction, maintenance and repair responsibilities,
and trespass rights. This agreement shall be filed with the Dakota County
recorder against the title of all properties involved. Amendment or
cancellation of the agreement shall be allowed only upon written approval by
the community development director or their designee.
         (7)   In addition to other freestanding signs allowed by this chapter,
one freestanding sign shall be allowed per subdivision or development:
            (a)   This sign shall be limited to one hundred (100) square feet
and ten (10) feet in height.
            (b)   This sign shall only be permitted on property within the
subdivision or development which is situated on a principal or minor arterial
road as identified in the comprehensive plan.
            (c)   Furthermore, this sign shall not be situated closer than one
hundred (100) feet to any other permitted freestanding sign.
         c.   Changeable Copy Signs:
         (1)   One changeable copy sign (but not including dynamic signs) shall
be allowed per site provided that the area of the sign does not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the allowable sign area or fifty (50) square feet, whichever
is less, for a freestanding or wall sign.
         (2)   On properties used for automobile fuel stations, an area not to
exceed sixteen (16) square feet within a freestanding sign shall be allowed for
continuous display (no flashing, scrolling or other animation) of electronic or
non-electronic changeable copy in accordance with Minn. Stat. § 239.751.
         d.   Dynamic signs in accordance with section
11-8-8.
      3.   Marquee Signs: Movie theaters are allowed chasing and running lights
on marquees subject to the requirements for wall signs in commercial districts
and the following standards:
         a.   Running and chasing lights are only allowed in the MX-1 and B-
1 districts;
         b.   Signs with running and chasing lights are not permitted on walls
that are within two hundred fifty (250) feet of residential districts or uses
from which the sign is visible, and the lights shall not exceed an illumination
intensity of 0.5 lumens at the property line;
         c.   No signs with running and chasing lights are allowed in a front
yard setback;
         d.   Signs with running and chasing lights shall be a minimum of
twelve (12) feet above the adjacent grade elevation and street grade elevation;
         e.   The power of illumination of running and chasing lights shall be
limited to fifteen (15) watts per bulb;
         f.   Running and chasing lights shall not be located near
intersections nor within the sight triangle adjacent to an intersection;
         g.   Only permanent wall signs shall be allowed running and chasing
lights; and
         h.   Hours of illumination shall be limited to between the hours of
11:30 A.M. and 11:00 P.M.
   D.   Signs Allowed by Permit in the B-2, I-1, and I-2 districts:
      1.   Wall Signs:
         a.   Permanent wall signs shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the
total area of the wall on which the signs are affixed.
         b.   Wall signs may be located on any side of a commercial building
that faces another commercial or industrial use or a collector, minor arterial
or principal arterial road as identified in the comprehensive plan.
         c.   All permanent wall signs shall be individual channel letters
mounted flush with the building or on a raceway.
         d.   Box or panel signs are prohibited.
         e.   Wall signs constructed on structures with more than one sign
shall be designed according to an approved sign concept plan in which all signs
have complementary designs, similar shapes and sign areas. Consideration may be
made by PUD to permit variation in size and design of signs for major tenants
or anchor businesses in larger complexes.
         f.   In the B-2 and I-1 districts, the following standards shall
apply:
         (1)   Wall signs shall consist of permanent high quality materials
with finished edges.
         (2)   No wood signs shall be permitted.
         (3)   Where more than one wall sign is requested per building frontage
(i.e., a multi-tenant center), a uniform sign criteria shall be prescribed by
the building owner, subject to review and approval by the city. The sign
criteria shall, among other things, describe the uniform type of sign to be
allowed, limitations of placement on the building, the method of fastening, and
the procedure for tenant sign approval.
      2.   Freestanding Signs:
         a.   One permanent freestanding sign per site.
         b.   Sites with multiple frontages along a public right-of-way will be
allowed one additional sign per right-of-way frontage provided that the
frontage faces another commercial or industrial use or a collector, minor
arterial or principal arterial road as identified in the comprehensive plan.
         c.   Each sign is limited to one hundred (100) square feet and ten
(10) feet in height.
         d.   Such signs, if illuminated, shall use only indirect light with
the light source fully diffused and aimed toward the ground.
         e.   All permanent freestanding signs shall have a base made of
decorative materials compatible with the exterior materials of the principal
structure on site. At a minimum, the base width dimension shall be larger than
fifty percent (50%) of the greatest width of the sign.
         f.   In addition to other freestanding signs allowed by this chapter,
one freestanding sign shall be allowed per subdivision or development:
         (1)   This sign shall be limited to one hundred (100) square feet and
ten (10) feet in height.
         (2)   This sign shall only be permitted on property within the
subdivision or development which is situated on a principal or minor arterial
road as identified in the comprehensive plan.
         (3)   Furthermore, this sign shall not be situated closer than one
hundred (100) feet to any other permitted freestanding sign.
         g.   In the B-2 and I-1 districts, any freestanding ground monument
signs shall be appropriately landscaped and subject to the same requirements
for all landscaping on the property.
   E.   Signs Allowed by Permit in the PI District and for Public and
Institutional Uses in Residential Districts:
      1.   Wall Signs:
         a.   Permanent wall signs shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of
the total area of the wall on which the signs are affixed.
         b.   Wall signage may be affixed to windows but shall not exceed
thirty percent (30%) of the window on which it is placed and is counted toward
the overall fifteen percent (15%) maximum wall signage.
         c.   Wall signs may be located on any side of a commercial building
that faces another commercial or industrial use, a collector, minor arterial,
or principal arterial road as identified in the comprehensive plan, or a
parking area.
         d.   All permanent wall signs shall be individual channel letters
mounted flush with the building or on a raceway. Channel letters shall have a
minimum depth of at least three (3) inches.
         e.   Box or panel signs are prohibited.
         f.   Wall signs constructed on structures with more than one sign
shall be designed according to an approved sign concept plan in which all signs
have complementary designs, similar shapes and sign areas. Consideration may be
made by PUD to permit variation in size and design of signs for major tenants
or anchor businesses in larger complexes.
      2.   Freestanding Signs:
         a.   One freestanding monument sign per site.
         b.   Sites with multiple frontages along a public right-of-way will be
allowed one additional sign per right-of-way frontage provided that the
frontage faces another commercial or industrial use or collector or arterial
road as identified in the Comprehensive Plan.
         c.   Each sign is limited to fifty (50) square feet and six (6) feet
in height.
         d.   These signs shall be located on private property and shall not be
located within any sight triangle.
         e.   All permanent freestanding signs shall have a base made of
decorative materials compatible with the exterior materials of the principal
structure on site. At a minimum, the base width dimension shall be larger than
fifty percent (50%) of the greatest width of the sign.
      3.   Changeable Copy Signs:
         a.   One changeable copy sign (but not including dynamic signs) shall
be allowed per site provided that the area of the sign does not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the allowable sign area or fifty (50) square feet, whichever
is less, for a freestanding or wall sign.
         b.   On properties used for automobile fuel stations in the I-
1 District, an area not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet within a
freestanding sign shall be allowed for continuous display (no flashing,
scrolling or other animation) of electronic or non-electronic changeable copy
in accordance with Minn. Stat. § 239.751.
      4.   Dynamic signs in accordance with section
11-8-8. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-8-8: DYNAMIC SIGNS:
   A.   On-premise dynamic signs are allowed subject to the following
standards:
      1.   Districts Allowed:
         a.   Dynamic signs may be located on properties within the B-1 and MX-
2 Districts.
         b.   Dynamic signs are also permitted in the PI and MX-1 districts, so
long as the property has frontage along an arterial road or major collector as
designated in the Comprehensive Plan.
         c.   Dynamic signs may also be located on public and institutional
uses within a residential district, provided that the site:
         (1)   Has an approved conditional use permit (CUP);
         (2)   Is located on a designated arterial or major collector road; and
         (3)   Complies with all other sign standards.
      2.   Number Of Signs: Each site can have only one dynamic sign and that
sign can have only one dynamic display.
      3.   When located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a residential
use or zone, dynamic signs shall be oriented so that no portion of the sign
face is visible from the residential use or zoning district.
      4.   Mode: Dynamic signs shall only be allowed to operate in a static
mode. Animation, motion or video displays are prohibited. Any change from one
static display to another must be instantaneous and shall not include any
distracting effects, such as dissolving, spinning or fading. The images and
messages displayed must be complete in themselves, without continuation in
content to the next image or message or to any other sign.
      5.   Size Of Dynamic Display:
         a.   The dynamic display portion of any sign shall not exceed thirty
five percent (35%) of the total allowable area of the sign, except for the
Public and Institutional District and public and institutional uses within
residential districts where the maximum percentage shall be fifty percent
(50%). Within the MX-1 district, the dynamic portion of signs is thirty-five
percent (35%) or fourteen (14) square feet, whichever is less.
         b.   The remaining percentage of the allowable sign area cannot have
dynamic display capabilities even if it is not used.
      6.   Minimum Display Time: The minimum display time shall be thirty (30)
seconds.
      7.   Brightness: Dynamic signs shall not exceed a maximum illumination of
five thousand (5,000) nits during daylight hours and a maximum illumination of
five hundred (500) nits between dusk to dawn as measured from the sign's face
at maximum brightness. All dynamic sign applications shall include
certification from the sign's manufacturer that the sign has been preset to
conform to the luminance levels noted above and these settings are protected
from end users' manipulation by password protected software.
      8.   Color: The use of color shall not create distraction or a hazard to
the public health, safety or welfare.
      9.   Operation: Dynamic signs shall be equipped with a means to
immediately discontinue the display if it malfunctions. The owner of a dynamic
sign must immediately cease operation of their sign when notified by the city
that it fails to comply with the standards of this chapter. The dynamic sign
shall remain inoperable until such time that the owner demonstrates to the city
that the device is in satisfactory working condition and conforms to the
standards of this chapter. Appeals of the city's direction regarding the
operation of a dynamic sign shall follow the appeals process outlined in
section 11-9-7, "Appeals", of this title.
   B.   Application To Existing Signs: The dynamic sign standards shall apply
to all existing and future dynamic signs, unless otherwise determined by the
city that an existing sign qualifies as a nonconforming use under State statute
or this Code. Any existing dynamic sign that cannot meet the minimum text size
as required by the speed limit must use the largest size possible for one line
of copy to fit in the available display space. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
CHAPTER 9
DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES
SECTION:
11-9-1: Site Plan And Building Design Review
11-9-2: Zoning Code Amendment (Text Or Map)
11-9-3: Conditional Use Permit (CUP)
11-9-4: Interim Use Permit (IUP)
11-9-5: Variance
11-9-6: Planned Unit Development (PUD)
11-9-7: Appeals
11-9-8: Enforcement
11-9-1: SITE PLAN AND BUILDING DESIGN REVIEW:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish a formal site plan
review procedure for commercial, industrial, institutional, and multiple-unit
residential development projects and provide regulations pertaining to the
enforcement of site design standards consistent with the requirements of this
title and pursuant to Minnesota statutes § 15.99.
   B.   Exemptions: Unless otherwise specifically required in this title, the
following shall be exempt from the requirements for commission review. All
exemptions remain subject to the requirements of this title.
      1.   The erection or alteration of permitted agricultural structures,
when all other provisions of this title are met.
      2.   Single-unit and two-unit dwellings, when all other provisions of
this title are met.
      3.   Construction of or addition to an accessory structure not exceeding
fifty percent (50%) of the building footprint of the principal structure, when
all other provisions of this title are met.
      4.   Interior alterations of all structures that do not affect the
existing uses or intensity of use, when all other provisions of this title are
met.
      5.   Minor revisions or additions to existing principal structures,
provided the proposed modifications do not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the
floor area of said structure or ten thousand (10,000) square feet, whichever is
less and all other provisions of this title are met.
      6.   The erection or alteration of commercial or industrial structures or
accessory structures permitted in the B-2 District, when all other provisions
of this title are met.
   C.   Review Procedures: Applicants shall submit to the city a completed
official city application, the associated application fee set by council
resolution and all supportive or supplementary information required by this
section prior to any consideration for a site plan review. The city shall
process all site plan applications in conformance with all applicable city,
county, and state standards and requirements. The request shall be considered
as being officially submitted and complete when the applicant has complied with
all specified information requirements. In cases where an application is judged
to be incomplete, the applicant shall be notified, in writing, of what
information must be provided for the application to be deemed complete within
fifteen (15) business days of the date of submission.
   D.   Review Process:
      1.   Prior to filing a formal site plan application, applicants may
present a concept plan to the city. The Zoning Administrator shall have the
authority to refer said plan to the planning commission and/or city council for
discussion, review, and informal comment. Any opinions or comments provided to
the applicant regarding a concept site plan application are to be considered
advisory only and shall not constitute a binding decision on the request.
      2.   Subsequent to any concept plan review, an applicant may present a
formal site plan application to the city.
      3.   The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to require the
applicant to hold a neighborhood meeting to inform nearby property owners of
the request. If required, this meeting shall take place following the submittal
of the formal application to the city but before notices for the public hearing
are published.
      4.   The Zoning Administrator shall refer all formal site plan
applications to the planning commission. The commission shall hold a public
hearing to review the formal site plan application and act on said application
in accordance with subsection C above of this section or applicable state
statute.
   E.   Public Hearing:
      1.   Unless exempted by this section, no site plan shall be considered
until a public hearing has been held by the commission.
      2.   A notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing shall be
published in the city's official newspaper, at least ten (10) days prior to the
hearing.
      3.   Notices shall be mailed to each property owner within five hundred
(500) feet of the affected property, except when located in A-1, A-2, and RR
districts in which case notice shall be mailed to each property owner within
one-fourth (1/4) mile of the affected property. The city shall use its best
available records to determine the names and addresses of property owners to
receive notice.
      4.   Failure to give notice to individual property owners or defects in
the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings, provided a bona fide attempt
was made to comply with these provisions.
      5.   During the public hearing city staff shall present their findings
with regard to the site plan application.
   F.   Review Standards: The Zoning Administrator shall review each
application for site plan review for compliance with the performance standards
contained in the comprehensive plan, this title and other applicable city codes
and policies. These standards may include, but are not limited to, the
following:
      1.   Land use designations and zoning districts.
      2.   Access, parking and loading.
      3.   Exterior building materials.
      4.   Trash enclosure.
      5.   Landscaping and berming.
      6.   Signage.
      7.   Lighting.
      8.   Engineering, grading and drainage.
      9.   Traffic and pedestrian circulation.
      10.   Parks and open space.
   G.   Building Permit: No person, firm or corporation shall erect, alter,
construct, enlarge, repair, move, improve, convert, demolish, equip, use,
occupy, or maintain any building, structure, or portion thereof, within the
city of Rosemount until proper permits and/or a certificate of occupancy has
been issued by the protective inspections division of the city. All work for
which a permit has been issued must be completed in accordance with title 9,
"Building Regulations," of this code and applicable federal, state and county
laws, codes and regulations.
      1.   Except as provided for by this section, no building permit shall be
issued until a site plan has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of
this title and approved by the commission. Upon approval of the site plan by
the commission, the building official will be authorized to process a building
permit for the proposed project pursuant to adopted building and fire codes.
The site plan approval process does not imply compliance with the requirements
of said building and fire codes.
   H.   Plan Conformance: Development of the site shall conform to all site and
construction plans officially submitted to and approved by the city. Once
approved, no changes, modifications or alterations shall be made to any plan
detail, standard, or specification without prior submission of a plan
modification request.
   I.   Plan Modifications: Major amendments to an approved site plan may be
approved by the planning commission. The notification, public hearing, and
appeal procedure for such amendments shall be the same as those for the
original site plan review. Any other amendments may be made administratively
when the Zoning Administrator determines that review and approval by the
planning commission of a detailed site and building plan is unnecessary to meet
the purpose and intent of this section. The Zoning Administrator's decision
regarding classification of an amendment is final. When determining if an
amendment is major, the Zoning Administrator may consider their determination
on whether the amendment:
      1.   Substantially alters the location of buildings, parking areas or
vehicle access.
      2.   Increases the total gross floor area of all buildings by more than
five percent (5%) or increases the gross floor area of any individual building
by more than ten percent (10%).
      3.   Increases the number of stories of any building.
      4.   Decreases the amount of open space by more than five percent (5%) or
alters it in such a way as to change its original design or intended use.
      5.   Changes the exterior building materials or color of the building.
      6.   Creates noncompliance with any special condition attached to the
approval of the site plan or applicable provision of this title.
   J.   Term Of Approval: Unless otherwise specified, an approved site plan
shall become null and void one (1) year from the date of approval unless the
property owner or applicant has substantially commenced construction of any
building, structure, addition or alteration, or use requested as part of the
approved plan or unless a petition for a time extension has been granted by the
planning commission. All extension requests shall be submitted in writing to
the community development department at least thirty (30) days prior to
expiration of the site plan and shall state facts showing a good faith effort
to complete work permitted under the original approval.
   K.   Site Improvement Performance Agreement And Financial Guarantee:
Following the approval of a site plan required by this title and prior to
issuance of a building permit, the applicant, if deemed necessary by the
planning commission, shall guarantee to the city the completion of all
improvements as shown on the approved site plan and as required by the site
plan approval. This guarantee shall be made by means of a site performance
agreement and a financial guarantee as provided below.
      1.   The applicant shall execute the site performance agreement on forms
provided by the city. The agreement shall define the required work and reflect
the terms of this section as to the required guarantee of the performance of
the work by the applicant.
      2.   The required work includes, but is not limited to, private exterior
amenities such as landscaping, turf establishment, private driveways, parking
areas, curb and gutter, recreational facilities, wetland buffers, erosion
control, fences and screening, and other similar facilities. The required work
shall also include all aspects of the tree preservation plan, if applicable.
      3.   A financial guarantee shall be submitted with the executed site
performance agreement as provided herein:
         a.   Financial guarantees acceptable to the city include cash escrow,
an irrevocable letter of credit, or other financial instrument that provides
equivalent assurance to the city and that is approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
         b.   The term of the financial guarantee shall be for the life of the
site improvement performance agreement, and it shall be the applicant's
responsibility to ensure that a submitted financial guarantee shall continue in
full force and effect until the Zoning Administrator shall have approved and
accepted all of the work undertaken to be done and shall thereby have released
the guarantee or reduced the amount of the guarantee as provided in this
section.
         c.   When any instrument submitted as a financial guarantee contains
provision for an automatic expiration date, after which the instrument may not
be drawn upon, notwithstanding the status of the site performance agreement or
of the required work, it shall be the applicant's responsibility to notify the
city in writing, by certified mail, at least sixty (60) days in advance of the
expiration date of the intent either to renew or not to renew the instrument.
If the instrument is to be renewed, a written renewal shall be provided at
least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date. If the instrument is not
to be renewed, and has not been released by the Zoning Administrator, another
acceptable financial guarantee in the appropriate amount shall be submitted at
least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date. Upon receipt of an
acceptable substitute financial guarantee, the Zoning Administrator may release
the original guarantee.
         d.   The amount of the financial guarantee shall be established by the
Zoning Administrator based upon an itemized estimate of the cost of all
required work as provided by the applicant. A cash escrow or irrevocable letter
of credit shall be in the amount of one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of
the approved estimated cost. The amount of any other approved financial
instrument shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator.
         e.   At the option of the city the applicant may submit a separate
financial guarantee for that portion of the required work consisting solely of
landscaping improvements with another financial guarantee for all other
exterior amenities and improvements that comprise the work. All trees shall be
warrantied to be alive, of good quality, and disease free for twelve (12)
months from the time of planting. Any subsequent replacement shall be
warrantied for twelve (12) months from the time of planting.
      4.   The time allowed for completion of the required improvements shall
be set forth in the site performance agreement. This agreement and the
financial guarantee shall guarantee compensation for the required improvements
and provide for reimbursement to the city of the cost of enforcement measures.
As the applicant completes various portions of such required work, the Zoning
Administrator may release such portion of the financial guarantee as it is
attributable to such completed work. Landscaping improvements shall not be
deemed complete until the city has verified survivability of all required
plantings through one winter season, defined for the purposes of this section
as the period between October 31 and April 30.
      5.   The applicant shall notify the Zoning Administrator in writing when
all or part of the required improvements have been completed in accordance with
the approved plan and may be inspected. Upon receipt of such notice, the Zoning
Administrator shall be responsible for the inspection of the improvements to
determine that the work performed meets the standards of this title and any
conditions imposed by the planning commission and the standards for the
particular industry, profession or material used in the performance of the
work. Any required work failing to meet such standards shall not be deemed
complete and the applicant shall be notified in writing as to required
corrections. Upon determination that required work has been completed,
including the winter season survivability of landscape plantings, notice shall
be given to the applicant of the date of completion and action taken by the
Zoning Administrator to release, or to reduce the amount of, the financial
guarantee.  (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024; amd. Ord. 2025-02, 1-21-2025)
11-9-2: ZONING CODE AMENDMENT (TEXT OR MAP):
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to allow for additions or
revisions to the provisions of this title and changes in zoning district
boundaries.
   B.   Procedures:
      1.   Initiation: An amendment to this title may be initiated by the
council, commission, or by petition of an affected landowner.
      2.   Application:
         a.   Applications provided by the city shall be completed in writing
prior to any consideration of an amendment of this title.
         b.   Zoning amendment fees are established by resolution of the
council.
         c.   Applications shall not be formally accepted until all supportive
or supplementary information has been furnished by the applicant.
         d.   Applications for an amendment to the text of this title shall be
submitted by an affected property owner on forms provided by the city and shall
include the proposed text for the ordinance amendment in proper ordinance form.
         e.   Applications to amend the text of this title must be received by
the council, which will then forward the petition to the commission for public
hearing and recommendation.
      3.   The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to require the
applicant to hold a neighborhood meeting to inform nearby property owners of
the request. If required, this meeting shall take place following the submittal
of the formal application to the city but before notices for the public hearing
are published.
      4.   Commission Recommendation: An amendment not initiated by the
commission shall be referred to the commission for study and report and may not
be acted upon by the council until it has received the recommendation of the
commission on the proposed amendment or until sixty (60) days have elapsed from
the date of reference of the amendment without a report by the commission.
      5.   Public Hearing:
         a.   No amendment to this title shall be considered until a public
hearing has been held by the commission. When the amendment application is
complete, the city shall conduct a public hearing before the commission
according to the procedures specified in section
11-9-1 of this chapter.
      6.   Council Action: Amendments to this title require a majority vote of
all members of council. The adoption or amendment of any portion of a zoning
ordinance which changes all or part of the existing classification of a zoning
district from residential to either commercial or industrial requires a two-
thirds (2/3) majority vote of all members of the council.
      7.   Reapplication: No application for the same or substantially the same
amendment shall be made within six (6) months of the date of denial.
      8.   Generally: Notice requirement and procedures set forth in this
section in excess of those required by state law are directory. Failure to
comply with such procedures will not invalidate the proceedings. (Ord. 2024-04,
6-4-2024)
11-9-3: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT (CUP):
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of CUPs is to allow for those uses which are not
generally suitable within the zoning district, but which under some
circumstances may be suitable. The applicant for a CUP shall have the burden of
proof that the use is suitable and that the standards set forth in this chapter
have been met.
   B.   Application, Public Hearing, Notice, And Procedure: The application,
public hearing, notice and procedure requirements for CUPs shall be the same as
those identified in section 11-9-1 of this chapter. CUPs may be granted by
majority vote of the entire council. Specific submissions required to complete
an application for a CUP shall address all standards applicable to the proposed
use. The applicant shall provide information as required in the site plan
review.
   C.   Standards: The commission shall recommend a CUP and the council may
issue such CUP if it finds that such use at the proposed location:
      1.   Will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, or
general welfare of the neighborhood or the city.
      2.   Will be harmonious with the objectives of the comprehensive plan and
city code provisions.
      3.   Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as to be
compatible or similar in an architectural and landscape appearance with the
existing or intended character of the general vicinity and will not change the
essential character of that area, nor substantially diminish or impair property
values within the neighborhood.
      4.   Will be served adequately by existing (or those proposed in the
project) essential public facilities and services, including streets, police
and fire protection, drainage, structures, refuse disposal, water and sewer
systems and schools.
      5.   Will not involve uses, activities, processes, material equipment,
and conditions of operation that will be hazardous or detrimental to any
persons, property, or the general welfare because of excessive production of
traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare or odors.
      6.   Will have vehicular ingress and egress to the property which does
not create traffic congestion or interfere with traffic on surrounding public
streets.
      7.   Will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of a natural,
scenic, or historic feature of major importance and will comply with all local,
state, and federal environmental quality standards.
      8.   These standards apply in addition to specific conditions as may be
applied throughout this code.
   D.   Conditions: In reviewing applications for CUPs, the Commission and the
Council may attach whatever reasonable conditions they deem necessary to
mitigate anticipated adverse impacts associated with these uses, to protect the
value of other property within the district, and to achieve the goals and
objectives of the comprehensive plan and city code provisions. Such conditions
may include, but are not limited to, the following:
      1.   Controlling the number, area, bulk, height, density, intensity, and
location of such uses.
      2.   Regulating ingress and egress to the property and the proposed
structures thereon with particular reference to vehicle and pedestrian safety
and convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in case of fire or other
catastrophe.
      3.   Regulating off street parking and loading areas where required.
      4.   Specifying utilities with reference to location availability and
compatibility.
      5.   Requiring berming, fencing, screening, landscaping or other
facilities to protect nearby property.
      6.   Ensuring compatibility of appearance.
      7.   In determining such conditions, special consideration shall be given
to protecting immediately adjacent properties from objectionable views, noise,
traffic and other negative characteristics associated with such uses.
   E.   Revocation: Failure to comply with any condition set forth in a CUP, or
any other violation of city code provisions, shall also constitute sufficient
cause for the termination of the CUP by the council following a public hearing.
   F.   Expiration:
      1.   In any case where a conditional use has not been established within
one (1) year of the date on which the CUP was granted, the permit shall be null
and void unless a petition for extension is requested in writing and filed with
the Zoning Administrator at least thirty (30) days before the expiration of the
deadline. The extension request shall be sent to the City Council for review
and decision.
      2.   If the conditional use is discontinued for six (6) months, the CUP
shall be null and void.
   G.   Permittee: A CUP shall be issued for a particular use and not for a
particular person. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-9-4: INTERIM USE PERMIT (IUP):
   A.   Purpose. The purpose of an IUP is to permit a use which would not be
appropriate generally, but which may be allowed within a certain zoning
district with appropriate restrictions. An IUP is not intended to last
indefinitely, but is meant to have a specific end date for when the use will no
longer be allowed on the property.
   B.   Application, Public Hearing, Notice, And Procedure: The application,
public hearing, public notice and procedure requirements for interim use
permits shall be the same as those for amendments as provided in section 11-9-
2 above of this chapter, except that the permit shall be issued on the
affirmative vote of a majority of the entire council. Specific submissions
required to complete an application for an interim use permit shall be
specified for each type of interim use allowed.
   C.   Standards:
      1.   The interim use must be allowed in the zoning district where the
property is located.
      2.   The interim use must meet or exceed the performance standards set
forth in this title and other applicable city ordinances.
      3.   The interim use must comply with the specific standards for the use
identified in this title, and must comply with all conditions of approval which
shall be included in an IUP agreement.
   D.   Conditions: The city may attach conditions to approval of a permit to
mitigate anticipated adverse impacts associated with the use, to ensure
compliance with the standards of approval, to protect the value of other
property, and to achieve the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan.
   E.   Findings For Interim Use Permits:
      1.   The extent, location, and intensity of the use will be in
substantial compliance with the comprehensive plan.
      2.   The use will provide adequate ingress and egress to minimize traffic
congestion in the public streets.
      3.   The use will not be detrimental to the existing character of the
development in the immediate neighborhood or endanger the public health,
safety, and general welfare.
      4.   The use will not impede the normal and orderly development and
improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted in the district.
      5.   The use shall, in all other respects, conform to the applicable
regulations of the district in which it is located.
   F.   Termination: An IUP shall terminate on the happening of any of the
following events, whichever first occurs:
      1.   The date stated in the permit.
      2.   Upon violation of the condition(s) under which the permit was
issued.
      3.   Upon change in the city's zoning regulation which renders the use
nonconforming.
   G.   Modification Of Standards Or Conditions: The council, after public
hearing, may modify standards or conditions required for the IUP, when strict
application of such standards or conditions would unreasonably limit or prevent
otherwise lawful use of a property or an existing structure and would result in
exceptional undue hardship to the owner of such property or structure;
provided, that such modification will not impair the intent and purpose of such
standards or conditions and is consistent with reasonable enjoyment of adjacent
property. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-9-5: VARIANCE:
   A.   Purpose: A variance is a modification or variation of the provisions of
this zoning code as applied to a specific piece of property. A variance may be
granted when strict enforcement of the provisions of the zoning code would
cause practical difficulties to the property owner, and when it can be
demonstrated that such action will be in keeping with the spirit and intent of
the code.
   B.   Applications: Applications provided by the city must be completed in
writing prior to any consideration of variance petitions. Fees for variances
are established by resolution of the city council.
   C.   The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to require the
applicant to hold a neighborhood meeting to inform nearby property owners of
the request. If required, this meeting shall take place following the submittal
of the formal application to the city but before notices for the public hearing
are published.
   D.   Public Hearing: No amendment to this title shall be considered until a
public hearing has been held by the commission. When the amendment application
is complete, the city shall conduct a public hearing before the commission
according to the procedures specified in section
11-9-1 of this chapter.
   E.   Approval Or Denial: The board of appeals and adjustments shall either
approve or deny variances based on Minn. Stat. § 462.357, subdivision 6.
Conditions of approval that are directly related to and bear a rough
proportionality to the impact created by the variance may be attached to any
variance granted.
   F.   Generally: Notice of requirement and procedures that are set forth in
this section in excess of those required by state law are directory. Failure to
comply with such procedures will not invalidate the proceedings.
   G.   Findings: The board of appeals and adjustments must find as follows in
the granting of a variance from this title. Variances may be granted when the
applicant for the variance establishes that there are practical difficulties in
complying with the zoning ordinance. Economic considerations alone do not
constitute practical difficulties.
      1.   The variance request is in harmony with the purposes and intent of
the ordinance.
      2.   The variance is consistent with the comprehensive plan.
      3.   The property owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable
manner.
      4.   There are unique circumstances to the property which are not created
by the landowner.
      5.   Granting of the variance does not alter the essential character of
the locality.
   H.   Lapse And Reapplication:
      1.   A variance granted but not used shall become void one year after its
effective date.
      2.   No application for the same or substantially the same variance shall
be made within six (6) months of the date of denial. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-9-6: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD):
   A.   Application And Review Process:
      1.   All applications for a (PUD) shall include both a master development
plan and final site and building plan. Prior to submission of these formal
applications, an applicant may submit a concept plan for review and comment by
the planning commission and city council.
      2.   Upon receipt of a complete application for concept plan, master
development plan, or final site and building plan, the Zoning Administrator
shall set a date for a public hearing as outlined in section 11-9-1 of this
chapter for formal review of the PUD application.
         a.   The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to require the
applicant to hold a neighborhood meeting to inform nearby property owners of
the request. If required, this meeting shall take place following the submittal
of the formal application to the city but before notices for the public hearing
are published.
         b.   The applicant shall make a presentation of the applicable PUD
application at a public hearing before the commission. The commission shall
recommend approval, revision, reapplication, or denial of the applicable plan
to the council.
   B.   PUD Concept Plan:
      1.   In order to receive guidance in the design of a PUD prior to
submission of a formal application, an applicant may submit a concept plan for
review and comment by the planning commission and city council.
      2.   The comments of the planning commission and city council shall
address the consistency of the concept plan with this chapter. The comments of
the planning commission and city council shall be for guidance only and shall
not be considered binding upon the city regarding approval of the formal PUD
application when submitted.
      3.   Submission of a concept plan is optional but is highly recommended
for large PUDs.
   C.   PUD Master Development Plan And Rezoning:
      1.   Classification Of PUD District:
         a.   All PUD master development plan applications shall include a
proposed rezoning to a specific PUD district. The district shall be designated
by the letters "PUD" followed by the alphanumeric designation of the underlying
zoning district, which may be either the prior zoning classification or a new
classification.
         b.   For mixed use PUDs, the city council shall, whenever reasonably
practical, specify underlying zoning classifications for the various parts of
the PUD. When it is not reasonably practical to specify the underlying zoning
classification, the city council may rezone the district, or any part thereof,
to "PUD-mixed".
      2.   Approval of a rezoning to PUD and master development plan shall
occur simultaneously and be subject to the procedures outlined in sections
11-9-2 and
11-9-1 of this chapter. After rezoning of the property to PUD, nothing shall be
constructed on the PUD site except in conformance with the approved plans and
this chapter.
      3.   Regulations governing uses and structures in the PUD shall be the
same as those governing the underlying zoning district subject to the
following:
         a.   Regulations may be modified expressly by conditions imposed by
the planning commission and city council at the time of rezoning to PUD.
         b.   In the case of districts rezoned to PUD-mixed, the planning
commission and city council shall specify regulations applicable to uses and
structures in various parts of the district.
      4.   No building or other permits shall be issued for any work on
property included within a proposed or approved PUD nor shall any work occur
unless such work is in compliance with an approved PUD.
   D.   PUD Final Site And Building Plan:
      1.   Approval of a final site and building plan for the entire PUD or for
specific parts of the PUD shall be subject to the procedures outlined in
section
11-9-1 of this title.
      2.   Applicants may combine the final site and building plan review with
the master development plan review by submitting all information required for
both stages simultaneously.
      3.   Approval of a final site and building plan shall signify approval of
all plans necessary prior to application for a building permit subject to other
necessary approvals by the city including, but not limited to, platting.
      4.   Substantial Compliance: The final site and building plan shall be in
substantial compliance with the approved master development plan. Substantial
compliance shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator based on the
following standards:
         a.   Buildings, parking areas and roads are in substantially the same
location as previously approved.
         b.   The number of residential living units has not increased or
decreased by more than five percent (5%) from that approved in the master
development plan.
         c.   The floor area of nonresidential uses has not been increased by
more than five percent (5%) nor has the gross floor area of any individual
building been increased by more than ten percent (10%) from that approved in
the master development plan.
         d.   There has been no increase in the number of stories in any
building.
         e.   Open space has not been decreased or altered to change its
original design or intended use.
         f.   All special conditions required on the master development plan by
the city have been incorporated into the final site and building plan.
      5.   Term Of Approval: If an application has not been made for a final
site and building plan pursuant to the approved master development plan for all
or a part of the property within a PUD or construction on the property has not
been initiated in conformance with the approved site and building plan within
one (1) calendar year of the date on which the PUD rezoning became effective or
if within that period no extension of time has been granted, the city council
may rezone the property to the zoning classification at the time of the PUD
application or to a zoning classification consistent with the comprehensive
plan designation for the property. In the absence of a rezoning, the approved
master development plan and approved site and building plan, if applicable,
shall remain the legal control governing development of the property included
within the PUD.
   E.   Conditions Of Approval: The city may impose such conditions on approval
of a master development plan and rezoning or final site and building plan as
the council deems necessary to assure compliance with the purposes of this
section, including the requirement that the developer execute and record such
covenants and restrictions on the PUD property as the city deems necessary to
assure that the property is developed and used in accordance with the approved
plans.
   F.   Basis For Action: The planning commission and city council shall base
their recommendations and actions regarding the applicable PUD application on
consideration of the items listed below. The planning commission and city
council may attach such conditions to their actions as they shall determine
necessary to better accomplish the purposes of this chapter.
      1.   Compatibility of the proposed plan with this chapter and the goals
and policies of the comprehensive plan.
      2.   Effect of the proposed plan on the neighborhood in which it is to be
located.
      3.   Internal organization and adequacy of various uses or densities,
circulation and parking facilities, public facilities, recreation areas, open
spaces, screening and landscaping.
      4.   Consistency with the standards of section
11-9-1 of this chapter pertaining to site and building plan review.
      5.   Such other factors as the planning commission or city council deems
relevant.
   G.   Amendments:
      1.   Major amendments to an approved master development plan may be
approved by the city council after review by the planning commission. The
notification and public hearing procedure for such amendment shall be the same
as for approval of the original PUD.
      2.   Any other amendment may be made administratively where the Zoning
Administrator determines that review and approval by the planning commission
and city council of a detailed site and building plan is unnecessary to meet
the objectives of this chapter.
      3.   When determining if an amendment is major, the Zoning Administrator
shall base their determination on whether the amendment:
         a.   Substantially alters the location of buildings, parking areas or
roads.
         b.   Increases or decreases the number of residential dwelling units
by more than five percent (5%).
         c.   Increases the gross floor area of nonresidential buildings by
more than five percent (5%) or increases the gross floor area of any individual
building by more than ten percent (10%).
         d.   Increases the number of stories of any building.
         e.   Decreases the amount of open space by more than five percent (5%)
or alters it in such a way as to change its original design or intended use.
         f.   Creates noncompliance with any special condition attached to the
approval of the master development plan.
   H.   Exemptions: This chapter shall not apply to any PUD that has received
final approval by the city council prior to the effective date hereof unless
such is requested by the property owner and approved by the city council. (Ord.
2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-9-7: APPEALS:
   A.   Board of Appeals And Adjustments:
      1.   The Planning Commission shall act as the Board of Appeals and
Adjustments and shall have the power to hear and decide, subject to appeal to
the City Council, requests in the following cases:
         a.   Interpretation: Hearing appeals where it is alleged that there is
an error in a decision or judgment made by the Zoning Administrator in the
interpretation or enforcement of this title or in the interpretation of zoning
district boundaries.
         b.   Variances: Grant variances from literal ordinance requirements in
instances where strict enforcement would cause undue hardship because of
circumstances unique to the individual property under consideration.
      2.   Interpretations may be requested to be heard by the board of appeals
and adjustments at any regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission.
   B.   Appeals To City Council:
      1.   The city council shall have the power to hear and decide appeals
where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any fact,
procedure, or finding made by the board of appeals and adjustments.
      2.   Building permits shall not be issued after an appeal has been filed
with the Zoning Administrator. If permits have been issued before an appeal has
been filed, then the permits are suspended and construction shall cease until
the city council has made a final determination of the appeal.
      3.   Within ten (10) working days of the action of the board of appeals
and adjustments, the applicant, the Zoning Administrator, a member of the city
council, or any aggrieved person may appeal the decision to the city council.
The appeal must be filed with the Zoning Administrator.
      4.   The city council shall conduct a hearing within thirty (30) days
after the receipt of the appeal from the action of the board of appeals and
adjustments. As provided in section
11-9-5 of this chapter, the city council shall give due notice of the hearing.
The city council shall render a decision on the appeal without unreasonable
delay.
      5.   Any person may appear and testify at the hearing either in person or
by duly authorized agent or attorney.
      6.   A fee to be established by resolution of the city council shall be
paid to the planning department by the appellant at the time the notice of
appeal is filed. Such resolution may provide for waiver or refund of such fee
under specific circumstances. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
11-9-8: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provisions of this
title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished to the maximum extent authorized in Minn. Stat. § 412.231, as amended
from time to time. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
   B.   Enforcement: This title shall be enforced by the Zoning Administrator,
who is authorized to take any appropriate actions or proceedings against a
violator as provided by statute or ordinance. Such activities may include, but
not be limited to, the following:
      1.   Periodically inspect buildings, structures, or uses of land to
determine compliance with the terms of this title.
      2.   Notify, in writing, any person responsible for violating a provision
of this title, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action
necessary to correct it.
      3.   Order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or
structures; order removal of illegal buildings, structures, additions or
alterations; order discontinuance of illegal work being done; or take any other
action authorized by this title to ensure compliance with or to prevent
violation of its provisions, including cooperation with the city attorney in
the prosecution of complaints.
      4.   Seek immediate enforcement, without prior written notice, whenever
it is determined that an emergency exists in relation to the enforcement of a
provision of this title that requires immediate action to protect the health,
safety, or welfare of occupants of any structure, or the public. (Ord. 2024-04,
6-4-2024)
CHAPTER 10
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-10-1: General Definitions
11-10-2: Use Definitions
11-10-3: Alternative Energy Definitions
11-10-4: Floodplain Definitions
11-10-5: Shoreland Definitions
11-10-6: Mississippi River Corridor Critical Area (MRCCA) Definitions
11-10-7: Signage Definitions
11-10-8: Tree Preservation Definitions
11-10-1: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
               Contiguous to. For example, two (2) adjoining lots with a common property
ABUTTING:      line are considered to be abutting. Sites or properties separated by a
               public right of way shall not be considered abutting.
ACCESSORY      A subordinate building or structure on the same lot with a principal or
BUILDINGS:     main building.
ACCESSORY      A structure, with or without a roof and/or walls, detached from a
STRUCTURE:     principal building located on the same lot and customarily incidental and
               subordinate to the principal building.
               A use of land or a building or portion thereof customarily incidental and
ACCESSORY USE: subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and located on
               the same lot with the principal use.
ALLEY:         A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of access to
               abutting property.
               Any modification, additions, or change in construction or type of
ALTERATIONS:   occupancy; any enlargement of a building, either horizontally or
               vertically; or the moving of a structure from one location to another.
               A domestic animal is an animal or fowl that is typically accessory to
               occupancy in a principal dwelling such as a dog, cat, rabbit, or
ANIMAL,        potbellied pig, and is tame or domesticated. Domestic animals of a smaller
DOMESTIC:      nature include gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, mice, birds, snakes,
               ferrets, and other similar animals maintained as pets and not for breeding
               purposes.
               Non-domestic animals may consist of small caged animals and fowl such as
               falcons, pigeons, pheasants, quail, chickens, ducks, geese, and other
ANIMAL, NON-   small animals and fowl of this nature which are kept outside the dwelling
DOMESTIC:      and of such type and nature that state and national associations exist
               establishing norms for breeding, confining and rearing. Pygmy goats and
               miniature horses are not included.
ATTORNEY:      The city attorney of Rosemount, Minnesota, or his designated
               representative.
               The largest accessory building on a property, constructed before 1940, for
BARN:          the exclusive storage of agricultural products and/or farm animals and
               larger one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet, with a gabled or
               gambrel roof.
               A portion of a building located partly underground, having more than fifty
BASEMENT:      percent (50%) of its floor to ceiling height below the average grade of
               the adjoining ground. Split level, split entry and earth sheltered homes
               shall be construed to satisfy basement requirements.
               Any structure having a roof which may provide shelter or enclosure for
BUILDING:      persons, animals or chattel, and when said structure is divided by party
               walls without openings, each portion of such building so separated shall
               be deemed a separate building.
               The vertical distance from finished grade to the top of the highest roof
BUILDING       beams on a flat or shed roof, the deck level on a mansard roof, and the
HEIGHT:        average distance between the eaves and ridge level for gable, hip and
               gambrel roofs.
BUILDING LINE: That line measured across the width of the lot at the point where the main
               structure is placed in accordance with setback provisions.
BUILDING,      A building in which is conducted the main or primary use of the lot on
PRINCIPAL:     which it is located.
CERTIFIED      An engineer who is licensed by the Minnesota board of architecture,
ENGINEER:      engineering, land surveying, landscape architecture and interior design.
CITY:          The city of Rosemount, Dakota County, Minnesota.
CITY ENGINEER: The professional engineer employed by the city of Rosemount.
CLEAR CUTTING: The removal of an entire stand of trees.
               A facility located on private property that primarily functions to provide
COMMERCIAL     a facility for any type of social gathering that is available for use by
EVENT CENTER:  various groups for such activities as public assemblies, meetings, private
               meetings, parties, weddings, receptions and dances.
COMMISSION:    The Planning Commission of the City of Rosemount.
COMMISSIONER:  The Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources.
               The controlled biological decomposition and management of selected solid
COMPOSTING:    waste to produce an innocuous, humus-like material, which can be used as a
               soil conditioner.
               A compilation of policy statements, goals, standards and maps for guiding
COMPREHENSIVE  the physical, social and economic development of the city and including a
PLAN:          land use plan, a community facilities plan and a transportation plan which
               has been prepared and adopted by the City of Rosemount.
CONSTRUCTION   Waste building materials, packaging, asbestos and rubble resulting from
DEBRIS:        construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition of buildings and roads.
               Materials that are commonly used in the construction, repair, remodeling
CONSTRUCTION   or landscaping of a building or building site. Examples of such materials
MATERIALS:     include, but are not limited to, plywood, brick, concrete, tools, roofing
               materials, dumpsters, and landscaping items.
COUNCIL:       The city council of the city of Rosemount.
               A fence made of high quality, long lasting and ornamental materials
DECORATIVE     including finished aluminum, wrought iron, brick and the like, but not
FENCE:         including wood, unfinished metal, vinyl, PVC, chainlink, wire, barbed wire
               or like materials.
               The number of dwelling units per acre of land. Gross density is based on
               the total land area of the development site excluding existing public
DENSITY:       streets or highways. Net density is based on the total land area of the
               development site excluding wetlands, parks, existing public streets or
               highways, other land that will remain permanently undeveloped, but
               including newly platted streets.
DISTRICT:      An area of land for which there are uniform regulations governing the use
               of the buildings and premises.
EQUAL DEGREE   A method of determining the location of floodway boundaries so that the
OF             hydraulic capacity of floodplain lands on each side of a stream are
ENCROACHMENT:  calculating proportionate increases in flood stages.
               An individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage or
FAMILY:        adoption, or a group of not more than five (5) persons not so related,
               living together as a single housekeeping unit using common cooking and
               kitchen facilities.
               Any partition, structure or wall, or gate erected as a dividing marker,
FENCE:         barrier or enclosure and located along the boundary or within the required
               yard. All fences are subject to building permit review and approval.
FINISHED       The end result of a manufacturing process that is ready for utilization or
PRODUCT:       consumption by the ultimate consumer.
               The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the floors of a building or
FLOOR AREA:    dwelling unit, measured from the exterior walls, or from the centerline of
               party walls separating buildings, excluding basements.
GARAGE/YARD    The temporary display and sale of goods within the garage and/or driveway
SALE:          of a residence.
               For the purpose of computing required parking, gross floor area is the
GROSS FLOOR    floor area for the building excluding accessory garages, underground
AREA (GFA):    parking, areas not enclosed by exterior walls, mechanical rooms, patios,
               decks, restrooms, elevator shafts, or stairwells.
GROUP USABLE   Open space associated with a multiple-unit development that is not part of
OPEN SPACE:    a required yard, is relatively free of buildings and is available for
               recreational usage by the residents.
GUESTROOM:     A room or group of rooms occupied, arranged or designed for occupancy by
               one or more guests for compensation.
HOMEOWNERS'    A community association, other than a condominium association, which is
ASSOCIATION:   organized in a development in which individual owners share common
               interests in open space or facilities.
               A surface that allows very little or no penetration of water or moisture
               into the soil or ground. Examples include concrete, asphalt, and various
IMPERVIOUS     compacted materials including aggregate, limestone and recycled
SURFACE:       bituminous. Buildings, rooftops, patios and driveways and any other
               structure shall be included for the purpose of calculating maximum lot
               coverage. Exception: Decks will not be considered when calculating lot
               coverage percentage.
INTERIM USE:   A temporary use of property until a particular date, until the occurrence
               of a particular event, or until zoning regulations no longer permit it.
               Any vehicle, as defined in this section, which does not have lawfully
JUNKED         affixed or attached thereto an unexpired state registration or license
VEHICLE:       plate or plates, or the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled,
               partially dismantled, inoperative, abandoned or discarded.
               A separate parcel, tract, or area of land undivided by any public street
               or approved private road, which has been established by plat, metes and
               bounds subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, and which is
LOT:           occupied by or intended to be developed for and occupied by a principal
               building or group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized
               for a principal use and uses accessory thereto, including such open spaces
               and yards as are designed and arranged or required by this title for such
               building, use or development.
               The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side or rear lot
LOT AREA:      lines, but not including any area occupied by the waters of lakes or
               rivers or by street rights-of-way.
LOT, CORNER:   A lot which has at least two (2) contiguous sides abutting upon a street
               for their full length.
LOT COVERAGE:  The percent of the lot covered with structures, paved areas, and other
               impervious surfaces.
               The mean distance between the front and rear lot lines. In order to allow
               flexibility in determining lot depth for parcels of unusual configuration,
               lot depth can be measured by averaging side property lines or by measuring
LOT DEPTH:     a straight perpendicular line extending from the front line to the rear
               lot line and passing through the building zone, subject to determination
               by the community development director or the director's designee. In no
               case would the perpendicular line passing through the building zone be
               less than the minimum lot depth standard.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE:      The lines bounding a lot as herein described.
               Any boundary of a lot which is opposite the front lot line. If the rear
LOT LINE,      lot line is less than ten (10) feet in length, the rear lot line shall be
REAR:          a line ten (10) feet in length within the lot, connecting the side lot
               lines and parallel to the front lot line.
               A lot which is part of a subdivision or plat, an auditor's subdivision or
LOT OF RECORD: a registered land survey; or a parcel of land not so platted, for which a
               deed has been recorded in the Dakota County recorder's office prior to
               October 19, 1972.
LOT, THROUGH:  A lot where opposite lot lines abut two (2) parallel streets and which is
               not a corner lot.
LOT WIDTH:     The width measured along the front yard setback line.
MSW            Ash from combustion of mixed municipal solid waste (MSW) or refuse derived
INCINERATOR    fuel at a waste combustor.
ASH:
MEMORIAL PARK: A cemetery developed with gravesite monuments that are flush with the
               ground surface.
MIXED USE      Development of one tract of land that will include two (2) or more
DEVELOPMENTS:  complementary and integrated uses. All uses will be approved under the
               planned unit development (PUD) process.
MONTESSORI     A school for children where the fundamental aim is self-education.
SCHOOL:
NONCONFORMING  A building or use of land which does not conform to the regulations of the
USE:           district or zone in which it is situated.
               Solid waste generated from an industrial or manufacturing process; MSW
               incinerator ash; and solid waste generated from nonmanufacturing
NONHAZARDOUS   activities such as service and commercial establishments and chemical and
INDUSTRIAL     debris contaminated soil from spills; property cleanup, and development
SOLID WASTE:   activities. Nonhazardous industrial waste shall not include: office
               materials; restaurant and food preparation waste; discarded machinery;
               demolition waste; household waste; or hazardous waste.
               Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection,
               excavation, channel rectification, culvert, building, wire, fence,
               stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across, or
OBSTRUCTION:   projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory flood hazard area
               which may impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of water,
               either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such
               water, or that is placed where the flow of water might carry the same
               downstream to the damage of life or property.
OPEN SPACE:    Any unoccupied space open to the sky on the same lot with a building.
ORDINARY HIGH  A line delineating the highest water level which has been maintained for a
WATER LINE     sufficient period of time to leave evidence on the landscape. The ordinary
(OHWL):        high water mark is commonly that point where the natural vegetation
               changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial.
               An area within a zoning district that has an additional set of
               restrictions governing permitted uses with the intent of preserving
OVERLAY        natural amenities or resources; or, an area within a district or
DISTRICT:      subdistrict that permits a use or uses, based upon meeting specified
               criteria, which may not be allowed or permitted elsewhere in the district
               because of the absence of said criteria.
OVERSIZED      A recreation vehicle twenty-three (23) feet or more in length or six
RECREATION     thousand five hundred (6,500) pounds or more in empty weight.
VEHICLE:
PASSENGER      A motor vehicle which meets the criteria for "passenger" class
VEHICLE:       registration and license plate as established by the Minnesota department
               of public safety.
PERFORMANCE    A criterion established to control noise, odor, toxic or noxious matter,
STANDARD:      vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or glare or heat generated by or
               inherent in uses of land or buildings.
               An area to be planned, developed, operated and/or maintained as a single
PLANNED UNIT   entity and containing one or more land uses or building types, which
DEVELOPMENT:   allows variances from the strict interpretation of this title in order to
               achieve other community or design objectives.
PRINCIPAL USE  The main use to which the premises are devoted and the principal purpose
OR STRUCTURE:  for which the premises exist.
PRIVATE        Any real property within the city which is privately owned and which is
PROPERTY:      not "public property" as defined in this section.
               Any waters of the state which serve a beneficial public purpose, as
PROTECTED      defined in Minn. Stat. 1976 § 103G.005. However, no lake, pond or flowage
WATERS:        of less than ten (10) acres in size and no river or stream having a total
               drainage area less than two (2) square miles shall be regulated as
               protected waters for the purposes of shoreland management.
PUBLIC         An official public meeting for which notice has been published in the
HEARING:       official newspaper.
PUBLIC         Any street or highway and includes the entire width between the boundary
PROPERTY:      lines of every way publicly maintained for the purposes of vehicular
               travel, and shall also mean any other publicly owned property or facility.
PUBLICATION:   A notice placed in the official newspaper.
               A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a
REACH:         stream or river influenced by a natural or manmade obstruction. In an
               urban area the segment of a stream or river between two (2) consecutive
               bridge crossings would most typically constitute a reach.
               Any vehicle which meets the criteria for "recreation" class registration
               and license plate, DNR registration, or trailer registration used for
               conveyance of recreation vehicles as established by the Minnesota
RECREATION     department of public safety, Minnesota department of natural resources, or
VEHICLE:       this title, including, but not limited to: travel trailers, stock car
               trailers, campers, motor homes, tent trailers, vehicles converted to motor
               homes, boat trailers, snowmobiles, snowmobile trailers, boats, personal
               watercraft, all-terrain vehicles, and all-terrain vehicle trailers.
               The process of collecting and preparing recyclable materials and reusing
RECYCLING:     the materials in their original form or using them in manufacturing
               processes that do not cause the destruction of recyclable material in a
               manner that precludes further use.
               A street, alley or easement permanently established for the passage of
RIGHT OF WAY:  persons and vehicles including the traveled surface of lands adjacent that
               are formally dedicated to such usage.
               An outdoor area, not enclosed within a building, that may include allowed
               temporary structures, used for temporary display of merchandise for sale,
               which display is not the principal use of the property but is in
SALES LOT:     compliance with the requirements of the zoning district in which it is
               located. Examples of such use include seasonal display and sale of
               Christmas trees, gardening or nursery products, consumer fireworks, or
               other similar goods.
SEMIFINISHED   The end result of a manufacturing process that will become a raw material
PRODUCT:       for an establishment engaged in further manufacturing.
SETBACK:       The minimum horizontal distance between a lot line and a building line or
               use.
SHORE IMPACT   Lands located adjacent to and within one hundred (100) feet of the OHWL of
ZONE:          public water.
               Lands located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the OHWL of a lake, pond
               or flowage and within three hundred (300) feet of a river or stream or the
               landward extent of a floodway designated by ordinance and the zoning map
SHORELAND:     on such river or stream, whichever is greater. The practical limits of
               shorelands may be less than the statutory limits whenever the waters
               involved are bounded by topographic divides which extend landward from the
               OHWL for lesser distances.
               Garbage, refuse, sludge from a water supply treatment plant or air
               contaminant treatment facility, and other discarded waste materials and
               sludges, in solid, semisolid, liquid, or contained gaseous form, resulting
               from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations, and from
               community activities, but does not include hazardous waste; animal waste
               used as fertilizer; earthen fill, boulders, rock; concrete diamond
               grinding and saw slurry associated with the construction, improvement, or
SOLID WASTE:   repair of a road when deposited on the road project site in a manner that
               is in compliance with best management practices and rules of the pollution
               control agency; sewage sludge; solid or dissolved material in domestic
               sewage or other common pollutants in water resources, such as silt,
               dissolved or suspended solids in industrial wastewater effluents or
               discharges which are point sources subject to permits under section 402 of
               the federal water pollution control act, as amended, dissolved materials
               in irrigation return flows; or source, special nuclear, or byproduct
               material as defined by the atomic energy act of 1954, as amended.
SPECIAL WASTE: A nonhazardous industrial waste that is not mixed municipal solid waste
               and is managed as a separate waste stream.
SPENT BAUXITE: A nonhazardous industrial waste, consisting primarily of aluminum oxide,
               aluminum silicate and silica material.
STREET:        A public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to
               abutting property.
STREET LINE:   The legal line of demarcation between a street and abutting land.
STRUCTURE:     Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on
               the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground.
               The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereof is
USE:           designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained
               and shall include any manner of performance of such activity with respect
               to the performance standards of this title.
USE, PERMITTED A use which is permitted only if the PUD procedure is used and a plan is
BY PUD:        formally approved by the city.
USE, PERMITTED A use which is unconditionally permitted in the district under which it is
BY RIGHT:      listed.
               A government, nonprofit or quasi-public use or institution such as a
               church, library, public or private school, hospital or municipally owned
USE, PUBLIC OR or operated building, structure or land use for public purpose, or a use
INSTITUTIONAL: owned or operated by a nonprofit, religious or eleemosynary institution
               and providing educational, cultural, recreational, religious or similar
               types of public programs.
               Any vehicle which is self-propelled or designed to be pushed or pulled and
VEHICLE:       shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses, motor bikes,
               motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts,
               campers, trailers, boats, planes and gliders.
WETLAND        Any activity that will change or diminish the course, current, or cross
ALTERATION:    section of a public water.
               Swamps, marshes or drainage basins as defined in "U.S. Fish and Wildlife
WETLANDS:      Circular No. 39" (1971 edition). For the purposes of shoreland/wetland
               regulations, wetland types 3, 4 and 5, of at least two and one-half (2.5)
               acres in size, will be regulated.
               A required open space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed from
YARD OR        the ground upward, except as otherwise provided for herein. The
SETBACK:       measurement of a yard shall be construed as the minimum horizontal
               distance between the lot line and the building line.
               A yard extending along the full width of the front lot line between side
YARD, FRONT:   lot lines and extending from the abutting front street right-of-way line
               to the nearest line of the principal building. On a corner lot the
               narrowest street dimension shall be the front yard.
YARD, INTERIOR A side yard which is not adjacent to a street.
SIDE:
               A yard extending along the full width of the rear lot line between side
YARD, REAR:    lot lines and extending from the abutting rear property line to the
               nearest line of the principal building.
YARD, STREET   A side yard which is adjacent to a street.
SIDE:
ZONING         See definition of District. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
DISTRICT:
 
11-10-2: USE DEFINITIONS:
ACCESSORY      A tract of land primarily used for residential purposes on which crops and often
AGRICULTURE:   livestock are raised but not as a principal source of income.
ACCESSORY      An accessory living space which is located within or attached to an existing
DWELLING UNIT, residential dwelling. This living space should be accessible from within the principal
INTERNAL OR    structure.
ATTACHED:
ACCESSORY      The sale of goods or services located within the same building or on the same lot as
RETAIL:        the principal use and which supports or is cohesive with the principal use.
ADULT          Refer to definitions in section
ESTABLISHMENT: 3-8-2 of this code.
               The use of the land for agricultural purposes, including farming, dairying, pasturage,
               horticulture, storage, animal and poultry husbandry and accessory uses and buildings.
AGRICULTURE:   The care and keeping of agricultural animals is also subject to the regulations for the
               care and keeping of animals within the city contained in title 7, chapter 4 of this
               code.
AGRICULTURAL   A structure meeting the definition listed in Minn. Stat. § 326B.103, Subd.3.
BUILDING:
AGRICULTURAL   A booth or stall located on a farm from which farm products raised exclusively on that
PRODUCT STAND: farm are sold to the general public.
AGRICULTURE    The use of land in conjunction with research, testing, and marketing of agricultural
RESEARCH AND   activities. The uses may include those necessary accessory uses subordinate to the
TESTING        principal use including packing, treating or storing produce or raising livestock. The
FACILITY:      operation of the accessory uses may include laboratory, office and greenhouse
               activities subordinate to the research activity.
AM RADIO       That portion of any communication equipment located on the exterior or outside of any
ANTENNA:       structure used for continuous or standby transmission or reception of AM radio waves.
ANIMAL         Any structure or premises on which more than five (5) dogs or cats over six (6) months
BOARDING,      of age are temporarily or permanently boarded, including animal day care/spa
KENNEL, OR     facilities. Veterinary clinics providing boarding as part of medical services are not
DAYCARE        included in this use.
CENTER:
               A domestic animal is an animal or fowl that is typically accessory to occupancy in a
ANIMAL         principal dwelling such as a dog, cat, rabbit, or potbellied pig, and is tame or
KEEPING,       domesticated. Domestic animals of a smaller nature include gerbils, hamsters, guinea
DOMESTIC:      pigs, mice, birds, snakes, ferrets, and other similar animals maintained as pets and
               not for breeding purposes.
               Non-domestic animals may consist of small caged animals and fowl such as falcons,
ANIMAL         pigeons, pheasants, quail, chickens, ducks, geese, and other small animals and fowl of
KEEPING, NON-  this nature which are kept outside the dwelling and of such type and nature that state
DOMESTIC:      and national associations exist establishing norms for breeding, confining and rearing.
               Pygmy goats and miniature horses are not included.
               A clinic operated by a licensed veterinarian exclusively for the diagnosis, treatment,
ANIMAL/        correction, relief, or prevention of animal disease, deformity, defect, injury, or
VETERINAR Y    other physical or mental conditions; the performance of obstetrical procedures for
CLINIC OR      animals, including determination of pregnancy and correction of sterility or
HOSPITAL:      infertility; and the rendering of advice or recommendations with regard to any of the
               above. The facility may also provide boarding for animals as part of medical services.
ART STUDIO:    An establishment engaged in the creation or display of visual works of art.
               A residential facility licensed by the state which provides services on a regular
ASSISTED       basis, such as personal services, twenty-four (24)-hour supervision, social activities,
LIVING         and health-related care and services, to individuals who require the assistance, but
FACILITY:      who do not require the degree of care and treatment that a hospital or skilled nursing
               facility provides.
               A building, land area, or other premises used or intended to be used for the retail
AUTOMOBILE     dispensing or sale of vehicular fuels. Additional services provided may include, but
FUEL STATION:  are not limited to, the sale of automobile accessories, groceries, and household
               products. Major or minor auto repair is not included in this use.
               Repair garages and specialty establishments for motorcycles, passenger automobiles and
AUTOMOBILE     trucks of all sizes, such as machine, body and fender, auto glass, painting, radiator,
REPAIR, MAJOR: transmission, and vehicle upholstery services. May also include repair of machinery and
               equipment.
               Minor automotive servicing and replacement of parts, usually in the same day, for
AUTOMOBILE     passenger automobiles and/or motorcycles not in excess of seven thousand (7,000) pounds
REPAIR, MINOR: gross weight. Services include, but are not limited to, engine tune up, lubrication,
               and tire, muffler, brake, and electrical services but shall not include any operation
               specified under "automobile repair, major".
BAR:           An establishment or part of an establishment used primarily for the sale or dispensing
               of liquor for consumption on the premises.
BARGE          Any premises used for the loading, unloading, storage, and distribution of barge cargo.
TERMINAL:      This use includes barge loading facilities and barge slips, but does not include barge
               fleeting.
BEEKEEPING:    The keeping of bees in one or more colonies.
               A facility that produces more than twenty thousand (20,000) barrels of malt liquor in a
BREWERY:       calendar year as regulated by Minnesota Statutes, as may be amended, and may or may not
               include a brewer taproom.
BREWERY,       A facility that produces not more than three thousand five hundred (3,500) barrels of
MICRO:         malt liquor in a calendar year as regulated by Minnesota statutes, as may be amended,
               and may or may not include a brewer taproom.
BREWERY,       A facility that produces not more than twenty thousand (20,000) barrels of malt liquor
SMALL:         in a calendar year as regulated by Minnesota Statutes, as may be amended, and may or
               may not include a brewer taproom.
BREWPUB:       A restaurant with a microbrewery or microdistillery use operated on the same premises
               as the restaurant.
CAR WASH, FULL A car wash wherein operating functions are performed primarily by an operator owner
SERVICE:       through the use of washing, waxing, and drying equipment supplemented with manual
               detailing by the operator owner.
CAR WASH,
SELF-SERVICE   A car wash wherein the customer provides labor and where only limited self-propelled
OR DRIVE-      wash racks are provided.
THROUGH:
               A parcel of land intended for the burial of human dead. A marker or memorial is erected
CEMETERY:      at each gravesite for permanent remembrance of the deceased. Cemeteries may include
               columbariums, crematories, mausoleums, mortuaries, and chapels when operated in
               conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery.
CHICKEN        The keeping of chickens.
KEEPING:
COMBINED HEAT  A facility that generates electricity and useful thermal energy in a single, integrated
AND POWER      system. Also known as cogeneration, or cogen, plants.
PLANT:
COMMERCIAL     Any structure, land, or combination thereof designed or arranged for the breeding of
ANIMAL         animals for sale purposes.
BREEDING:
COMMERCIAL     An establishment that is primarily engaged in the production and/or wholesaling of
BAKERY:        baked goods, but where retail sales are prohibited.
COMMERCIAL     A group of unified commercial establishments located on a single land parcel and
CENTER:        consisting of not less than two (2) distinct business entities which share or jointly
               use parking facilities.
               A structure or designated area used for celebration, weddings, ceremonies, receptions,
COMMERCIAL     corporate functions, or similar activities for the benefit for someone other than the
EVENT CENTER:  property owner that takes place on an occasional basis. This does not include uses
               accessory to single-family uses, such as private parties, gatherings and similar
               activities.
COMMERCIAL     An establishment conducted within or without an enclosed building for the growth,
GREENHOUSE OR  display, and sale of trees, shrubs, flowers, and other plants for wholesale to
NURSERY:       retailers and jobbers. Exterior storage and accessory sales are prohibited.
COMMERCIAL     A use where horses and ponies owned or used by someone other than the property owner
HORSE STABLE:  are boarded in exchange for compensation.
               Indoor facilities operated as a business and which are open to the public for a fee
COMMERCIAL     that shall include, but are not limited to, billiard parlors, skating rinks, inflatable
RECREATION     domes or structures, indoor swimming pools, bowling alleys, movie theaters, arcades,
FACILITY,      health clubs, reception halls, and other similar businesses. Such businesses may also
INDOOR:        provide a snack bar, restaurant, retail sales of related items, and other support
               facilities.
COMMERCIAL     Outdoor facilities operated as a business and which are open to the public for a fee
RECREATION     that shall include, but are not limited to, golf courses, outdoor swimming pools,
FACILITY,      amusement parks, and other similar businesses. Such facility may also provide a snack
OUTDOOR:       bar, restaurant, retail sales of related items, and other support facilities.
COMMUNITY      A piece of land gardened or cultivated by a group of people individually or
GARDEN:        collectively.
COMPOSTING:    The controlled biological decomposition and management of selected solid waste to
               produce an innocuous, humuslike material, which can be used as a soil conditioner.
CONSTRUCTION   A lot or portion of a lot or parcel used to store and maintain construction equipment
CONTRACTOR     and other materials customarily required in the building trades by a construction
YARD:          contractor.
CONSTRUCTION   A facility that accepts and disposes of construction debris and industrial waste in
DEMOLITION     accordance with permits and plans approved by the State of Minnesota, Dakota County,
WASTE          and all other applicable local, State, and Federal laws.
FACILITY:
CONSTRUCTION-  A temporary use or structure related to construction activities on the same site. This
REL ATED       use may consist of construction-related trailers, mobile structures used for
TEMPORARY USE: construction offices and storage, batch plans, and temporary offices to replace
               permanent facilities being reconstructed.
CONTINUING     A residential facility or complex which provides a variety of senior living choices,
CARE SENIOR    from independent living to long-term care, with a goal of helping residents to age in
FACILITY:      place.
               A facility used primarily for the storage, management, processing, and transmission of
DATA CENTER:   digital data which houses computer or network equipment, systems, services, appliances,
               and other associated components related to digital data storage and operations.
               A state-licensed facility other than a private residence that provides for the care of
DAY CARE       children and adults during only part of a twenty-four (24)-hour day. This term includes
CENTER:        nursery schools, preschools, day care facilities, and other similar uses but excludes
               public and private schools or any facility offering care of individuals for a full
               twenty-four (24)-hour period.
DAY CARE,      A dwelling unit where a resident of the dwelling is providing care under Minnesota
GROUP FAMILY:  Rules 9502 for up to 14 children.
DISTILLERY:    A facility that produces distilled spirits as regulated by Minnesota Statutes, as may
               be amended.
DISTILLERY,    A facility that produces not more than forty thousand (40,000) proof gallons of
MICRO:         distilled spirits in a calendar year as regulated by Minnesota statutes, as may be
               amended.
DRIVE-THROUGH  An accessory use, structure, or portion of a principal structure where patrons may
FACILITY:      purchase products or receive service without having to leave their motor vehicle (and
               enter a building).
DWELLING,      A residential building consisting of five (5) or more independent dwelling units, but
APARTMENT:     sharing hallways and main entrances and exits.
DWELLING,      A building designed for one or more dwelling units as well as non-residential uses that
APARTMENT      are permitted in the zoning district, with all dwelling units sharing a joint entrance
MIXED USE:     from the outside.
DWELLING,      A single residential unit which is located within a larger residential structure
ATTACHED       containing three (3) or more units and which is separated from the adjoining dwelling
TOWNHOUSE OR   unit(s) by at least one common wall. Each unit shall have separate and individual
ROWHOUSE:      entrances. Each dwelling may be located on its own individual lot or on a common lot
               containing all of the attached units.
DWELLING,      A cluster of single-unit dwellings in the form of smaller houses, arranged around a
COURTYARD      shared courtyard or open space that is typically perpendicular to the street. The
COTTAGE:       shared courtyard takes the place of individual rear yards and becomes an important
               community-enhancing element of this housing type.
DWELLING,      A dwelling unit used jointly for both residential and commercial uses.
LIVE/WORK:
               A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode, is
               eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or,
DWELLING,      when erected on the site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which
MANUFACTURED   is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a
HOME:          permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities; except that the term
               herein includes any structure which meets all the requirements and with respect to
               which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the state of
               Minnesota and complies with the standards established under this title.
DWELLING,      A site-built or factory-built residential structure containing one dwelling unit on a
SINGLE-UNIT    single lot and which is not attached to any other dwelling unit by any means, including
DETACHED:      roof, wall, or floor.
DWELLING,      A dwelling which is joined to one other dwelling at one or more sides by a common wall
TWINHOME:      or walls, each unit on a separate lot, and each unit having at least two (2) walls
               exposed to the outdoors.
DWELLING, TWO- A single residential structure on a single lot which contains two (2), three (3), or
TO FOUR-UNIT:  four (4) separate dwelling units.
               A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more
DWELLING UNIT: persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and
               sanitation.
EDUCATIONAL    Educational services, excluding elementary and secondary schools, as part of a multi-
SERVICES:      tenant or mixed-use building, including arts and crafts, dance and music instruction
               and self-defense and similar individual or small group educational services.
               Underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water distribution systems;
               collection, communication, supply or disposal systems including poles, wires, mains,
               drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, water pumping or storage facilities, gas
ESSENTIAL      regulation stations, sewer lift or pumping facilities, traffic signals, hydrants,
SERVICE        electrical substations and switching stations, or other associated equipment and
FACILITY:      accessories in conjunction therewith, including associated equipment enclosure
               buildings (but not including any other buildings or commercial use antenna towers),
               which systems are owned and operated by public utilities or by municipal or other
               governmental agencies for the purpose of providing an essential service to the public.
               A winery operated by the owner of a Minnesota farm with a majority of the ingredients
FARM WINERY:   produced on the premises as regulated by Minnesota statutes, as may be amended, and may
               or may not include associated event spaces, retail, and restaurants without drive-
               through facilities.
               A building or part thereof used for human funeral services. Such building may contain
               space and facilities for:
               1.   Embalming and the performance of other services used in preparation of the dead
               for burial:
FUNERAL HOME:  2.   The performance of autopsies and other surgical procedures;
               3.   The storage of caskets, urns, and other related funeral supplies;
               4.   The storage of funeral vehicles;
               5.   Facilities for cremation; and
               6.   A funeral chapel or other area used for the performance of funeral ceremonies,
               mourning, and viewing of the deceased.
GENERAL        Any establishment within an enclosed building which is engaged in the repair of
REPAIR:        consumer goods such as furniture, jewelry, watches, clocks, radios, small electronics,
               and televisions. Repair of vehicles or industrial equipment is not included.
               A private building or structure constructed chiefly of glass, glasslike or translucent
GREENHOUSE:    material which is devoted to the protection or cultivation of flowers or other tender
               plants.
               An establishment which provides physical fitness facilities and services to the public
HEALTH AND     for a fee, including but not limited to; game courts, exercise equipment, exercise
ATHLETIC CLUB  areas, running tracks, swimming pools, physical fitness maintenance and weight control
FACILITY:      services and instructors, locker rooms, saunas and associated retail shop intended for
               members of the club only.
HOME           Any occupation or profession engaged in by the occupant of a residential dwelling unit,
OCCUPATION:    which is clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the premises and
               does not change the character of said premises.
HOSPITAL:      An establishment providing physical or mental health services, inpatient or overnight
               accommodations, and medical or surgical care of the sick or injured.
               A building containing eight (8) or more guestrooms in which lodging is provided with or
               without meals for compensation and which is open to transient or permanent guests or
HOTEL:         both, and where no provision is made for cooking in any guestroom, and in which ingress
               and egress to and from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised
               by a person in charge.
LANDSCAPE AND  A service business principally engaged in the decorative and functional alteration,
HORTICULTURAL  planting, and maintenance of grounds. This use may include limited outdoor storage of
SERVICE:       equipment and materials.
LONG-TERM OR   A facility that provides meals, lodging, and nursing care to two (2) or more
TRANSITIONAL   individuals due to illness, age, or infirmity. Long-term care facilities include
CARE FACILITY: skilled nursing facilities such as nursing homes, rest homes, boarding care homes,
               convalescent care, and other transitional care facilities.
               Any site, lot, field or tract of land upon which two (2) or more occupied manufactured
               homes are located and includes any building, structure, tent, vehicle or enclosure used
               or intended for use as part of the equipment of the manufactured home park. Also
               referred to in this title simply as "park".   
               1.   APPURTENANCE: The visible, functional, or ornamental objects accessory to and part
               of a building.
               2.   CLOSURE STATEMENT: A statement prepared by the park owner clearly stating the park
               is closing, addressing the availability, location, and potential costs of adequate
               replacement rental sites within a twenty-five (25)-mile radius of the manufactured home
               park that is closing and the probable relocation costs of the manufactured homes
               located in the park to other parks within the twenty- five (25)-mile radius.
               3.   DISPLACED RESIDENT: A resident of an owner-occupied manufactured home who rents a
               lot in a manufactured home park, including members of the resident's household, as of
               the date the park owner submits a closure statement to the city community development
               department.
               4.   LOT: An area within a manufactured home park, designed and used for the
               accommodation of a manufactured home.
               5.   PARK OWNER: The owner of a manufactured home park and any person acting on behalf
               of the owner in the operation or management of a manufactured home park.
               6.   PERSON: Any individual, corporation, firm, partnership, incorporated and
               unincorporated association or any other legal or commercial entity.
               7.   PURCHASER: The person buying the manufactured home park from the park owner. In
               the event that the park owner intends to retain ownership and convert the park to a
               different use, all references to the purchaser refer to the park owner.
               8.   RELOCATION COSTS: The reasonable cost of relocating a manufactured home from a
               manufactured home park within the city that is being closed or converted to another use
               to another manufactured home park within a twenty-five (25)-mile radius of the park, as
MANUFACTURED   follows:
HOME PARK:        a.   Preparation for Move: Reasonable costs incurred to prepare the eligible
               manufactured home for transportation to another site. This category includes crane
               services, tire and/or axle rental if needed, and the cost of repairs or modifications
               that are required in order to take down, move and set up the manufactured home.
                  b.   Transportation to Another Site: Reasonable costs incurred to transport the
               eligible manufactured home and any attached appurtenances, such as porches, decks,
               skirting and awnings, which were not acquired after notice of closure or conversion of
               the park to another manufactured home park within a twenty-five (25)-mile radius. This
               category also includes the cost of insuring the manufactured home while the home is in
               the process of being relocated, and the cost of obtaining moving permits provided that
               the park owner shall not be required to pay delinquent taxes on a manufactured home if
               necessary in order to obtain a moving permit. This category does not include the cost
               of moving personal property separate and distinct from the mobile home and separate and
               distinct from the appliances and appurtenances of the mobile home.
                  c.   Hookup at a New Location:
                     i.   The reasonable cost of connecting the eligible manufactured home to
               utilities at the relocation site, including crane services if needed. The park owner
               shall not be required to upgrade the electrical or plumbing systems of the manufactured
               home.
                     ii.   Relocation costs do not include the cost of any repairs or modifications to
               the manufactured home needed to bring the home into compliance with the state and
               federal manufactured home building standards for the year in which the home was
               constructed. Relocation costs also do not include the cost of any repairs or
               modifications to the home or appurtenances into compliance with the rules and
               regulations of the manufactured home park to which the manufactured home is to be
               relocated, if those rules and regulations are no more stringent than the rules and
               regulations of the park in which the home is located, and the resident was notified of
               noncompliance with the rules and regulations of the park in which it is located within
               sixty (60) days prior to delivery of the closure statement.
ANUFACTURING,  The production and sale on the premises of hand manufactured products involving only
CUSTOM:        the use of hand tools and domestic mechanical equipment.
               An establishment or use of land that manufactures, assembles, or fabricates using
               processes that generally create odor, noise, vibration, illumination or particulates
               that may impact surrounding properties. This category shall also include any use of
MANUFACTURING, land that needs large outdoor structures or storage that cannot be incorporated into
HEAVY:         the building. Examples include, but are not limited to the following: large-scale food
               and bottling operations; lumber, milling and planning facilities; grain milling; gas
               manufacture, aggregate, concrete, and asphalt plants; foundries, forge shops, and other
               intensive metal fabrication; and chemical manufacturing.
               An establishment or use of land for the assembly or processing of previously processed
               components or manufactured parts using processes that do not create significant amounts
               of noise, vibration, illumination, or particulates that may impact surrounding
MANUFACTURING, properties. Odors produced on-site shall not negatively affect other businesses or
LIGHT:         properties in the area. Examples include but are not limited to the following: food;
               pharmaceuticals; clothes; furniture (where wood is milled off-site); hardware; toys;
               light sheet metal products; mechanical components; printing; small vehicle assembly;
               and computer software.
MEDICAL OR     A facility used primarily for the provision of outpatient medical, dental,
DENTAL CLINIC: chiropractic, therapeutic, optometric or mental health care and treatment.
               The extraction of sand, gravel, rock or other such material from the land.
               1.   ASPHALT PLANT: A facility used to manufacture asphalt or other forms of coated
               road stone, sometimes known as blacktop. This facility allows the combination of a
               number of aggregates, sand, and filler, in the correct proportions, heated and finally
               coated with a binder. Increasingly, recycled asphalt or aggregate products (RAP) are
               used as part of the mix.
               2.   BATHYMETRIC OR HYDROGRAPHIC CHARTS: Charts that show lake bottom relief or terrain
               as contour lines (called depth contours or isobaths) and selected depths (soundings).
               3.   BERM: A level space, shelf, or raised barrier separating two (2) areas.
               4.   CLEAN FILL: As defined in Dakota County ordinance 110, section 2.00.
               5.   CONCRETE: A mixture of paste and aggregates (sand and rock). The paste, composed
               of cement and water, coats the surface of the fine (sand) and coarse aggregates (rocks)
               and binds them together into a rocklike mass known as concrete.
               6.   CONSTRUCTION AGGREGATES OR AGGREGATE: A broad category of coarse particulate
               material used in construction, including sand, gravel, crushed stone, slag, and
               recycled concrete.
               7.   CONVEYING (CONVEYOR): A common piece of mechanical handling equipment that moves
               materials from one location to another.
               8.   CRUSHING/CRUSHING PLANT: A machine or plant designed to reduce large rocks into
               smaller rocks or gravel.
               9.   DRY MINING: Mining and excavation that takes place above the ground water table.
               10.   EIS: The environmental impact statement as defined by the Minnesota environmental
               quality board rules.
               11.   FLOATING DREDGE (DREDGING): An activity of mining that is carried out underwater
               with a machine equipped to excavate material from underwater and bring it to shore
               where they can be processed into construction grade aggregates.
               12.   HAUL ROAD: An internal private road used to transport material.
               13.   HAUL ROUTE: An external public road used to transport material.
               14.   LARGE SCALE MINERAL EXTRACTION: Mineral extraction at a scale that would require
               a mandatory environmental impact statement as described in Minnesota Rules, part
               4410.4400 subpart 9 nonmetallic mineral mining.
               15.   MINERAL EXTRACTION ACCESSORY USE: Any use customarily incidental to a mineral
               extraction operation, including but not limited to: gravel crushing, gravel washing,
               minor vehicle and mining equipment maintenance, offices associated with the mining
               operation, stockpiling, storage of machinery used daily in the extraction area, and
               truck washing.
               16.   MINERAL EXTRACTION ANCILLARY USE: Any use and production facility that either
               uses significant quantities of aggregate resources or benefits from close proximity to
MINERAL        large scale mineral extraction operation but which also generates issues, nuisances,
EXTRACTION:    and adverse land use impacts beyond the scope of the operation itself.
               17.   MINING BUFFER/SETBACK: The distance a structure or activity must be from the edge
               of an EIS boundary line.
               18.   PORTABLE PROCESSING EQUIPMENT: Equipment designed on a skid or axle assembly that
               can move from point to point allowing for shorter travel times and reduced emissions.
               19.   PRECAST/CAST CONCRETE PRODUCTS: Products such as bridge beams or plank, concrete
               pipe or culverts that are cast at a facility and later transported to a specific
               construction site after a proper curing time has been achieved.
               20.   READY MIXED CONCRETE PLANT: A facility that manufactures specifically designed
               concrete for delivery to a customer's construction site in a freshly mixed or plastic
               unhardened state.
               21.   RECLAMATION/END USE: The process of creating useful landscapes that meet a
               variety of goals. It includes all aspects of this work, including material placement,
               stabilizing, capping, regrading, and placing cover soils, revegetation, and
               maintenance.
               22.   RECYCLED ASPHALT AND/OR AGGREGATE PRODUCTS (RAP): Left over or demolished
               concrete or asphalt products. These products are recycled (reproduced) and reused in
               production of new products or road base products used on construction sites.
               23.   SCREENING/SCREENING PLANT: A machine that takes granulated material and separates
               it into multiple grades by particle size.
               24.   SMALL SCALE MINERAL EXTRACTION: Mineral extraction at a scale less than would
               require a mandatory environmental impact statement as described in Minnesota Rules,
               part 4410.4400 subpart 9 nonmetallic mineral mining.
               25.   STAGING: Setting up of equipment or a truck fleet in preparation for a day's
               activity.
               26.   STOCKPILE: A pile or storage location for bulk materials, forming part of the
               bulk material handling process. Stockpiles are normally created by a stacking conveyor.
               27.   STRIPPING: Removing topsoil (black dirt), clay, timber, brush and waste aggregate
               products from the top of the mining deposit to expose the quality sand and gravel
               needed in the production of high-quality construction aggregates.
               28.   TON OF MATERIAL: A U.S. short ton (2,000 pounds) of material.
               29.   TOPSOIL: The upper outermost layer of soil, usually in the top two (2) to eight
               (8) inches. It has the highest concentration of organic matter and is where most of the
               earth's biological soil activity occurs.
               30.   TRUCK SCALE: A platform device that a truck will drive onto for weighing to
               ensure that the truck is of legal weight and/or dimension.
               31.   WASHING/WASH PLANT: A machine into which sand and gravel is conveyed, separated
               by size, washed, dewatered, and then sent to stockpiles for load out.
               32.   WET MINING: Mining and excavation area that will take place below the ground
               water table.
MOBILE FOOD    A food service operation as defined in section
UNIT:          3-10-2 of this code.
               A building or group of attached or detached buildings under common ownership containing
               eight (8) or more guest or sleeping rooms which is used or intended to be used
MOTEL:         primarily for the accommodation of transient automobile travelers. This term shall
               include buildings designated as auto courts, tourist courts, motor courts, motor hotels
               and similar names.
MUNICIPAL
SOCIAL,        An area of land, water or any building in which social and cultural events, teen
CULTURAL, OR   center, recreation or athletic sports are provided for public or semi-public use,
RECREATIONAL   whether temporary or permanent.
FACILITY:
NATURE
PRESERVE/      Any area or parcel of undeveloped land which remains in its natural state in perpetuity
CONSERV ATION  through deeds or other legal means.
AREA:
NONHAZARDOUS   A facility that accepts and land disposes of only nonhazardous industrial waste. The
INDUSTRIAL     facility may accept nonhazardous industrial liquid waste if such liquids are processed
WASTE          to ensure no free liquids are land disposed. A facility shall include containment cells
CONTAINMENT    and all other appurtenances necessary for its operation.
FACILITY:
               An establishment used primarily for conducting the predominantly administrative or
OFFICE:        clerical service affairs of a business, profession, service, industry or government, or
               like activity. This use may include ancillary services for office workers, such as a
               restaurant, coffee shop, newspaper or candy stand, and child care facilities.
OFF-SITE       Any establishment including but not limited to plumbing, installation, electrical, or
SERVICE        IT services where services are rendered off of the premises of the primary business
BUSINESS:      location.
OFF-STREET     A land surface or facility providing off-street vehicular parking spaces with drives
PARKING OR     and maneuvering lanes so as to provide access for entrance and exit. Parking facilities
LOADING        may include public garages, parking ramps, surface parking lots, and other similar
FACILITY:      uses.
OUTDOOR        A specified outdoor area for dining which is accessory to a principal restaurant or
DINING:        food service establishment use.
OUTDOOR        Sales or the arrangement of the products a business sells outside of the building the
DISPLAY OR     business occupies.
SALES:
OUTDOOR        Functioning structures such as conveyor belt systems, cooling towers, storage silos, or
INDUSTRIAL     similar that are accessory and integral to the principal use of the site.
EQUIPMENT:
OUTDOOR        The storage of personal or business property for a period greater than twenty-four (24)
STORAGE:       hours outside of an enclosed building.
               An area of land developed and maintained for active and/or passive recreational
PARK:          pursuits, including tot-lots, playgrounds, neighborhood parks, play fields, and special
               purpose areas.
PLACE OF       Building(s) or structure(s) which by design, construction, and/or adaptation are
WORSHIP:       primarily intended for the conducting of organized religious services and associated
               accessory uses such as daycares or nurseries.
PRODUCTION     Structures or land involved in the staging, creation, and/or production of motion
STUDIO:        pictures, radio or television shows, and recording and broadcast facilities.
               An establishment or use to which members of the general public are invited, induced, or
PUBLIC         permitted to attend. Public assembly uses may include but is not limited to, art
ASSEMBLY:      gallery, museum, club or lodge, governmental service building, auditorium, civic or
               community center, conference or convention center, or live performance facilities.
PUBLIC OR      A structure or use which provides services available to the public and managed by
GOVERNMENTAL   public entities including but not limited to libraries, city offices, auditoriums,
SERVICES:      civic centers, and public administration buildings.
PUBLIC PARKING A land surface or facility providing off-street vehicular parking spaces with drives
OR LOADING     and maneuvering lanes so as to provide access for entrance and exit. Parking facilities
FACILITY:      may include public garages, parking ramps, surface parking lots, and other similar
               uses.
PUBLIC         An indoor or outdoor public complex or destination designed and equipped for the
RECREATION     conduct of sports and leisure-time activities. This facility may include swimming
FACILITY:      pools, tennis courts, or other similar uses associated with a designated recreation
               area. This use includes related accessory buildings and structures.
RECREATIONAL   A private area or facility intended to serve the recreational needs of a specific
AMENITY,       residential population. Private recreational amenities include but are not limited to:
PRIVATE:       tennis courts, walking trails, basketball courts, or playground equipment.
               Any vehicle which meets the criteria for "recreation" class registration and license
               plate, DNR registration, or trailer registration used for conveyance of recreation
RECREATION     vehicles as established by the Minnesota department of public safety, Minnesota
VEHICLE:       department of natural resources, or this title, including, but not limited to: travel
               trailers, stock car trailers, campers, motor homes, tent trailers, vehicles converted
               to motor homes, boat trailers, snowmobiles, snowmobile trailers, boats, personal
               watercraft, all-terrain vehicles, and all-terrain vehicle trailers.
               An area where used, waste, discarded, or salvaged materials are bought, sold,
RECYCLING      exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned, packed, disassembled or handled, including, but not
OPERATION:     limited to, scrap iron, and other metals, paper, rags, bottles and lumber. Recycling
               operation shall not include businesses that use recycled materials to manufacture a
               finished product.
RESIDENTIAL    An in-home residential facility licensed by the state which provides primarily non-
CARE FACILITY: medical care to individuals who are in need of personal assistance to manage the
               activities of daily life or for the protection of the individual.
               An establishment where food and drink are prepared and served for human consumption,
RESTAURANT:    principally within the establishment or for take-out to be consumed off-premises.
               Alcohol sales may be permitted with this use. This use includes sit-down and fast
               casual establishments.
               A residential settlement established on or contiguous to the grounds of a religious
SACRED         institution's primary worship location primarily for the purpose of providing permanent
COMMUNITY:     housing for chronically homeless persons, extremely low-income persons, and designated
               volunteers.
SACRED
COMMUNITY      A mobile residential dwelling providing permanent housing within a sacred community.
MICRO UNIT:
SALES OFFICE,  The temporary use of a dwelling unit or other structure within a residential
TEMPORARY:     development project as a sales or rental office for the units within the same
               development.
SATELLITE      An apparatus capable of receiving communications from a transmitter or a transmitter
DISH:          relay located in a planetary orbit.
SCHOOL,        A building used for the purpose of public or private elementary education, including
ELEMENTARY:    special needs education, which meets all the requirements of compulsory education laws
               of the State of Minnesota, and not providing residential accommodations.
               A building used for the purpose of public or private middle school education as defined
SCHOOL,        in Minnesota State Statute 120A.05., including special needs education, which meets all
MIDDLE:        the requirements of compulsory education laws and of the State of Minnesota, and not
               providing residential accommodations.
SCHOOL, POST-  A building or area of land used for the purpose of public or private post-secondary
SECONDARY:     education, including but not limited to colleges, universities, and trade or business
               schools.
SCHOOL,        A building used for the purpose of public or private secondary education, including
SECONDARY:     special needs education, which meets all the requirements of compulsory education laws
               of the State of Minnesota, and not providing residential accommodations.
SCRAP OR       Any area, lot, land, parcel, building or structure, or part thereof used for the
SALVAGE YARD:  storage, collection, processing, purchase, sale, salvage, or disposal of scrap, waste,
               reclaimable material, or debris.
SELF-SERVICE   A building or group of buildings consisting of two (2) or more individual, self-
STORAGE        contained units leased to individuals, organizations, or businesses for self-service
FACILITY:      storage of personal property.
SHORT-TERM     A dwelling, or portion thereof, that is used for accommodations or lodging of guests
VACATION       paying a fee or other compensation for a period of less than thirty (30) consecutive
RENTAL:        days.
               A building, structure, or part thereof used for the display of merchandise or equipment
SHOWROOM:      and its sale to a customer where delivery of purchased merchandise is made directly to
               the ultimate consumer from a warehouse.
SMALL-SCALE    A solar collector or other device mounted on the ground or on a building, pole, or rack
SOLAR ENERGY   whose primary purpose is to harvest energy by transferring solar energy into another
GENERATION     form of energy.
SYSTEM:
SPECIALTY FOOD An establishment whose primary business is the sale of a single specialty type of food
OR BEVERAGE    or beverage that is not considered a complete meal (e.g. candy, coffee, ice cream) for
SHOP:          consumption on or off premises. The sale of other food, beverages, or merchandise is
               incidental to the sale of the specialty food or beverage.
SPENT BAUXITE  A facility that accepts and land disposes of only spent bauxite. A facility shall
DISPOSAL       include containment cells, leachate collection systems, monitoring systems and other
FACILITY:      appurtenances necessary for its operation.
STANDALONE
RETAIL         A detached structure fifty thousand (50,000) square feet or greater in gross floor area
BUSINESS,      where goods are sold.
LARGE:
STANDALONE
RETAIL         A detached structure under fifty thousand (50,000) square feet in gross floor area
BUSINESS,      where goods are sold.
SMALL:
STANDALONE
SERVICE        A detached structure where services are sold or provided.
BUSINESS:
STORAGE AND
SALE OF        The storage and sale of machinery and equipment, including but not limited to trailers,
MACHINERY AND  motorcycles, boats, and farm implements.
EQUIPMENT:
               A constructed or pre-fabricated in-ground or above-ground structure over twenty-four
SWIMMING POOL: (24) inches deep and containing more than five thousand (5,000) gallons of water
               designed or used for recreational purposes including swimming, diving and bathing.
TESTING OR     A facility involved in scientific research, investigation, testing, or experimentation,
RESEARCH       but not including manufacture or sale of products, except as incidental to the main
LABORATORY:    purpose of the laboratory.
TOBACCO OR     A retail establishment dedicated to the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, or
SMOKE SHOP:    associated smoking devices and accessories as its primary source of income.
               An outdoor area, not enclosed within a building, that may include allowed temporary
TRANSIENT      structures, used for temporary display of merchandise for sale, which display is not
MERCHANT SALES the principal use of the property but is in compliance with the requirements of the
LOT:           zoning district in which it is located. Examples of such use include seasonal display
               and sale of Christmas trees, gardening or nursery products, consumer fireworks, or
               other similar goods.
TRANSIT        Any structure, area, or transit facility that is primarily used as part of a transit
STATION:       system for the purpose of loading, unloading, or transferring passengers or
               accommodating the movement of passengers from one mode of transportation to another.
               Any building, premises or land in which or upon which a business, service or industry
               involving the maintenance, cleaning, servicing, storage or repair of commercial
TRUCK STOP:    vehicles is conducted. Primary activities include the dispensing of motor fuel and the
               sale of accessories or equipment for trucks and similar commercial vehicles but may
               also include overnight accommodations, restaurant facilities, a car wash and truck wash
               or other ancillary uses.
TRUCK          A building or area in which freight brought by truck is assembled and/or temporarily
TERMINAL:      stored for re-routing or re-shipment. The terminal facility may also include storage
               and/or parking areas for truck tractor and/or trailer units.
VEHICLE SALES  Any land or buildings, other than a street, used for the display, sale, or rental of
OR RENTAL:     new or used motor vehicles or trailers in operable condition. Leasing of vehicles is
               also included in this use.
WAREHOUSE AND  An establishment engaged in the storage and distribution of manufactured products,
DISTRIBUTION   supplies, and equipment.
FACILITY:
WASTE          A facility that treats solid waste after collection and before disposal. Processing
PROCESSING     includes, but is not limited to, reduction; storage; separation; exchange; resource
FACILITY:      recovery; physical, chemical, or biological modification; and transfer from one waste
               facility to another.
WASTE TRANSFER A facility in which collected solid waste from any source is temporarily stored,
STATION:       concentrated or deposited to await subsequent transportation.
WHOLESALE      An establishment primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial,
TRADE          commercial, institutional or professional business users; to other wholesalers; or
ESTABLISHMENT: acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to,
               individuals or companies.
WILDLIFE       An area involved in the preservation and production of both animal and plant life. This
RECREATION     use includes but is not limited to game farms and fish hatcheries. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-
AREA:          2024; amd. Ord. B-315, 9-17-2024)
 
11-10-3: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of alternative energy systems, the following definitions shall
apply:
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEM:            A ground source heat pump, wind or solar
                                      energy system.
                                      A solar energy system that provides
COMMUNITY SOLAR GARDEN OR SOLAR FARM: electric power to multiple users residing
                                      or located off-site from the location of
                                      the solar energy system.
                                      An active solar energy system that
PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM:                  converts solar energy directly into
                                      electricity.
                                      A device, structure or a part of a device
                                      or structure for which the primary
SOLAR COLLECTOR:                      purpose is to capture sunlight and
                                      transform it into thermal, mechanical,
                                      chemical, or electrical energy.
                                      Radiant energy received from the sun that
SOLAR ENERGY:                         can be collected in the form of heat or
                                      light by a solar collector.
                                      A device or structural design feature, a
                                      substantial purpose of which is to
                                      provide daylight for interior lighting or
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM:                  provide for the collection, storage and
                                      distribution of solar energy for space
                                      heating or cooling, electricity
                                      generation or water heating.
                                      A solar energy system whose primary
                                      purpose is to harvest energy by
                                      transferring solar energy into another
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, ACTIVE:          form of energy or transferring heat from
                                      a solar collector to another medium using
                                      mechanical, electrical, or chemical
                                      means.
                                      A solar energy system that is an integral
                                      part of a principal or accessory
                                      building, replacing or substituting for
                                      an architectural or structural component
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, BUILDING         of the building. Building integrated
INTEGRATED:                           systems include, but are not limited to,
                                      photovoltaic or hot water solar energy
                                      systems that are contained within or
                                      substitute for roofing materials,
                                      windows, skylights, awnings and shade
                                      devices.
                                      A photovoltaic solar energy system that
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, GRID INTERTIE:   is connected to an electric circuit
                                      served by an electric utility company.
                                      A freestanding solar system mounted
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, GROUND MOUNTED:  directly to the ground using a rack or
                                      pole rather than being mounted on a
                                      building.
                                      A photovoltaic solar energy system in
                                      which the circuits energized by the solar
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, OFF GRID:        energy system are not electrically
                                      connected in any way to electric circuits
                                      that are served by an electric utility
                                      company.
                                      A system that captures solar light or
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, PASSIVE:         heat without transforming it to another
                                      form of energy or transferring the energy
                                      via a heat exchanger.
                                      A solar energy system mounted directly or
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, ROOF MOUNTED:    abutting the roof of a principal or
                                      accessory building.
                                      A commercial facility that converts
                                      sunlight into electricity, whether by
                                      photovoltaic (PV), concentrating solar
SOLAR FARM:                           thermal devices (CST), or other
                                      conversion technology, for the principal
                                      purpose of wholesale sales of generated
                                      electricity.
                                      A system that includes a solar collector
                                      and a heat exchanger that heats or
SOLAR HOT WATER SYSTEM (Also THERMAL  preheats water for building heating
SYSTEM):                              systems or other hot water needs,
                                      including residential domestic hot water
                                      and hot water for commercial processes.
                                      A view of the sun from a specific point
                                      on a lot or building that is not obscured
                                      by any vegetation, building, or object
SOLAR RESOURCE:                       for a minimum of four hours between the
                                      hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and
                                      three o'clock (3:00) P.M. standard time
                                      on any day of the year. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-
                                      4-2024)
 
11-10-4: FLOODPLAIN DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of floodplain overlay district, the following definitions
shall apply:
             The flood having a one-percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
BASE FLOOD:  given year. "Base flood" is synonymous with the term "regional flood" used in
             Minnesota Rules, part 6120.5000.
BASE FLOOD   The elevation of the base flood, regional flood, or one-percent (1%) annual
ELEVATION    chance flood. The term "base flood elevation" is used in the flood insurance
(BFE):       study.
             Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not
DEVELOPMENT: limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading,
             paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of materials or equipment.
FARM FENCE:  An open type of fence of posts and horizontally run wire, further specified in
             Minn. Stat. § 344.02 Subd. 1(a - d).
FLOOD        The portion of the one-percent (1%) annual chance floodplain located outside of
FRINGE:      the floodway.
FLOOD        An official map of a community, on which the Federal Insurance Administrator has
INSURANCE    delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to
RATE MAP     the community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a Digital
(FIRM):      Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM).
FLOODPLAIN:  The beds, channel and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or watercourse, or
             other source which have been or hereafter may be inundated by the base flood.
             The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and those portions
FLOODWAY:    of the adjoining floodplain which must be reserved to carry or store the base
             flood discharge without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
             than one-half foot.
             A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent
MANUFACTURED chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when
HOME:        attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include
             the term "recreational vehicle."
             A vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is four hundred (400) square feet or
             less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, is designed to be self-
             propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and is designed primarily
RECREATIONAL not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
VEHICLE:     recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. Those vehicles not meeting this
             definition shall be considered a structure for the purposes of this title. For
             the purposes of this title, the term recreational vehicle is synonymous with the
             term "travel trailer/travel vehicle."
REGULATORY   An elevation no lower than one foot (1') above the elevation of the base flood
FLOOD        plus any increases in water surface elevation caused by encroachments on the
PROTECTION   floodplain that result from designation of a floodway. These increases in water
ELEVATION    surface elevations are typically identified in the Floodway Data Tables, found in
(RFPE):      the Flood Insurance Study.
             A roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally
STRUCTURE:   above ground, as well as a manufactured home. Recreational vehicles not
             considered travel ready, as detailed in Section 4.40, shall also be considered a
             nonconforming structure for the purposes of this title.
SUBSTANTIAL  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the cost of restoring the
DAMAGE:      structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent
             (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
             Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
             structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market
             value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement.
             This term includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage," regardless
             of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
SUBSTANTIAL  1.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of
IMPROVEMENT: state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
             identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum
             necessary to assure safe living conditions.
             2.   Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will
             not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." For
             the purpose of this title, "historic structure" is defined in 44 CFR § 59.1.
             (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
 
11-10-5: SHORELAND DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of the MRCCA overlay district, the following definitions shall
apply:
ACCESSORY      Any building or improvement subordinate to a principal use which, because of the
STRUCTURE OR   nature of its use, can reasonably be located at or greater than normal structure
FACILITY:      setbacks. Examples include: swimming pools, saunas, detached garages, and
               storage sheds.
ANIMAL         A facility as defined by Minnesota Rules, part 7020.0300.
FEEDLOT:
               A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff, or embankment having the following
               characteristics:
               1.   Part or all of the feature is located in a shoreland area;
               2.   The slope must drain toward the waterbody;
               3.   The slope rises at least twenty-five (25) feet above the ordinary high
BLUFF:         water level; and
               4.   The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a point twenty-five
               (25) feet or more above the ordinary high water level averages thirty percent
               (30%) or greater (see Figure 1), except that an area with an average slope of
               less than eighteen percent (18%) over a distance of at least fifty (50) feet
               shall not be considered part of the bluff (see Figure 2).
Figure 1. Illustration of Bluff
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4b51a377144822298e340f2016f76ebbfa73789c/IMAGES/0-0-0-
1723.jpg]
Figure 2. Exception to Bluff
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4b51a377144822298e340f2016f76ebbfa73789c/IMAGES/0-0-0-
1725.jpg]
BLUFF IMPACT   A bluff and land located within twenty (20) feet of the top of a bluff. See
ZONE:          Figure 3.
Figure 3. Bluff Impact Zone and Top of Bluff
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4b51a377144822298e340f2016f76ebbfa73789c/IMAGES/0-0-0-
1727.jpg]
BLUFF, TOE OF: The lower point of a fifty (50)-foot segment with an average slope exceeding
               eighteen percent (18%) or the ordinary high water level, whichever is higher.
               For the purposes of measuring setbacks, bluff impact zone, and administering
BLUFF, TOP OF: vegetation management standards, the higher point of a fifty (50)-foot segment
               with an average slope exceeding eighteen percent (18%). See Figure 3.
BOATHOUSE:     A facility as defined by Minn. Stat. § 103G.245.
BUFFER:        A vegetative feature as defined by Minn. Stat. § 103F.48.
BUILDING LINE: A line parallel to a lot line or the ordinary high water level at the required
               setback beyond which a structure may not extend.
CONTROLLED     A lot used to access public waters or as a recreation area for owners of
ACCESS LOT:    nonriparian lots within the same subdivision containing the controlled access
               lot.
               Developments that provide transient, short-term lodging spaces, rooms, or
COMMERCIAL     parcels and their operations are essentially service-oriented. For example,
PLANNED UNIT   hotel/motel accommodations, resorts, recreational vehicle and camping parks, and
DEVELOPMENTS:  other primarily service-oriented activities are commercial planned unit
               developments.
COMMERCIAL     The principal use of land or buildings for the sale, lease, rental, or trade of
USE:           products, goods, and services.
COMMISSIONER:  The commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources.
               A land use or development as defined by ordinance that would not be appropriate
CONDITIONAL    generally but may be allowed with appropriate restrictions upon a finding that
USE:           certain conditions as detailed in the zoning ordinance exist, the use or
               development conforms to the comprehensive land use plan of the community, and
               the use is compatible with the existing neighborhood.
               A horizontal, unenclosed platform with or without attached railings, seats,
DECK:          trellises, or other features, attached or functionally related to a principal
               use or site and at any point extending more than three feet above ground.
DUPLEX,        A dwelling structure on a single lot, having two (2), three (3), and four (4)
TRIPLEX, AND   units, respectively, attached by common walls and each unit equipped with
QUAD:          separate sleeping, cooking, eating, living, and sanitation facilities.
DWELLING SITE: A designated location for residential use by one (1) or more persons using
               temporary or movable shelter, including camping and recreational vehicle sites.
               Any structure or portion of a structure, or other shelter designed as short- or
DWELLING UNIT: long-term living quarters for one or more persons, including rental or timeshare
               accommodations such as motel, hotel, and resort rooms and cabins.
EXPANSION:     Any increase in a dimension such as number of units or size, area, volume, or
               height of an existing structure or accessory structure or facility.
EXTRACTIVE     The use of land for surface or subsurface removal of sand, gravel, rock,
USE:           industrial minerals, other nonmetallic minerals, and peat not regulated under
               Minn. Stat. §§ 93.44 to 93.51.
FOREST LAND    The clear cutting of forested lands to prepare for a new land use other than
CONVERSION:    reestablishment of a subsequent forest stand.
               A structure used as a dwelling unit that may contain sleeping spaces and kitchen
GUEST COTTAGE: and bathroom facilities in addition to those provided in the primary dwelling
               unit on a lot.
               The vertical distance between the highest adjoining ground level at the building
HEIGHT OF      or ten (10) feet above the lowest adjoining ground level, whichever is lower,
BUILDING:      and the highest point of a flat roof or average height of the highest gable of a
               pitched or hipped roof (see Figure 4).
Figure 4. Height of Building
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4b51a377144822298e340f2016f76ebbfa73789c/IMAGES/0-0-0-
1729.jpg]
               A constructed hard surface that prevents or retards entry of water into the soil
IMPER VIOUS    and causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities and at an
SURFA CE:      increased rate of flow than prior to development, including rooftops; decks;
               sidewalks; patios; swimming pools; parking lots; concrete, asphalt, gravel
               driveways, or permeable pavers; and other similar surfaces.
               Making an existing structure or accessory structure or facility of better
IMPROVEMENT:   quality, more efficient, or more aesthetically pleasing, that does not replicate
               what pre-existed, but does not include an expansion, enlargement, or
               intensification.
INDUSTRIAL     The use of land or buildings for the production, manufacture, warehousing,
USE:           storage, or transfer of goods, products, commodities, or other wholesale items.
INTENSIVE      The complete removal of trees or shrubs in a contiguous patch, strip, row, or
VEGETATION     block.
CLEARING:
               A parcel of land designated by plat, metes and bounds, registered land survey,
LOT:           auditors plot, or other accepted means and separated from other parcels or
               portions by said description for the purpose of sale, lease, or separation.
               The minimum distance between:
LOT WIDTH:     1.   Side lot lines measured at the midpoint of the building line; and
               2.   Side lot lines at the ordinary high water level, if applicable (see Figure
               5).
Figure 5. Lot Width
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4b51a377144822298e340f2016f76ebbfa73789c/IMAGES/0-0-0-
1731.jpg]
               Upkeep or preservation of an existing structure or accessory structure or
MAINTENAN CE   facility against normal wear and tear or degradation over time that does not
AND REPAIR:    change exterior dimensions. Examples include the rehabilitation or replacement
               of windows, siding, a roof, or exterior finishes such as paint or stain.
METALLIC       "Metallic minerals and peat" has the meaning given under Minn. Stat. §§ 93.44 to
MINERALS AND   93.51.
PEAT:
               Any legal use, structure or parcel of land already in existence, recorded, or
NONCONFORMITY: authorized before the adoption of official controls or amendments to those
               controls that would not have been permitted to become established under the
               terms of the official controls as now written.
               The boundary of public waters and wetlands, and shall be an elevation
               delineating the highest water level which has been maintained for a sufficient
ORDINARY HIGH  period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly that point where
WATER LEVEL:   the natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly
               terrestrial. For watercourses, the ordinary high water level is the elevation of
               the top of the bank of the channel. For reservoirs and flowages, the ordinary
               high water level is the operating elevation of the normal summer pool.
               A type of development characterized by a unified site design for a number of
               dwelling units or dwelling sites on a parcel, whether for sale, rent, or lease,
               and also usually involving clustering of these units or sites to provide areas
               of common open space, density increases, and a mix of structure types and land
PLANNED UNIT   uses. These developments may be organized and operated as condominiums, time-
DEVELOPMENT:   share condominiums, cooperatives, full fee ownership, commercial enterprises, or
               any combination of these, or cluster subdivisions of dwelling units, residential
               condominiums, townhouses, apartment buildings, dwelling grounds, recreational
               vehicle parks, resorts, hotels, motels, and conversions of structures and land
               uses to these uses.
PUBLIC WATERS: Any water as defined in Minn. Stat. § 103G.005, Subd. 15, 15a.
REPLACEMENT    Reconstruction of part or all of an existing structure or accessory structure or
AND            facility that closely matches or replicates the preexisting structure or
RESTORATION:   facility.
               A use where the nature of residency is non-transient and the major or primary
               focus of the development is not service-oriented. For example, residential
RESIDENTIAL    apartments, manufactured home parks, time-share condominiums, townhouses,
PLANNED UNIT   cooperatives, and full fee ownership residences would be considered as
DEVELOPMENT:   residential planned unit developments. To qualify as a residential planned unit
               development, a development must contain at least five (5) dwelling units or
               sites.
RESORT:        Has the meaning in Minn. Stat. § 103F.227.
SEMIPUBLIC     The use of land by a private, nonprofit organization to provide a public service
USE:           that is ordinarily open to some persons outside the regular constituency of the
               organization.
               The minimum horizontal distance between a structure, sewage treatment system, or
SETBACK:       other facility and an ordinary high water level, sewage treatment system, top of
               a bluff, road, highway, property line, or other facility.
SEWAGE
TREATMENT      Has the meaning given under Minnesota Rules, part 7080.1100, Subp. 82.
SYSTEM:
               Pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, and force main, and all other
SEWER SYSTEM:  construction, devices, appliances, or appurtenances used for conducting sewage
               or industrial waste or other wastes to a point of ultimate disposal.
SHORE IMPACT   Land located between the ordinary high-water level of a public water and a line
ZONE:          parallel to it at a setback of fifty percent (50%) of the structure setback (see
               Figure 6).
Figure 6. Shore Impact Zone
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4b51a377144822298e340f2016f76ebbfa73789c/IMAGES/0-0-0-
1733.jpg]
               Land located within the following distances from public waters:
               1.   One thousand (1,000) feet from the ordinary high water level of a lake,
SHORELAND:     pond, or flowage; and
               2.   Three hundred (300) feet from a river or stream, or the landward extent of
               a floodplain designated by ordinance on a river or stream, whichever is greater
               (see Figure 7).
Figure 7. Definition of Shoreland
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4b51a377144822298e340f2016f76ebbfa73789c/IMAGES/0-0-0-
1735.jpg]
SHORE          Swimming areas, docks, watercraft mooring areas and launching ramps and other
RECREATION     water recreation facilities.
FACILITIES:
               Any archaeological site, standing structure, or other property that meets the
               criteria for eligibility to the National Register of Historic Places or is
               listed in the State Register of Historic Sites, or is determined to be an
SIGNIFICANT    unplatted cemetery that falls under the provisions of Minn. Stat. § 307.08. A
HISTORIC SITE: historic site meets these criteria if it is presently listed on either register
               or if it is determined to meet the qualifications for listing after review by
               the Minnesota state archaeologist or the director of the Minnesota Historical
               Society. All unplatted cemeteries are automatically considered to be significant
               historic sites.
STEEP SLOPE:   Lands having average slopes over twelve percent (12%), as measured over
               horizontal distances of fifty (50) feet or more, which are not bluffs.
               Any building or appurtenance, including decks, except aerial or underground
STRUCTURE:     utility lines, such as sewer, electric, telephone, telegraph, gas lines, towers,
               poles, and other supporting facilities.
SUBDIVISION:   Land that is divided for the purpose of sale, rent, or lease, including planned
               unit developments.
               An evaluation of land to determine if it is appropriate for the proposed use.
               The analysis considers factors relevant to the proposed use and may include the
               following features: susceptibility to flooding; existence of wetlands; soils,
SUITABILITY    erosion potential; slope steepness; water supply, sewage treatment capabilities;
ANALYSIS:      water depth, depth to groundwater and bedrock, vegetation, near-shore aquatic
               conditions unsuitable for water-based recreation; fish and wildlife habitat;
               presence of significant historic sites; or any other relevant feature of the
               natural land.
VARIANCE:      Means the same as that defined in Minn. Stat. § 394.27 Subd. 7 (for counties) or
               § 462.357 Subd. 6 (2) (for municipalities).
               A small, above ground building or other improvement, except stairways, fences,
               docks, and retaining walls, which, because of the relationship of its use to
WATER-ORIENTED surface water, reasonably needs to be located closer to public waters than the
ACCESSORY      normal structure setback. Examples of such structures and facilities include,
STRUCTURE OR   watercraft and watercraft equipment storage structures, gazebos, screen houses,
FACILITY:      fish houses, pump houses, patios, and detached decks. Boathouses and boat
               storage structures given the meaning under Minn. Stat. § 103G.245 are not a
               water-oriented accessory structures.
               The use of land for commercial, industrial, public or semi-public purposes,
WATER-         where access to and use of a public water is an integral part of the normal
DEPENDENT USE: conduct of operation. Marinas, resorts, and restaurants with transient docking
               facilities are examples of uses typically found in shoreland areas.
WETLAND:       Has the meaning given under Minnesota Rules, part 8420.0111. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-
               2024)
 
11-10-6: MISSISSIPPI RIVER CORRIDOR CRITICAL AREA (MRCCA) DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of the MRCCA overlay district, the following definitions shall
apply:
ACCESS PATH:   An area designated to provide ingress and egress to public waters.
ADJACENT:      Having a boundary that physically touches or adjoins.
AGRICULTURAL   A use having the meaning given under Minn. Stat. § 40A.02.
USE:
ALTERNATIVE    Subdivision design methods such as conservation design, transfer of development
DESIGN:        density, or similar zoning and site design techniques that protect open space and
               natural areas.
BIOLOGICAL AND The functions of vegetation in stabilizing soils and slopes, retaining and filtering
ECOLOGICAL     runoff, providing habitat, and recharging groundwater.
FUNCTIONS:
               A natural topographic feature having:
               1.   A slope that rises at least twenty-five (25) feet where the grade of the slope
BLUFF:         averages eighteen percent (18%) or greater, measured over any horizontal distance of
               twenty-five (25) feet, from the toe of the slope to the top of the slope. Where the
               slope begins below the ordinary high water level, the ordinary high water level is
               the toe of the slope. See Figure 5.1; or
Figure 5.1. Bluff
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4b51a377144822298e340f2016f76ebbfa73789c/IMAGES/0-0-0-1737.jpg]
               2.   A natural escarpment or cliff with a slope that rises at least ten (10) feet
               above the ordinary high water level or toe of the slope, whichever is applicable, to
               the top of the slope, with a slope of seventy-five (75) degrees or greater. See
               Figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2. Natural Escarpment Bluff and Bluff Impact Zone
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4b51a377144822298e340f2016f76ebbfa73789c/IMAGES/0-0-0-1739.jpg]
BLUFF IMPACT   A bluff and land located within twenty (20) feet of the bluff. See Figure 5.2 for
ZONE (BIZ):    natural escarpment or cliff example and Figure 5.3 for more common bluff example.
Figure 5.3. Bluff Impact Zone, Bluffline, Toe of bluff, and Top of Bluff
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4b51a377144822298e340f2016f76ebbfa73789c/IMAGES/0-0-0-1741.jpg]
               A line delineating the top of the bluff. More than one bluffline may be encountered
BLUFFLIN E:    proceeding landward from the river. See Figure 5.2 for natural escarpment or cliff
               example and Figure 5.3 for more common bluff example.
               A line along the bottom of a bluff, requiring field verification, such that the
               slope above the line exceeds eighteen percent (18%) and the slope below the line is
BLUFF, TOE OF: eighteen percent (18%) or less, measured over a horizontal distance of twenty-five
               (25) feet. See Figures 5.2 for natural escarpment or cliff example and Figure 5.3
               for more common bluff example.
               A line along the top of a bluff, requiring field verification, such that the slope
               below the line exceeds eighteen percent (18%) and the slope above the line is
BLUFF, TOP OF: eighteen percent (18%) or less, measured over a horizontal distance of twenty-five
               (25) feet. See Figures 5.2 for natural escarpment or cliff example and Figure 5.3
               for more common bluff example.
               The area upon which structures may be placed on a lot or parcel of land and excludes
BUILDABLE      areas needed to meet requirements for setback, rights-of-way, bluff impact zones,
AREA:          historic properties, wetlands, designated floodways, land below the ordinary high
               water level of public waters, and other unbuildable areas.
BUILDING:      A structure with two (2) or more outside rigid walls and a fully secured roof and
               affixed to a permanent site.
CERTIFICATE OF A document written after a compliance inspection, certifying that the development
COMPLIANCE:    complies with applicable requirements at the time of the inspection.
COMMISSIONER:  The commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
CONDITIONAL    A use having the meaning given under Minn. Stat. chapters 394 and 462.
USE:
CONSERVATION   A pattern of subdivision that is characterized by grouping lots within a portion of
DESIGN:        a parcel, where the remaining portion of the parcel is permanently protected as open
               space.
CONVENTIONAL   A pattern of subdivision that is characterized by lots that are spread regularly
SUBDIVISION:   throughout a parcel in a lot and block design.
               A horizontal, unenclosed, aboveground level structure open to the sky, with or
DECK:          without attached railings, seats, trellises, or other features, attached or
               functionally related to a principal use or site.
DEVELOPER:     Having the meaning given under Minn. Stat. § 116G.03.
DEVELOPMENT:   Having the meaning given under Minn. Stat. § 116G.03.
               An action under this chapter related to land use that requires a public hearing by
DISCRETIONARY  local ordinance or statute, such as preliminary plats, final subdivision plats,
ACTION:        planned unit developments, conditional use permits, interim use permits, variances,
               appeals, and rezonings.
DOCK:          Having the meaning given under Minnesota Rules part 6115.0170.
ELECTRIC POWER Equipment and associated facilities for generating electric power or devices for
FACILITIES:    converting wind energy to electrical energy as identified and defined under Minn.
               Stat. § 216E.
               Underground or overhead gas, electrical, communications, steam, or water
               distribution, collection, supply, or disposal systems, including storm water.
ESSENTIAL      Essential services include poles, wires, mains, drains, pipes, conduits, cables,
SERVICES:      fire alarm boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, navigational structures, aviation
               safety facilities or other similar equipment and accessories in conjunction with the
               systems. Essential services does not include buildings, treatment works as defined
               in Minn. Stat. § 115.01, electric power facilities or transmission services.
FEEDLOT:       Having the meaning given for animal feedlots under Minnesota Rules chapter 7020.
FLOODPLAIN:    Having the meaning given under Minnesota Rules chapter 6120.
FULLY          The reconstruction of an existing impervious surface that involves site grading and
RECONSTRUCTS:  subsurface excavation so that soil is exposed. Mill and overlay and other
               resurfacing activities are not considered fully reconstructed.
HARD-SURFACE   A trail surfaced in asphalt, crushed aggregate, or other hard surface, for multi-
TRAIL:         purpose use, as determined by local, regional, or state agency plans.
               An archaeological site, standing structure, site, district, or other property that
               is:
               1.   Listed in the National Register of Historic Places or the State Register of
               Historic Places or locally designated as a historic site under Minn. Stat. chapter
HISTORIC       471;
PROPERTY:      2.   Determined to meet the criteria for eligibility to the National Register of
               Historic Places or the State Register of Historic Places as determined by the
               director of the Minnesota Historical Society; or
               3.   An unplatted cemetery that falls under the provisions of Minn. Stat. chapter
               307, in consultation with the Office of the State Archaeologist.
               A constructed hard surface that either prevents or retards the entry of water into
IMPERVIOUS     the soil and causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities and at an
SURFACE:       increased rate of flow than prior to development. Examples include rooftops, decks,
               sidewalks, patios, parking lots, storage areas, and driveways, including those with
               concrete, asphalt, or gravel surfaces.
INTENSIVE      The removal of all or a majority of the trees or shrubs in a contiguous patch,
VEGETATION     strip, row, or block.
CLEARING:
INTERIM USE:   A use having the meaning given under Minn. Stat. chapters 394 and 462.
LAND           An activity that exposes the soil or changes the topography, drainage, or cross
ALTERATION:    section of the land, excluding gardening or similar minor soil disturbances.
LOCAL          Counties, cities, and townships.
GOVERNMENT:
LOT:           Having the meaning given under Minnesota Rules chapter 6120.
               The shortest distance between lot lines measured at both the ordinary high water
LOT WIDTH:     level and at the required structure setback from the ordinary high water level. See
               Figure 5.4.
Figure 5.4. Lot Width
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4b51a377144822298e340f2016f76ebbfa73789c/IMAGES/0-0-0-1743.jpg]
MARINA:        Having the meaning given under Minnesota Rules part 6115.0170.
MISSISSIPPI
RIVER CORRIDOR The area within the River Corridor Boundary.
CRITICAL AREA
(MRCCA):
MOORING        Having the meaning given under Minnesota Rules part 6115.0170.
FACILITY:
NATIVE PLANT   A plant community identified by the Minnesota Biological Survey or biological survey
COMMUNITY:     issued or adopted by a local, state, or federal agency.
NATURAL-       A trail composed of native soil and rock or compacted granular stone, primarily
SURFACE TRAIL: intended for hiking, equestrian, or mountain bike use, as determined by local,
               regional, or state agency plans.
NATURAL        Any combination of ground cover, understory, and tree canopy that, while it may have
VEGETATION:    been altered by human activity, continues to stabilize soils, retain and filter
               runoff, provide habitat, and recharge groundwater.
NONCONFORMITY: Having the meaning given under Minn. Stat. § 394.22.
               Construction, reconstruction, repair, relocation, expansion, or removal of any
               facility for the extraction, stockpiling, storage, disposal, or reclamation of
NONMETALLIC    nonmetallic minerals such a stone, sand, and gravel. Nonmetallic mining does not
MINING:        include ancillary facilities such as access roads, bridges, culverts, and water
               level control structures. For purposes of this subpart, "facility" includes all mine
               pits, quarries, stockpiles, basins, processing structures and equipment, and any
               structures that drain or divert public waters to allow mining.
OFF-PREMISE    Those signs that direct attention to a product, service, business, or entertainment
ADVERTISING    venue that is not exclusively related to the premises where the sign is located.
SIGNS:
ORDINARY HIGH
WATER LEVEL    Having the meaning given under Minn. Stat. § 103G.005.
(OHWL):
               A zoning district applied over one or more previously established zoning districts,
OVERLAY        establishing additional or stricter standards and criteria for covered properties in
DISTRICT:      addition to those of the underlying zoning district. Overlay districts are often
               used to protect historic features and natural resources such as shoreland or
               floodplain.
PARCEL:        Having the meaning given under Minn. Stat. § 116G.03.
PATIO:         A constructed hard surface located at ground level with no railings and open to the
               sky.
PICNIC         A roofed structure open on all sides, accessory to a recreational use.
SHELTER:
               A method of land development that merges zoning and subdivision controls, allowing
PLANNED UNIT   developers to plan and develop a large area as a single entity, characterized by a
DEVELOPMENT    unified site design, a mix of structure types and land uses, and phasing of
(PUD):         development over a number of years. Planned unit development includes any conversion
               of existing structures and land uses that utilize this method of development.
PLAT:          Having the meaning given under Minn. Stat. §§ 505 and 515B.
PORT:          A water transportation complex established and operated under the jurisdiction of a
               port authority according to Minn. Stat. chapter 458.
               Key resources and features, including shore impact zones, bluff impact zones,
PRIMARY        floodplains, wetlands, gorges, areas of confluence with tributaries, natural
CONSERVATION   drainage routes, unstable soils and bedrock, native plant communities, cultural and
AREAS (PCAs):  historic properties, and significant existing vegetative stands, tree canopies, and
               other resources identified in local government plans.
PRIVATE        Private roads, driveways, and parking areas, private water access and viewing
FACILITIES:    facilities, decks and patios in setback areas, and private signs.
PROFESSIONAL   An engineer licensed to practice in Minnesota.
ENGINEER:
PUBLIC         Public utilities, public transportation facilities, and public recreational
FACILITIES:    facilities.
PUBLIC         Recreational facilities provided by the state or a local government and dedicated to
RECREATION     public use, including parks, scenic overlooks, observation platforms, trails, docks,
FACILITIES:    fishing piers, picnic shelters, water access ramps, and other similar water-oriented
               public facilities used for recreation.
PUBLIC RIVER   Views toward the river from public parkland, historic properties, and public
CORRIDOR VIEWS overlooks, as well as views toward bluffs from the ordinary high water level of the
(PRCVs):       opposite shore, as seen during the summer months and documented in the MRCCA plan/
               chapter of the comprehensive plan.
PUBLIC         All transportation facilities provided by federal, state, or local government and
TRANSPORTATION dedicated to public use, such as roadways, transit facilities, railroads, and
FACILITIES:    bikeways.
PUBLIC         Electric power facilities, essential services, and transmission services.
UTILITIES:
PUBLIC WATERS: Having the meaning given under Minn. Stat. § 103G.005.
READILY        Land and development that are easily seen from the ordinary high water level of the
VISIBLE:       opposite shore during summer months.
RESOURCE       A federal, state, regional, or local agency that engages in environmental, natural,
AGENCY:        or cultural resource protection or restoration activities, including planning,
               implementation, and monitoring.
               A vertical or nearly vertical structures constructed of mortar and rubble masonry,
RETAINING      rock, or stone regardless of size, vertical timber pilings, horizontal timber planks
WALL:          with piling supports, sheet pilings, poured concrete, concrete blocks, or other
               durable materials.
               Natural coarse rock placed or constructed to armor shorelines, streambeds, bridge
ROCK RIPRAP:   abutments, pilings and other shoreline structures against scour, or water or ice
               erosion.
RIVER CORRIDOR The boundary approved and adopted by the Metropolitan Council under Minn. Stat. §
BOUNDARY:      116G.06, as approved and adopted by the legislature in Minn. Stat. § 116G.15, and as
               legally described in the State Register, volume 43, pages 508 to 518.
RIVER-         The use of land for commercial, industrial, or utility purposes, where access to and
DEPENDENT USE: use of a public water feature is an integral part of the normal conduct of business
               and where the use is dependent on shoreline facilities.
SELECTIVE      The removal of isolated individual trees or shrubs that are not in a contiguous
VEGETATION     patch, strip, row, or block and that does not substantially reduce the tree canopy
REMOVAL:       or understory cover.
SETBACK:       A separation distance measured horizontally.
               Land located between the ordinary high water level of public waters and a line
SHORE IMPACT   parallel to it at a setback of fifty percent (50%) of the required structure setback
ZONE (SIZ):    or, for agricultural use, fifty (50) feet landward of the ordinary high water level.
               See Figure 5.5.
               Facilities that require a location adjoining public waters for ingress and egress,
               loading and unloading, and public water intake and outflow, such as barge
SHORELINE      facilities, port facilities, commodity loading and unloading equipment, watercraft
FACILITIES:    lifts, marinas, short-term watercraft mooring facilities for patrons, and water
               access ramps. Structures that would be enhanced by a shoreline location, but do not
               require a location adjoining public waters as part of their function, are not
               shoreline facilities, such as restaurants, bait shops, and boat dealerships.
Figure 5.5. Shore Impact Zone
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4b51a377144822298e340f2016f76ebbfa73789c/IMAGES/0-0-0-1745.jpg]
               A natural topographic feature with an average slope of twelve (12%) to eighteen
STEEP SLOPE:   (18%) percent, measured over a horizontal distance equal to or greater than fifty
               (50) feet, and any slopes greater than eighteen percent (18%) that are not bluffs.
STORM WATER
MANAGEMENT     Facilities for the collection, conveyance, treatment, or disposal of storm water.
FACILITIES:
               A building, sign, or appurtenance thereto, except for aerial or underground utility
STRUCTURE:     lines, such as sewer, electric, telephone, or gas lines, and utility line towers,
               poles, and other supporting appurtenances.
SUBDIVISION:   Having the meaning given under Minn. Stat. § 462.352.
SUBSURFACE
SEWAGE         Having the meaning given under Minnesota Rules, part 7080.1100.
TREATMENT
SYSTEM:
               1.   Electric power lines, cables, pipelines, or conduits that are:
                  a.   Used to transport power between two points, as identified and defined under
TRANSMISSION   Minn. Stat. § 216E.01, Subd. 4; or
SERVICES:         b.   For mains or pipelines for gas, liquids, or solids in suspension, used to
               transport gas, liquids, or solids in suspension between two (2) points; and
               2.   Telecommunication lines, cables, pipelines, or conduits.
               The more or less continuous line formed by the tops of trees in a wooded area when
TREELINE:      viewed from a particular point. The treeline is determined during all seasons as if
               under full foliage.
VARIANCE:      Having the meaning given under Minn. Stat. § 394.22.
WATER ACCESS   A boat ramp, carry-down site, boarding dock, and approach road, or other access that
RAMP:          allows launching and removal of a boat, canoe, or other watercraft with or without a
               vehicle and trailer.
               A small building or other improvement, except stairways, fences, docks, and
WATER-ORIENTED retaining walls, that, because of the relationship of its use to public waters,
ACCESSORY      needs to be located closer to public waters than the normal structure setback.
STRUCTURE:     Examples include gazebos, screen houses, fish houses, pump houses, and detached
               decks and patios.
WATER QUALITY  Land within the shore impact zone or within fifty (50) feet of the OHWL of the
IMPACT ZONE:   river, whichever is greater, and land within fifty (50) feet of a public water,
               wetland, or natural drainage route.
WETLAND:       Having the meaning given under Minn. Stat. § 103G.005.
WHARF:         Having the meaning given under Minnesota Rules, part 6115.0170. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-
               2024)
 
11-10-7: SIGNAGE DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of signage uses, the following definitions shall apply:
BANNERS:                     Attention getting devices which resemble flags and
                             are of a paper, cloth or plastic like consistency.
                             A rectangular piece of fabric of distinctive
                             design which is mounted on a pole that is used as
FLAG:                        a symbol (as a nation), signaling device
                             (nautical), or attention getting device
                             (advertising, commercial or noncommercial).
                             The height of a sign shall be measured from the
HEIGHT:                      centerline of the street or highway toward which
                             the sign is principally displayed to the top of
                             the sign.
                             A sign which displays only the name, address and
IDENTIFICATION SIGN:         title of an occupant or the name and address of a
                             building or development.
                             A measure of luminance equal to the total amount
NIT:                         of light emitted from a sign divided by the
                             surface area of the sign (candelas per square
                             meter).
PENNANT:                     A flag or banner which tapers to a point.
                             Any letter, work, symbol, model, printed,
                             projected or affixed device, poster, picture,
SIGN:                        reading matter, or other representation in the
                             nature of an advertisement, announcement,
                             direction or informative device including
                             structural and component parts.
                             The area of a sign includes the space inside a
                             continuous line drawn around and enclosing all
                             letters, designs and background materials
SIGN AREA:                   exclusive of border, trim and structural supports.
                             For the purpose of calculating the area of
                             multiple faced or back-to-back signs, the
                             stipulated maximum sign area shall refer to a
                             single face.
                             A sign or portion thereof that has a reader board
                             for the display of text information in which each
                             alphanumeric character, graphic or symbol is
                             defined by objects not consisting of an
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY:       illumination device and may be changed or
                             rearranged manually or mechanically with
                             characters, illustrations, letters or numbers that
                             can be changed or rearranged without altering the
                             face or surface of the sign structure.
                             Any sign, except official signs, with
                             characteristics of a sign that appear to have
                             movement or that appear to change, caused by any
                             method other than physically removing and
                             replacing the sign or its components, whether the
                             apparent movement or change is in the display, the
                             sign structure itself, or any other component of
                             the sign. This includes a display that
                             incorporates a technology or method allowing the
SIGN, DYNAMIC:               sign face to change the image without having to
                             physically or mechanically replace the sign face
                             or its components. This also includes any
                             rotating, revolving, moving, flashing, blinking,
                             or animated display and any display that
                             incorporates rotating panels, LED lights
                             manipulated through digital input, "digital ink"
                             or any other method or technology that allows the
                             sign face to present a series of images or
                             displays.
                             A directly or indirectly illuminated sign or
                             portion thereof that exhibits changing light or
                             color effect by any means, so as to provide
                             intermittent illumination that changes light
SIGN, FLASHING:              intensity in sudden transitory bursts and creates
                             the illusion of intermittent flashing light by
                             streaming, graphic bursts showing movement, or any
                             mode of lighting which resembles zooming,
                             twinkling or sparkling.
                             Any sign that is attached directly to the ground
                             or is supported vertically by any structure having
SIGN, FREESTANDING:          a source of support independent of any building
                             existing on the premises on which the sign is
                             located.
                             Any sign lawfully in existence on the effective
                             date hereof or any sign lawfully in existence on
SIGN, LEGAL NONCONFORMING:   the date of any amendment to this chapter which
                             does not conform to the regulations affecting
                             signs for the district in which the sign is
                             situated.
                             A sign that does not advertise products, goods,
SIGN, NONCOMMERCIAL OPINION: businesses, or services and that expresses an
                             opinion or other point of view.
SIGN, NONCONFORMING:         Any sign which does not conform to the regulations
                             of this chapter.
                             A commercial speech sign which directs the
                             attention of the public to a business, activity
                             conducted, or product sold or offered at a
                             location not on the same lot where such sign is
SIGN, OFF PREMISES:          located. For purposes of this title, easements and
                             other appurtenances shall be considered to be
                             outside such lot and any sign located or proposed
                             to be located in an easement or other appurtenance
                             shall be considered an off premises sign.
                             Signs of a public noncommercial nature including
                             public notification signs, safety signs, traffic
SIGN, OFFICIAL:              signs, direction to public facilities when erected
                             by or on behalf of a public official or employee
                             in the performance of official duty.
                             Any sign that directs attention to the name of the
                             building, premises, or to the name of the building
                             management firm, or to the business, principal
SIGN, ON PREMISES:           product, service, entertainment, or activity
                             conducted, sold or offered upon the premises on
                             which such sign is located or to noncommercial
                             speech.
                             A sign so designed as to be movable from one
SIGN, PORTABLE:              location to another, and which is not permanently
                             attached to the ground, sales display device or
                             structure.
                             Any sign which is affixed to the outside of the
SIGN, PROJECTING:            exterior wall or soffit of any building and is not
                             parallel to the plane of the wall or soffit.
                             Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and
SIGN, ROOF:                  above the roof of a building, supported by the
                             roof structure, and extending vertically above the
                             highest portion of the roof.
                             Any building sign erected or constructed as an
                             integral or essentially integral part of a normal
                             roof structure of any design, so that no part of
SIGN, ROOF INTEGRAL:         the sign extends vertically above the highest
                             portion of the roof and so that no part of the
                             sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a
                             space of more than six (6) inches.
SIGN, ROTATING:              A sign or portion of a sign which turns about on
                             an axis.
                             Searchlights shall be considered signs if they
SIGN, SEARCHLIGHT:           announce, direct attention to, or advertise
                             business, professional, commodity, service or
                             entertainment activities.
SIGN, SHIMMERING:            A sign which reflects an oscillating sometimes
                             distorted visual image.
                             A portable sign for temporary placement on a
                             sidewalk in the public right-of-way, intended for
SIGN, SIDEWALK:              a building or business located adjacent to the
                             right-of- way with no front yard or a front yard
                             that will not accommodate a permanent freestanding
                             sign as permitted by this title.
                             A sign, banner, pennant, portable changeable copy
                             sign, portable sign, searchlight sign, or similar
                             device designed and/or displayed to promote brief
SIGN, TEMPORARY:             business, professional, commodity, service or
                             entertainment activities such as, but not limited
                             to, grand openings, sales, or special promotions
                             or events.
SIGN, TIME AND TEMPERATURE:  A sign that displays only current time and
                             temperature information.
                             A sign which is affixed to the exterior wall,
                             mansard roof or soffit of a building and which is
SIGN, WALL:                  parallel to the building wall. A wall sign does
                             not project more than twelve (12) inches from the
                             surface to which it is attached, nor extend beyond
                             the top of the parapet wall.
SPEECH, COMMERCIAL:          Speech advertising a business, profession,
                             commodity, service or entertainment.
                             Speech dissemination of messages not classified as
                             commercial which include, but are not limited to,
SPEECH, NONCOMMERCIAL:       messages concerning political, religious, social,
                             ideological, public service and informational
                             topics. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
 
11-10-8: TREE PRESERVATION DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of tree preservation, the following definitions shall apply:
                                  The horizontal extension of a tree's branches
CANOPY OF TREE:                   and foliage in all directions from its trunk
                                  and upper layer of green crown.
                                  A woody plant bearing seeds and cones
CONIFEROUS TREE:                  oftentimes, but not always, retaining foliage
                                  throughout the year.
                                  Any area in which movement of earth,
                                  alteration in topography, soil compaction,
                                  disruption of vegetation, change in soil
CONSTRUCTION AREA:                chemistry, or any other change in the natural
                                  character of the land occurs as a result of
                                  site preparation, grading, building
                                  construction or any other construction
                                  activity.
DECIDUOUS TREE:                   A woody plant which has a defined crown, and
                                  which loses leaves annually.
                                  Any person or entity who undertakes to
                                  improve a parcel of land, by platting for the
DEVELOPER:                        purposes of establishing two (2) or more
                                  dwelling units, or grading which requires a
                                  grading permit.
                                  Every two (2) feet in height of a coniferous
DIAMETER OF CONIFEROUS TREE:      tree is equivalent to one (1) caliper inch of
                                  diameter.
                                  The length of a straight line measured in
DIAMETER OF DECIDUOUS TREE:       caliper inches through the trunk of a tree at
                                  four and one-half (4.5) feet above the
                                  ground.
                                  An imaginary vertical line which extends from
DRIP LINE OR ROOT ZONE OF A TREE: the outermost branches of a canopy to the
                                  ground.
                                  A person holding at least a Bachelor's Degree
FORESTER:                         in Forestry from an accredited four (4) year
                                  college of forestry or any official appointed
                                  by the city.
                                  Includes ironwood, catalpa, oak, maple
HARDWOOD DECIDUOUS TREE:          (hard), walnut, ash, hickory, birch, black
                                  cherry, hackberry, locust and basswood.
HEALTHY TREE:                     Average or better condition and vigor for
                                  area as may be determined by the forester.
                                  A healthy hardwood deciduous tree measuring
                                  equal to or greater than twenty-seven (27)
HERITAGE TREE:                    inches in diameter or a healthy coniferous
                                  evergreen tree greater than fifty (50) feet
                                  in height.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT:              A person licensed by the state of Minnesota
                                  as a landscape architect.
                                  A piece of property that is being platted for
                                  the purpose of establishing urban residential
                                  use with two (2) or more dwelling units or is
NEW DEVELOPMENT:                  being improved by grading which requires a
                                  grading permit. This definition does not
                                  apply to agricultural lot splits or to public
                                  street/utility projects.
NURSERYMAN:                       A person licensed by the state of Minnesota
                                  as a nurseryman.
                                  The owner of a buildable property who is
PROPERTY OWNER:                   constructing or expanding a dwelling or a
                                  business on that property.
                                  A healthy deciduous hardwood tree measuring a
                                  minimum of six (6) caliper inches in
                                  diameter, a healthy softwood deciduous tree
SIGNIFICANT TREE:                 measuring a minimum of twelve (12) caliper
                                  inches, or a healthy coniferous tree
                                  measuring a minimum of twelve (12) feet in
                                  height.
                                  Includes cottonwood, poplars/aspen, box
SOFTWOOD DECIDUOUS TREE:          elder, willow, silver maple and elm. (Ord.
                                  2024-04, 6-4-2024)
 
TITLE 12
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS
SECTION:
12-1-1: Title
12-1-2: Purpose
12-1-3: Applicability
12-1-4: Authority
12-1-5: Lots Of Record, Recording And Conveying Of Land
12-1-6: Interpretation
12-1-7: Severability
12-1-8: Definitions
12-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the Subdivision Ordinance of the
city of Rosemount except as herein referred to as "this title." (Ord. 2024-04,
6-4-2024)
12-1-2: PURPOSE:
   A.   All subdivisions of land hereafter submitted for approval shall comply
in all respects with the regulations set forth herein. It is the purpose of
these regulations to:
      1.   Encourage well planned, efficient, and attractive developments by
establishing adequate standards for design and construction.
      2.   Provide for the health, safety, and welfare of people by requiring
properly designed and coordinated streets and adequate sewage, water, and
drainage facilities.
      3.   Secure the rights of the public with respect to public land and
waters.
      4.   Serve as a tool to carry out the objectives and policies of the
comprehensive guide plan.
      5.   Provide for a means to provide adequate recreational areas, school
sites, and other public facilities. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
12-1-3: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   This title shall apply to the subdivision of land in the city.
   B.   Subdivisions which meet the following circumstances are exempt from the
regulations of this title:
      1.   Where all the resulting parcels, tracts, lots, or interests will be
twenty (20) acres or larger in size and five hundred (500) feet in width for
agricultural or residential uses;
      2.   Where all the resulting parcels, tracts, lots, or interests will be
five (5) acres or larger in size for commercial and industrial uses;
      3.   Creating cemetery lots; or
      4.   Subdivisions resulting from court orders or the adjustment of a lot
line by the relocation of a common boundary. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
12-1-4: AUTHORITY:
   A.   The effective date of this title is June 4, 2024. This chapter hereby
supersedes and replaces in its entirety, Title 11 of the Rosemount, Minnesota
Code on the effective date hereof.
   B.   The authority to adopt this title within the City of Rosemount is
derived from M.S. Chapter 462, including but not limited to M.S. §§ 462.357 and
462.358, as well as other applicable state statutes and rules. Whenever other
applicable city, state, or federal laws or rules referenced in this title have
been amended or superseded, this title shall also be considered amended
accordingly.
   C.   The City Council shall be the platting authority.
   D.   The Zoning Administrator, or the Zoning Administrator's designee, shall
administer and enforce the provisions of this title and shall have said
authority to:
      1.   Enter upon the land or within a building during reasonable working
hours as found necessary to fulfill his/her duties as administrator of this
title.
      2.   Conduct inspections of buildings and use of land to determine
compliance with the terms of this title.
      3.   Maintain permanent and current records of this title, including, but
not limited to, maps, amendments, bonds, variances, waivers, plats, development
agreements, and applications thereto.
      4.   Institute in the name of Rosemount appropriate citations or
proceedings against a violator as provided by law. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
12-1-5: LOTS OF RECORD, RECORDING AND CONVEYING OF LAND:
   A.   Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, before any binding
contract is made for the sale of any part thereof, before the subdivision is
recorded with the county and before any permit for the erection of a structure
in such proposed subdivision shall be granted, the subdividing owner, or its
authorized agent, shall apply for and secure approval of such subdivision in
accordance with the procedures herein.
   B.   No conveyance involving the division of land to which these regulations
are applicable shall be filed or recorded with the Dakota County recorder's
office if the land is described in the conveyance by reference to an unapproved
registered land survey made after or to an unapproved plat made after such
regulations became effective. No building permit shall be issued and no public
utilities provided to a lot, piece or parcel of land created by a division of
land made in violation of the subdivision regulations of the city. (Ord. 2024-
04, 6-4-2024)
12-1-6: INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Relationship To Comprehensive Plan:
      1.   The Comprehensive Plan for the City of Rosemount or "comprehensive
plan," including amendments adopted by the City Council, is the guiding policy
document for the city. A primary intent of this title is to implement the
policies and goals of the comprehensive plan while remaining consistent with
all applicable requirements of federal and state laws.
   B.   Conflicting Regulations Or Provisions:
      1.   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
title shall be held to minimum requirements.
      2.   Where any provision of these regulations imposes restrictions
different from those imposed by any other provision of these regulations or any
other ordinance, rule, or regulation, or other provision of the law, whichever
provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall control.
   C.   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions:
      1.   It is not intended by this title to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this title
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this title shall prevail. All
other ordinances inconsistent with this title are hereby repealed to the extent
of the inconsistency only. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
12-1-7: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this title are severable. If any section, clause, provision,
or portion of this title is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this title shall not be affected
thereby. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
12-1-8: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply within Title 12 Subdivision Regulations:
ADMINISTRATOR: The Rosemount city administrator or the administrator's designee.
ALLEY:         A right-of-way that provides a secondary means of vehicular access to the side
               or rear of two (2) or more properties abutting on a street.
               The person or persons requesting approval of a subdivision by the council.
APPLICANT:     Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the property proposed for
               subdivision in the event that the applicant does not own the affected property.
ATTORNEY:      The Rosemount city attorney.
               An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets, or by
BLOCK:         streets and the exterior boundary or boundaries of the subdivision, or a
               combination of the above with a river, lake, wetland or railroad right-of-way.
BOARD:         The Rosemount board of appeals and adjustments.
BOULEVARD:     That portion of a street right-of-way between the curb or curb line and the
               property line.
BUILDING:      As defined in the city's zoning ordinance.
BUILDING       The minimum horizontal distance from a lot boundary to the nearest part of the
SETBACK:       foundation wall of a building as defined in title 11 of this code.
CITY:          The city of Rosemount, Dakota County, state of Minnesota.
CLERK:         The Rosemount city clerk.
COMMISSION:    The planning commission of the city.
COMPREHENSIVE  As defined in the city's zoning ordinance.
PLAN:
COUNCIL:       The city council of the city of Rosemount.
COUNTY         The county recorder of Dakota County, Minnesota.
RECORDER:
               The applicant or owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his/her
               representative who has petitioned the city for the installation of public
DEVELOPER:     improvements including streets and/or utilities. Consent shall be required from
               the legal owner of the proposed subdivision if the developer does not own the
               affected property.
EASEMENT:      Authorization by a property owner for another to use the owner's property for a
               specified use.
EASEMENT,      As defined and described within Minn. Stat. § 505.01, Subdivision 3, Paragraph
DRAINAGE:      (b).
EASEMENT, NON- An easement restricting vehicular access from a public or private property.
ACCESS:
EASEMENT,      As defined and described within Minn. Stat. § 505.01, Subdivision 3, Paragraph
UTILITY:       (j).
ENGINEER:      The professional engineer employed by the city of Rosemount.
ENGINEERING    City of Rosemount Engineering Guidelines as approved by the city council.
GUIDELINES:
               A deposit of funds held by the city for the purpose of securing public
ESCROW:        infrastructure or subdivision improvements or other costs or obligations of the
               developer as required or specified by resolution by the city council,
               ordinance, subdivision agreement or agreed to by the developer.
FINANCE        The Rosemount finance director or treasurer.
DIRECTOR:
FRONTAGE:      That side of a lot abutting on a public street right-of- way.
GRADE:         The ratio of horizontal or vertical dimensions of slope of the road, street, or
               other public way specified as a percentage of slope.
               A freeway or expressway, providing a trafficway for through traffic, in respect
HIGHWAY,       to which owners or occupants of abutting property of lands and other persons
LIMITED        have no legal right to accesses to or from the same, except at such points and
ACCESS:        in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction
               over such trafficway.
HOMEOWNERS'    A community association which is organized in a development in which individual
ASSOCIATION:   owners share common interests in open space or facilities.
IMPROVEMENTS:  See definition of Public Improvement.
LETTER OF      A letter provided to the city authorizing person(s) to pay money or extend
CREDIT:        credit to another on the credit of the writer to secure the promise to perform
               some act.
LOT:           As defined in the city's zoning ordinance.
METES AND      A method of property description whereby properties are described by means of
BOUNDS:        their direction and distance from an easily identified location.
MONUMENT:      An iron stake or pin placed in the ground indicating the location of
               intersecting property boundary lines.
               A parcel of land designated on a plat intended for future development purposes
OUTLOT:        that is restricted from private development or use, and will be replatted in
               accordance with an adopted preliminary plat, or a platted parcel intended for
               public or quasi-public use including parks or ponding.
               Any individual, firm, corporation, association, syndicate, partnership, or
OWNER:         trust with an interest in the land sought to be subdivided under these
               regulations.
               A public pedestrian walkway provided between lots where required by the city to
PEDESTRIANWAY: allow for pedestrian accessibility to streets or public areas. This may also be
               referred to as a "trailway".
PLANNED UNIT   As defined in the city of Rosemount's zoning ordinance.
DEVELOPMENT:
               The drawing or map of a subdivision prepared for filing or recording pursuant
PLAT:          to Minn. Stat. chapter 505 and containing all elements and requirements set
               forth in applicable local regulations adopted pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 462.358
               and chapter 505.
               A drawing, in final form, showing a proposed subdivision containing all
PLAT, FINAL:   information and detail required by state statutes and by this title to be
               presented to the city council for approval, and which, if approved, may be duly
               filed with the county recorder.
PLAT,          A plat submitted to the city for preliminary consideration and approval.
PRELIMINARY:
PROTECTIVE     A contract between parties which constitutes a restriction on the use of the
COVENANT:      property. Such restrictions are not enforced by the city.
PUBLIC         An infrastructure facility such as sanitary sewer, water main, storm sewer,
IMPROVEMENT:   street, or other facilities intended for the public welfare for which the city
               may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation.
PUBLIC LAND:   Land owned and/or operated by a governmental unit dedicated for public use.
PUBLICATION:   As defined in the city's zoning ordinance.
REGISTERED     A drawing of a tract (or tracts) of unplatted land meant to be conveyed as a
LAND SURVEY    separate parcel as defined by Minn. Stat. § 508.47, subd. 2.
(RLS):
REPLATTING:    The platting of an area that was previously final platted and recorded with
               Dakota County.
RIGHT-OF-WAY:  As defined in the city's zoning ordinance.
RURAL          A low density subdivision in the agriculture or rural area beyond the
SUBDIVISION:   metropolitan urban service area (MUSA) with on-site individual sewage treatment
               facilities.
SHALL:         Mandatory.
SIDEWALK:      A paved pedestrian walkway separate from the street surface.
STREET:        As defined in the city's zoning ordinance.
STREET,        A street intended to move traffic from local streets to arterial streets across
COLLECTOR:     the city.
STREET, CUL-   A street with only one (1) vehicular outlet.
DE-SAC:
STREET         That part of a lot which abuts a public right-of-way.
FRONTAGE:
STREET, LOCAL: A street to serve primarily as an access to abutting properties.
               A street intended to collect and distribute traffic from minor traffic
STREET, MINOR  generating areas such as community commercial areas, primary and secondary
ARTERIAL:      educational facilities, hospitals, major recreational areas, churches, and
               offices. They are designed to carry traffic from collector streets across the
               county to regional system of principal arterial highways.
               A road intended to move through traffic to and from major traffic generators
STREET,        such as central business districts, regional shopping centers, colleges, and/or
PRINCIPAL      universities, military installations, major industrial areas, and similar
ARTERIAL:      traffic generators within the governmental unit; and/or as a route for traffic
               between communities or large areas and/or which carries interstate and/or high
               volumes of traffic.
STREET,        A street which is not dedicated to the city for public use.
PRIVATE:
STREET WIDTH:  On a street with curbs, a measurement from the face of curb, or the measurement
               of the paved or improved surface of a street perpendicular to the centerline.
STRUCTURE:     As defined in the city's zoning ordinance.
               Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association, who shall lay out
SUBDIVIDER:    any subdivision or part thereof as defined therein, either by themselves or
               with others
               The separation of an area, parcel or tract of land under single ownership into
               two (2) or more parcels, tracts, lots or long-term leasehold interests where
               the creation of the leasehold necessitates the creation of streets, roads, or
               alleys for residential, commercial industrial, or any other use, or any
               combination thereof, except those separations:
SUBDIVISION:   1.   Where all the resulting parcels, tracts, lots, or interests will be twenty
               (20) acres or larger in size and five hundred (500) feet in width for
               residential uses and five (5) acres or larger in size for commercial and
               industrial uses;
               2.   Creating cemetery lots; or
               3.   Resulting from court orders or the adjustment of a lot line by the
               relocation of a common boundary.
SUBDIVISION    A contractual agreement providing for public infrastructure improvements and
AGREEMENT:     land development entered into between the city and subdivider to be completed
               prior to final plat approval.
SUBDIVISION,   A subdivision that creates no more than four (4) lots and depends upon existing
MINOR:         infrastructure for development and may be waived of some platting requirement.
SURVEY         See definition of Monument.
MONUMENT:
SURVEYOR:      A person duly registered as a land surveyor by the state of Minnesota.
URBAN          A subdivision serviced or to be serviced with municipal sanitary sewer, storm
RESIDENTIAL    sewer and municipal water developed within the metropolitan urban service area
SUBDIVISION:   (MUSA).
VARIANCE:      As defined in the city's zoning ordinance, title 11, section11-9-5.A of this
               code.
ZONING         As defined in the city's zoning ordinance.
DISTRICT:
ZONING         Title 11 of this code. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
ORDINANCE:
 
CHAPTER 2
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS AND IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
12-2-1: Street Design Standards
12-2-2: Street Sections
12-2-3: Sidewalks, Trails, Or Pathways
12-2-4: Easement Details
12-2-5: Landlocked Parcels
12-2-6: Park Dedication
12-2-7: Required Improvements
12-2-8: Grading Of Site Prior To Final Plat
12-2-9: Homeowners Association
12-2-1: STREET DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   A subdivision shall provide for the continuation or appropriate
projection of existing streets in surrounding areas; or a subdivision shall
conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved, or adopted by the council to
meet a particular situation where topography or other conditions make
continuance or conformance to existing streets impractical.
   B.   Local streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic
will be discouraged and so that they will not function as collector streets.
   C.   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed collector
or arterial street, the city may require such treatment as may be necessary for
adequate protection of residential property and to afford separation of through
and local traffic.
   D.   Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way, or
limited access highway right of way, the city may require a frontage street
approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance
suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land. Such distances shall
also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and
future grade separations.
   E.   Centerline offsets at shall conform with the standards listed within
the Engineering Guidelines.
   F.   Sight easements with tangent distances of twenty-five (25) feet shall
be provided at street intersections or the city may permit property lines at
street intersections to be rounded with a radius deemed necessary.
   G.   Street right of way and widths shall conform with the standards listed
within the Engineering Guidelines.
   H.   The construction of half streets shall be prohibited, but half of the
required right-of-way shall be platted within such tract where streets are
appropriate as determined by the city.
   I.   Cul-de-sac dead end streets, designated to be so permanently, shall not
serve more than fifteen (15) single-unit dwellings or twenty-five (25) multiple
dwelling units.
   J.   Cul-de-sacs shall only be developed where justified by irregular
topography or where adjacent to limited access streets.
   K.   Street grades shall conform with the standards listed within the
Engineering Guidelines. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
12-2-2: STREET SECTIONS:
   A.   The street section shall comply with design standards as set forth in
the city standard specification.
   B.   All street designs are subject to review and approval of the engineer.
(Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
12-2-3: SIDEWALKS, TRAILS, OR PATHWAYS:
   A.   Sidewalks shall be required along one side of any local street. Where
possible, the required sidewalk shall be located on the same side of the street
as previously existing sidewalks in the area to ensure continuity and reduce
the need for road crossings.
   B.   Sidewalks, trails, or paved pathways shall be located along both sides
of any collector or arterial street. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
12-2-4: EASEMENT DETAILS:
   A.   Utility and drainage easements abutting public street right-of-way and
centered on rear or side lot lines shall be at least ten (10) feet wide or
wider as may be required by the city.
   B.   Where a subdivision is traversed by a ponding area, watercourse,
ponding or utility easements, drainage, channel, or stream there shall be
provided a drainage easement conforming substantially with the lines of such
watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be
adequate for the purpose as determined by the city. Said drainage or ponding
easements shall be laid out and located in such a manner as to provide
reasonable access for maintenance and dredging purposes without undue
infringement upon the property over which access is taken.
   C.   Trails or pedestrianways shall be shown as trailways on the plat as
separate easements or recorded at the county as the city may direct.
   D.   When double frontage or reverse frontage lots are incorporated in a
plat, a planting screen easement of at least ten (10) feet in width may be
required along the line of lots abutting a collector street or minor or
principal arterial highways. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
12-2-5: LANDLOCKED PARCELS:
   A.   As a general rule, the city shall not permit landlocked parcels or
parcels that are only served by private easements. However, the city may permit
the following:
      1.   Landlocked parcels in multiple dwelling or commercial complex
provided said parcel(s) have access to public street by an easement over
another parcel within the same multiple dwelling or commercial complex.
      2.   Landlocked parcels which are unbuildable (outlots) and reserved as
permanent public open spaces such use as ponding areas may be permitted. A
conservation easement may be required by the city to ensure that the property
is preserved as open space. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
12-2-6: PARK DEDICATION:
   A.   Comprehensive Plans:
      1.   Where a proposed park, trailway, ponding, or open space area, shown
on the city's comprehensive plan, park development guide, comprehensive storm
sewer plan or official map, is located in the whole or in part in a
subdivision, such area or areas shall be shown on the preliminary plat.
      2.   Such area or areas shall also be dedicated to the city by the
subdivider if the council requests such dedication under the provisions of the
subsections below.
   B.   Dedication: In all subdivisions, the city shall require that a
reasonable portion of such land be set aside and dedicated to the public for
parks, playgrounds or other public use exclusive of property dedicated for
streets and other public ways.
      1.   In all residential subdivisions it shall be presumed that a
reasonable amount of land has been dedicated for parks and playgrounds if the
subdivider dedicates at least one twenty-fifth (1/25) of an acre for each Low
Density Residential dwelling unit of the proposed subdivision (acres to be
dedicated = 0.04 x number of dwelling units), 0.03 of an acre for Medium
Density Residential (acres to be dedicated = 0.03 x number of dwelling units)
or 0.02 of an acre for High Density Residential (acres to be dedicated = 0.02 x
number of dwelling units). The land use density determination will be based
upon the approved Comprehensive Land Use Plan. The city shall determine whether
a cash payment in lieu of land dedication is appropriate. The amount of cash
dedication shall be determined by multiplying the number of dwelling units of
the proposed subdivision times the designed fee per dwelling which may be set
from time to time by resolution of the council.
      2.   In all commercial, industrial and other subdivisions, it shall be
presumed that a reasonable amount of land has been dedicated to serve the needs
of the resident and working population for parks and playgrounds if the
subdivider dedicates at least ten percent (10%) of the land in the subdivision
for parks, recreation and usable open space. The city shall determine whether a
cash payment in lieu of land dedication is appropriate. The amount of the cash
dedication shall be determined by multiplying the number of acres (determined
by application of the formula stated above) times the designated fee per acre
which may be set from time to time by resolution of the council.
      3.   The dedication of a portion of land for parks or playgrounds, or the
payment of cash in lieu thereof, provided for above shall be presumed to be
reasonable. However, upon the request of the applicant, the recommendation of
the park and recreation commission, or at the discretion of the council, the
city may either increase or decrease such dedication or payment upon a
determination by the council that such dedication or payment is unreasonable or
insufficient given the specific characteristics of the proposed subdivision and
its intended use.
      4.   Ponding areas, needed as part of the overall city storm drainage
plan, shall be dedicated as land or easement at the option of the city and as
accepted by the city. However, no credit shall be given for park dedication
unless said area meets the criteria for public parks as stated in the city's
park dedication resolution and is approved by the council. Said dedication of
land or easement shall be in a form approved by the council.
      5.   In the case of subdivisions of land which have previously been
subdivided and for which land has been dedicated for parks or playgrounds, or
cash payments in lieu of such dedication have been made, the council shall make
reasonable adjustments to recognize such previous dedication or payment.
   C.   Timing Of Park Dedication: If a new subdivision is designed to be
platted into more than one addition, all park and other public use lands
contemplated under this section in the total subdivision area shall be
dedicated with the final plat of the first phase or addition of the subdivision
unless otherwise approved by the council.
   D.   Condition Of Land To Be Dedicated: Land to be dedicated for public
park, trail, or ponding shall be brought to a suitable condition by the
subdivider in accordance with city policy. All disturbed areas shall have
topsoil restored, be regraded with turf established according to specifications
provided by the city.
   E.   Abstract: Such lands shall be free and clear of all liens and
encumbrances including special assessments as evidenced by a recent abstract of
title or registered property abstract to be submitted at developer's cost to
the city for its examination.
   F.   Dedicated Property: City must have received warranty deed or equivalent
for dedicated park property by the city before final plat is approved. (Ord.
2024-04, 6-4-2024)
12-2-7: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
The following required improvements shall be installed in accordance with the
engineering policy, standards, and specifications which have been or may in the
future be adopted by the council. Where standards and specifications have not
been adopted, the improvements shall be made in accordance with good
engineering practices. No building permit shall be issued until public
improvements have been accepted by the city.
   A.   Roads And Highways:
      1.   Unless otherwise exempted, all lots shall be provided frontage along
existing roads and highways or road and highway to be constructed in
conjunction with the development of the subdivision and where not premature
under subsection
12-3-1 H.11.c of this title.
   B.   Sanitary Sewer Systems:
      1.   Where available, municipal sewer facilities shall be provided in the
development of the subdivision and where not premature under subsection
12-3-1 H.11.c of this title.
      2.   Where municipal sewer facilities are not available, individual
sewage systems shall be provided in accordance with this code.
   C.   Water Systems:
      1.   Where available, municipal water facilities shall be provided in the
development of the subdivision and where not premature under subsection
12-3-1 H.11.b of this title.
      2.   Where municipal water facilities are not available, individual water
systems shall be provided in accordance with the Minnesota Department of Health
and Dakota County adopted standards.
   D.   Drainage Facilities: Storm sewer, open drainage, or other facilities
and easements shall be installed and provided, which will adequately provide
for the drainage of surface waters and where not premature under subsection
12-3-1 H.11.a of this title.
      1.   Said drainage facilities shall be provided as approved by the city
engineer.
      2.   Storm sewer and/or other drainage facilities shall be installed as
determined to be necessary by the city engineer for proper drainage of the
surface waters.
   E.   All streets and utilities not located within a public right-of-way must
be maintained by the owner.
   F.   Turf: Prior to the issuance of occupancy permits for a dwelling so
provided, seeding shall be established and maintainable as a lawn, sod shall be
installed upon the unpaved street right-of-way fronting the lot and in any
drainage swales adjacent to the lot. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
12-2-8: GRADING OF SITE PRIOR TO FINAL PLAT:
Approval of a subdivision grading permit does not obligate the city in any
manner to approve a final plat. For further example, please refer to title 9,
"Building Regulations," of this code. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
12-2-9: HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION:
   A.   The declaration of covenants for a homeowners' association shall be
approved by the city and shall contain the following:
      1.   Duties Of Homeowners' Association: The open space and common areas
of a development shall be maintained and cared for by the developer of the
project until a homeowners' association is formed to maintain open space and
common areas. This homeowners' association shall be responsible for the care
and maintenance of all open space and common areas of this project and also for
the maintenance and appearance of the exterior of each unit.
      2.   Homeowners' Charges: The homeowners' association shall levy charges
to each owner for the maintenance cost, operating costs and improvement costs
for the open space, parks, and green areas and also for the parking and
bituminous surfaced areas which are not publicly owned and maintained. In
addition, the homeowners' association will assume the responsibility to
maintain the exterior of the building and also their front and rear yards in an
acceptable condition which is compatible to the neighboring property. This
condition shall be so kept that it will not cause a blighting of the area or a
general deterioration of the development. The homeowners' association will
cause blighted properties to be repaired, restored, and maintained as necessary
to a proper standard for the area.
      3.   Failure To Organize Homeowners' Association: In the event that the
developer or owner of the project is unable to organize the property owners
into an association for the maintenance of the project after twelve (12) months
from the completion of the construction, the council will call for a public
hearing of all persons so concerned and ask for the creation of such an
association. If no association is formed or if the association ceases to
function any time after it is formed, the council will order such maintenance
work and restoration of the area and then will assess such costs, together with
a reasonable supervision charge, to the property owners in the single-family
attached project or the individual property owner receiving the individual
benefit.
      4.   Declaration Of Covenants: The council may require that the
declaration of covenants include provisions to meet the minimum requirements of
this section or to satisfy conditions of city approval, may be enforced by the
city, and may not be amended or released without city council approval. (Ord.
2024-04, 6-4-2024)
CHAPTER 3
SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
12-3-1: Subdivision Platting Process
12-3-2: Preliminary Plat
12-3-3: Final Plat
12-3-4: Platting Alternatives
12-3-5: Subdivision Variance
12-3-6: Planned Unit Development
12-3-7: Violations And Penalties
12-3-1: SUBDIVISION PLATTING PROCESS:
   A.   All subdivisions are subject to platting requirements unless otherwise
provided for within this title.
   B.   Preapplication: The subdividers or owners should meet with city
officials (engineer and planner) in order to be made fully aware of all
applicable ordinances, policies, regulations, and plans pertinent to the
proposed subdivision. Staff will then inform the subdividers of the specific
processes and requirements for subdivision approval.
   C.   Application And Fees: All applications for subdivisions shall be filed
with the city and shall include all of the information required on the
application form provided by the city and all of the information required by
this title. Failure by the applicant to provide all of the required information
may result in immediate rejection of the application by staff. Application and
processing fees shall be established by fee resolution adopted from time to
time by the council.
   D.   Staff Review Of Application: Within fifteen business (15) days of the
receipt of the application, staff shall complete the initial review to
determine if all required information has been filed. The applicant will be
notified of incomplete or unacceptable application upon completion of initial
review. Failure by the city to inform the applicant does not obligate the city
in any manner.
   E.   Neighborhood Meeting: The zoning administrator shall have the authority
to require the applicant to hold a neighborhood meeting to inform nearby
property owners of the request. If required, this meeting shall take place
following the submittal of the formal application to the city but before
notices for the public hearing are published.
   F.   Public Hearing: When the application is complete, the city shall
conduct a public hearing before the commission according to the procedures
specified in the city's zoning ordinance, title 11, section 11-9-1of this code.
   G.   Council Approval: The council shall act following the receipt of a
complete application as required accompanied by recommendations forwarded by
the parks and recreation committee, planning commission, and utilities
commission regarding the subdivision in accordance with Minn. Stat. § 462.358.
   H.   Qualifications Governing Approval Of Subdivisions: All subdivisions
shall conform to the following criteria:
      1.   That the proposed subdivision complies with applicable ordinances
and the comprehensive guide plan.
      2.   That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision complies
with applicable plans of Dakota County, state of Minnesota or the metropolitan
council.
      3.   That the physical characteristics of the site, including, but not
limited to, topography, vegetation, susceptibility to erosion, and filtration,
susceptibility to flooding, water storage and retention, are such that the site
is suitable for the type of development or use contemplated.
      4.   That the site physically is suitable for the proposed density of
development.
      5.   That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are
not likely to cause environmental damage.
      6.   That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements are
not likely to cause health problems.
      7.   That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will
not conflict with the easements of record or with easements established by
judgment of court.
      8.   That completion of the proposed development of the subdivision can
be completed in a timely manner so as not to cause an economic burden upon the
city for maintenance, repayment of bonds, or similar burden.
      9.   That the design of the subdivision is compatible and consistent with
the platting or approved preliminary plat on adjacent lands.
      10.   That all proposed urban residential subdivisions are in the
metropolitan urban service area (MUSA).
      11.   That the subdivision is not premature. A premature subdivision may
include any of the following scenarios:
         a.   Lack Of Adequate Drainage: A condition of inadequate drainage
shall be deemed to exist if:
         (1)   Surface or subsurface water retention and runoff is such that it
constitutes a danger to the structural security of the proposed structures.
         (2)   The proposed subdivision will cause pollution of water sources
or damage from erosion and situation on downhill or downstream land.
         (3)   The proposed site grading and development will cause harmful and
irreparable damage from erosion and situation on downhill or downstream land.
         (4)   Factors to be considered in making these determinations may
include: average rainfall for the area; the relation of the land to
floodplains; the nature of soils and subsoils and their ability to adequately
support surface water runoff and waste disposal systems; the slope of the land
and its effect on effluents; and the presence of streams as related to effluent
disposal.
         b.   Lack Of Adequate Water Supply: A proposed subdivision shall be
deemed to lack an adequate water supply if the proposed subdivision does not
have adequate sources of water to serve the proposed subdivision if developed
to its maximum permissible density without causing an unreasonable depreciation
of existing water supplies for surrounding areas.
         c.   Lack Of Adequate Roads Or Highways To Serve The Subdivision: A
proposed subdivision shall be deemed to lack adequate roads or highways to
serve the subdivision when:
         (1)   Roads which serve the proposed subdivision are of such a width,
grade, stability, vertical and horizontal alignment, site distance and surface
condition that an increase in traffic volume generated by the proposed
subdivision would create a hazard to public safety and general welfare, or
seriously aggravate an already hazardous condition, and when, with due regard
to the advice of the county and/or the Mn-DOT, said roads are inadequate for
the intended use.
         (2)   The traffic volume generated by the proposed subdivision would
create unreasonable highway congestion or unsafe conditions on highways
existing at the time of the application or proposed for completion within the
next two (2) years.
         d.   Lack Of Adequate Waste Disposal Systems: A proposed subdivision
shall be deemed to lack adequate waste disposal systems if in subdivisions for
which sewer lines are proposed, there is inadequate sewer capacity in the
present system to support the subdivision if developed to its maximum
permissible density after reasonable sewer capacity is reserved for schools,
planned public facilities, and commercial and industrial development projected
for the next five (5) years; or if in subdivisions where sewer lines are
neither available nor proposed, there is inadequate on site sewer capacity
potential to support the subdivision if developed to the maximum permissible
density.
         e.   Inconsistency With Comprehensive Plan: A proposed subdivision
shall be deemed inconsistent with the city's comprehensive plan when the
subdivision is inconsistent with the purposes, objectives and recommendations
of the adopted comprehensive plan of Rosemount, as may be amended. Subdivisions
which do not follow planned public improvements shall be deemed inconsistent
with the city's growth strategies as outlined in the comprehensive plan.
         f.   Public Service Capacity: A proposed subdivision shall be
determined to lack necessary public service capacity when services such as
recreational facilities, schools, police and fire protection and other public
facilities, which must be provided at public expense, cannot reasonably be
provided for within the next two (2) years.
         g.   Minnesota Environmental Quality Board (EQB) Policies: The
proposed subdivision is inconsistent with the policies of the environmental
quality board, as may be amended, and could adversely impact critical
environmental areas or potentially disrupt or destroy historic areas, which are
designated or officially recognized by the council, in violation of federal and
state historical preservation laws.
         (1)   Inconsistency With Capital Improvement Plan: A proposed
subdivision shall be deemed inconsistent with capital improvement plans when
improvements and/or services necessary to accommodate the proposed subdivision
have not been programmed in the Rosemount, county or other regional capital
improvement plans. The council may waive this criteria when it can be
demonstrated that a revision to capital improvement programs can be
accommodated.
   I.   Appeals Of Decisions:
      1.   An appeal of any decision made under this title may be filed and
reviewed according to the procedures in section
11-9-7 "Appeals." (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024; amd. Ord. 2025-02, 1-21-2025)
12-3-2: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   A.   A preliminary plat is required for overall public infrastructure
phasing and capital improvement planning.
   B.   Staff Review, Public Hearing, And Approval: The city shall complete the
review, public hearing, and approval process according to the requirements of
section
12-3-1 of this title.
   C.   Final Requirements: Prior to a final plat submission, the following
information shall have been reviewed and approved by the council:
      1.   A preliminary plat in accordance with the provisions of this title;
      2.   An environmental assessment worksheet (EAW) when required and
subject to the provisions of Minnesota state statutes;
      3.   Approval of other governmental jurisdictions that have approval
authority of preliminary plats;
      4.   An engineering feasibility report unless this requirement has been
waived by the council; and
      5.   A tree preservation plan in accordance with section
11-7-7 of this code.
   D.   Lapse And Extension Provision:
      1.   Approval shall be effective for a period of five (5) years after
action by the council unless otherwise specified by the council.
      2.   Upon expiration of the time limit, all approvals for preliminary
plat or portions thereof for which a final plat has not been recorded with the
county, shall be null and void and a new petition and processing shall be
necessary to revalidate the preliminary plat unless the council shall grant an
extension of time prior to the expiration date.
      3.   This subsection will pertain to all preliminary plats approved after
January 1, 2015. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
12-3-3: FINAL PLAT:
   A.   A final plat is required for recording each phase or addition of a
subdivision. Prior to granting final plat approval, the council may permit or
require the plat to be divided into two (2) or more additions or may impose
such conditions upon filing of the additions as it may deem necessary to ensure
the orderly development of the plat.
   B.   Review And Approval:
      1.   The Zoning Administrator shall review the final plat and forward a
recommendation to the city council for review and final decision.
      2.   If found acceptable, the final plat shall be approved by city
council resolution. The city council shall state, in writing, its findings for
approval or denial, as well as any conditions of approval.
      3.   Following the decision by the city council, the zoning administrator
shall notify the applicant of the council's action and reasons thereof.
   C.   Final Requirements: Prior to the city executing the final plat, the
following information shall have been received and approved by the council:
      1.   A subdivision agreement, drafted by the city that identifies all
requirements of the developer and the city;
      2.   The approved phasing of the subdivision, which may include the use
of additions and/or outlots with dedication of public rights of way and/or
public easements;
      3.   Approval of other governmental jurisdictions that have approval
authority of preliminary plats;
      4.   An engineering feasibility report;
      5.   Review and approval by the city's public utilities commission and
park and recreation committee; and
      6.   A copy of the abstract when required by the city for a title search.
   D.   Recording Requirements:
      1.   Vested Rights: No vested rights, in terms of conveying lots, shall
accrue to any plat by reason of preliminary or final approval until the actual
signing of the plat by the city after all requirements are met and recorded
with the county.
      2.   Signing Of Plat: Signatures shall be recorded upon the final plat as
required by the county.
         a.   The signature of the mayor or vice mayor attesting to the date
upon which the council approved the final plat.
         b.   The signature from the clerk's office and seal of the city
attesting to the above referenced actions by the city and valid signatures.
      3.   Release Of Plat: The final plat shall not be released by the clerk
for recording with the county until the following have been completed:
         a.   The recording of signatures upon the final plat as listed in
subsections D.1 and D.2 above of this section.
         b.   The recording of signatures upon the appropriate subdivision
agreement(s).
         c.   The submittal of all required fees and appropriate financial
guarantees to the city, if any, ensuring the applicant's performance of the
terms of these regulations.
      4.   Recording Of Plat:
         a.   It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to file the plat
with the county recorder within two (2) years after the plat has been released
for recording by the city unless a time extension has been granted by the
council.
         b.   Failure to record the plat within two (2) years of council
approval shall render all approvals by the city null and void until a new
application has been processed and approved by the city or until the city has
granted an extension in time in which the final plat shall be recorded.
      5.   Proof Of Recording: The city shall not take any action related to
the plat such as issuing building permits or awarding public utility or street
contracts on the platted property until such time as the clerk has been
satisfied that the plat has been recorded with the county recorder. (Ord. 2024-
04, 6-4-2024)
12-3-4: PLATTING ALTERNATIVES:
Alternatives to the standard preliminary and final plat procedures and
requirements may be permitted under certain conditions as defined below.
   A.   Lot Line Adjustment:
      1.   When owners of adjacent properties intend to modify the areas of the
existing parcels while not creating an additional buildable lot, approval of a
lot line adjustment can be requested when all of the following apply:
         a.   The new legal descriptions for the properties are metes and
bounds or simple, easily described division of two (2) platted lots of record
(for example, east ½ of lot 31, north 150 feet of lot 31);
         b.   The adjustment does not result in the creation of a new lot, does
not make one of the lots large enough to be eligible for further subdivision,
and does not make an unbuildable lot buildable; and
         c.   The resulting parcels meet all applicable ordinance requirements,
except that if one of the parcels was previously non-conforming, it must become
more conforming as a result of the subdivision.
      2.   The zoning administrator shall approve or deny the application and
provide the applicant with written notice of the decision and reasons for
approval or denial.
   B.   Agricultural Lot Divisions:
      1.   Lot divisions for single-unit dwellings in the agricultural district
may be exempted from platting requirements in accordance with the requirements
of title 11 chapter 3 of this code.
   C.   Minor Subdivision:
      1.   Property may be subdivided through a minor subdivision procedure
which combines the preliminary and final plat procedures in sections
12-3-1 and
12-3-3 in conformance with the following conditions:
         a.   The resulting subdivision shall contain no more than four (4)
parcels.
         b.   The proposed subdivision shall be in areas where municipal
streets and utilities are already in place and capable of serving the plat.
         c.   Future streets shall not be constructed and the proposed
subdivision shall not interfere with proper development of neighboring adjacent
properties.
         d.   Resulting parcels shall conform with all zoning ordinance
requirements.
      2.   Minor subdivision shall conform to all requirements of standard
subdivision except that some of the information requirements such as the
engineering feasibility report may be waived by the city staff.
   D.   Registered Land Survey (RLS):
      1.   Registered land surveys shall not be used to avoid the requirements
of this title.
      2.   A registered land survey for parcels of less than five (5) acres in
size or three hundred (300) feet in width shall be reviewed by the commission
and approved by the council in the same manner as a preliminary plat. Such
approval shall be attached to the survey.
      3.   All registered land surveys shall be prepared in conformance with
Minn. Stat. § 508.47, subdivision 4.
   E.   Corrections:
      1.   When a survey or description of a parcel or lot has been found to be
inadequate to describe the actual boundaries, approval of a corrective plat may
be requested.
      2.   This type of subdivision creates no new lots or streets.
      3.   The proposed corrective subdivision, in sketch plan form, along with
a letter signed by both property owners agreeing to the new subdivision, shall
be submitted to the council for approval. No hearing or commission review is
necessary unless the proposal is referred to the commission by the planner for
clarification.
      4.   The proposed lots shall not cause any portion of the existing lots,
parcel, or existing buildings to be in violation of this regulation or the
zoning code. A certificate of survey may be required on any proposed lot with
existing buildings in order to determine the placement of the building on the
proposed lot. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
12-3-5: SUBDIVISION VARIANCE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide for variations from
the literal provisions of this title in instances where an unusual hardship
exists upon the land.
   B.   Board Of Appeals And Adjustments: The board of appeals and adjustments
as defined within section
11-9-7 shall review all variances to this title.
   C.   Procedures: The board of appeals of adjustments shall follow the
procedures in section
11-9-7 of the Zoning Ordinance.
   D.   Review Criteria: The board of appeals and adjustments shall not approve
a variance unless they find that the following criteria, as applicable, have
been met:
      1.   The variance, and its resulting construction or project, would be in
keeping with the spirit and intent of this chapter.
      2.   The variance would alleviate an unusual hardship existing upon the
land such as physical surroundings, shape, or topographical conditions. Unusual
hardship includes, but is not limited to, inadequate access to direct sunlight
for solar energy systems.
      3.   The variance and its resulting construction or project would not be
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other nearby properties.
      4.   The variance requested is the minimum action required to alleviate
the hardship. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
12-3-6: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   The city may combine public hearing requirements for subdivisions with
those required for planned unit developments.
   B.   Dimensional deviations in the development of the subdivision under this
chapter shall relate to lot area, lot width, lot depth, frontage on a public
street, street width, setbacks for any yard, height, setback from adjacent
zoning district or use, length of cul-de-sac, length of block, and radius of
cul-de-sac.
   C.   Said dimensional deviations shall be clearly stated and documented at
the time of approval by the council before they shall have full form and
effect.
   D.   Unless waived by the Zoning Administrator, all data required on a
preliminary plat and on a final plat as set forth in this chapter, including
streets, utility easements, existing or proposed subdivisions of ownership and
such other information, if any, as required by this chapter, shall be required
as a part of the planned unit development as set forth in section
11-9-6 of this code. Such waiver shall not constitute a verification that all
required data has been submitted. (Ord. 2024-04, 6-4-2024)
12-3-7: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provisions of this title
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished
according to Minn. Stat. § 609.02, subdivision 3. (Ord.
 
