RUSHFORD, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Local legislation current through Ord. - , passed 4-14-2025
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f96a454829628dad3923165be401283a1782260/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1324.png]
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street, Ste. 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
CHARTER
Editor’s note:
   No substantive changes have been made to this document. Any original errors
or inconsistencies have been retained. Only formatting changes have been made
and/or scrivener’s errors corrected.
CHARTER
of the
CITY OF RUSHFORD
Minnesota
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f96a454829628dad3923165be401283a1782260/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1308.gif]
 
Framed by the
Board of Freeholders
And Delivered to the Mayor on March 4, 1927
Approved by the
Voters on Monday,
April 4, 1927
TABLE OF CONTENTS
   
Chapter 1.   General Provisions
   
Chapter 2.   Elections
   
Chapter 3.   Legislation and Administration
   
Chapter 4.   Taxation and Finance
   
Chapter 5.   Public Improvements
   
Chapter 6.   Franchises
   
Chapter 7.   Miscellaneous and Transitory Provisions
   
Certificate of Commission
CHARTER OF
THE CITY OF RUSHFORD
FILLMORE COUNTY, MINNESOTA
CHAPTER 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 1. POWERS OF THE CITY.
   The municipal corporation in the County of Fillmore, State of Minnesota,
known as the City of Rushford, with boundaries as now established, or as
hereafter established in the manner provided by law, shall continue to be a
municipal corporation under the same name; shall have perpetual succession; may
use a corporate seal; may sue and be sued; may acquire property of any kind or
description, or any Tight, title or interest in the same within or without its
boundaries for any municipal purpose by purchase, gift, devise, condemnation,
or lease or otherwise, and may sell, convey lease, hold, encumber, manage and
control or otherwise dispose of such property as its interests require; and
except as prohibited by the constitution or statutes of the State of Minnesota
or of the United States, the City of Rushford shall have all other municipal
powers, functions, rights, remedies, privileges, and immunities of every name
and nature whatsoever. The enumeration of particular powers in other sections
of this charter shall not be construed to limit the powers of the city to those
thus enumerated. The provisions of this charter shall be construed liberally in
favor of the city, to the end that it may have all necessary powers for the
efficient conduct of its municipal affairs, as contemplated by the municipal
home rule provisions of the constitution and laws of the State of Minnesota.
SECTION 2. BOUNDARIES.
   Until changed as provided by law, the City of Rushford shall include the
following territory: the west half of section thirteen; the east half of
section fourteen; the south half of the southeast quarter of section eleven;
the south half of the southwest quarter of section twelve; the southeast
quarter of the southwest quarter of section eleven; the east half of the
northwest quarter of section fourteen; and the east half of the southwest
quarter of section fourteen, all in township one hundred four north, range
eight west.
SECTION 3. POWERS, HOW EXERCISED.
   All powers of the city, unless otherwise provided in this charter, shall be
exercised by the City Council or under its direction.
CHAPTER 2. ELECTIONS
SECTION 4. ELECTIVE OFFICERS.
   There shall be elected at large in the City of Rushford, a Mayor, four
aldermen, and two justices of the peace, or a municipal justice as may be
provided by law. The Mayor and aldermen shall together constitute the Council
of said city.
SECTION 5. REGULAR ELECTIONS.
   The regular municipal election shall be held on the second Tuesday in July,
1927, and annually thereafter at such place or places as the City Council may
designate. The City Council may by ordinance divide the city into two or more
voting precincts. At least fifteen days public notice shall be given by the
City Clerk of the time and place or holding any election, and of the officers
to be elected and the propositions to be voted upon, but failure to give such
notice shall not invalidate such elections.
SECTION 6. NOMINATIONS.
   The manner of nomination of all elective officers provided for in this
charter shall be by petition. The Council may provide for the holding of a
public caucus. The name of any candidate for elective office in the city shall
be printed on the ballot whenever a petition signed by ten electors of the city
or by the president, secretary and eight members of a caucus shall have been
filed on his behalf with the City Clerk at least ten days before the election.
The Clerk shall prepare the ballot in a manner to be provided by ordinance.
SECTION 7. NOMINATION PETITIONS.
   The form of the nomination petition shall be substantially as follows:
 
“NOMINATION PETITION”
“We, the undersigned, electors of the city of Rushford, Minnesota, hereby
nominate ________________________
whose residence is Rushford, Minnesota, for the office of ____________________
to be voted upon at the election to be held on the _____day of ____________, 19
_____; we individually certify that we are qualified electors, and that we have
not signed more nomination petitions for candidates for this Office than there
are persons to be elected thereto.”
 
SECTION 8. JUDGES AND CLERKS OF ELECTION.
   The Council shall at least ten days before each municipal election, appoint
three qualified voters to be judges of the election and two qualified voter to
be Clerks of the election in each precinct.
SECTION 9. PROCEDURE AT ELECTION.
   The conduct of elections shall be regulated by ordinance, subject to the
provisions of this charter. The general election laws of the state shall govern
in all matters not otherwise provided for in this charter or the ordinances
passed hereunder.
SECTION 10. CANVASS OF ELECTION.
   The Council shall meet and canvass the election returns within five days
after any regular or special election.
SECTION 11. SPECIAL ELECTIONS.
   The Council may by a resolution, passed by a vote of four-fifths of its
members order a special election and fix the time and place of holding the
same.
SECTION 12. TERM OF OFFICE.
   The term of office of the Mayor shall be one year. The term of office of the
aldermen and the justices of the peace shall be two years.
SECTION 13. VACANCIES.
   An elective office may be deemed vacant in ease of the failure of the person
elected to qualify within ten days after official notice of his election. or by
reason of death, resignation, removal from the city, conviction of a felony, or
removal from office. If a vacancy occurs in an elective office the Council
shall forthwith appoint an eligible person to fill the office until the next
general municipal election, when the office shall be filled by election for the
unexpired term, if any, if not, then for a full term. Elections of justices of
the peace shall always be for a full term.
SECTION 14. SALARIES OF ELECTIVE OFFICERS.
   The Council shall by ordinance fix the salaries of the Mayor and members of
the Council, which shall be in a stated sum for each regular and special
meeting of the Council. The justices of the peace shall receive the fees
allowed by law.
CHAPTER 3. LEGISLATION AND ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 15. PRESIDING OFFICER.
   The Mayor shall be the president of the Council and shall preside at all
meetings of the Council. At the first regular meeting of the Council, which
shall be held on the second Tuesday after the municipal election, the Council
shall elect one of its members president pro-tem. Such president pro-tem shall
preside at the meetings of the Council in the absence of the Mayor, and shall
during the absence of the Mayor from the city or during his disability be
acting Mayor with full power as Mayor. The Mayor shall be recognized as the
official head of the city for all ceremonial purposes, by the courts for the
purpose of serving processes, and by the governor for purposes of military law.
SECTION 16. COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   All meetings of the Council shall be held in the city hall. The Council
shall keep a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. It
shall hold at least one regular meeting each month and may hold other meetings
as provided by its rules. At any meeting of the Council a majority of the
members shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller number may adjourn from time
to time. The Council shall provide by ordinance a means by which a minority may
compel the attendance of absent members. All meetings of the Council shall be
open to the public.
SECTION 17. APPOINTIVE OFFICERS.
   At the first meeting of the Council after the annual election, the Council
shall appoint the following officers who shall hold office for the term of one
year or until they are removed by the Council: City Clerk, City Assessor, City
Treasurer, two Constables, and a Board of Health of three members. The Council
may from time to time appoint such other officers, employees and agents for
said city as may be deemed necessary for the proper management and operation of
its municipal affairs. The Council shall by ordinance prescribe the duties and
fix the compensation of all appointive officers.
SECTION 18. QUALIFICATION FOR APPOINTIVE OFFICE.
   No member of the Council may be chosen to any appointive office for which a
compensation is paid, either during his terms of office or for one year
thereafter. Every appointive officer shall be a resident and qualified voter of
the City of Rushford.
SECTION 19. ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all legislation shall be by
ordinance. Every ordinance and resolution shall be presented in writing and
read in full at a Council meeting before a vote is taken thereon. The reading
of a resolution may be dispensed with by unanimous consent. All administrative
business may be transacted by ordinary motion. Upon the final passage of all
ordinances and resolutions, the ayes and nays shall be recorded. A majority
vote of all the members of the Council shall be required for the passage of all
ordinances and resolutions except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
SECTION 20. ENACTING CLAUSE.
   The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be in the words: “The City of
Rushford Ordains:”
SECTION 21. FILING AND READING ORDINANCES.
   Every ordinance, other than an emergency ordinance, shall have two readings,
and at least three days shall elapse between the first and second readings
thereof. Every ordinance or resolution authorizing the making of any contract
involving a liability on the part of the city in excess of one thousand dollars
shall remain on file in the office of the City Clerk at least one week after
its introduction before its final passage except an emergency ordinance or
resolution. An emergency ordinance or resolution is one for the immediate
preservation of the public peace, health, morals, safety, or welfare, in which
the emergency is defined and declared in a preamble thereto, separately voted
upon. Such preamble shall receive the affirmative vote of four-fifths of the
members of the Council. No grant of any franchise shall be construed to be an
emergency ordinance. An emergency ordinance or resolution may be enacted
without previous filing, and on the same day it is introduced.
SECTION 22. SIGNATURE AND LOCATION OF ORDINANCES.
   Every ordinance except as otherwise provided in
Section 24 of this chapter shall be signed by the Mayor, or in his absence by
the president pro-tem of the Council, attested by the City Clerk, published
within twenty days after its passage by the Council and recorded by the City
Clerk in a properly indexed book kept by him for that purpose. Every ordinance
not so published and recorded shall be void.
SECTION 23. WHEN ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS TAKE EFFECT.
   All ordinances shall take effect immediately upon their passage and
publication unless a later date is fixed therein, in which event they shall
take effect at such later date. Resolutions shall take effect upon their
passage.
SECTION 24. REVISION AND CODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.
   The ordinances of the city may from time to time, by a single ordinance, be
revised, rearranged and codified and any new matter may be added which may be
deemed necessary by the Council. Such revision and codification may be
published in book form and such publication shall be held to be a sufficient
publication of all of the ordinances contained therein. Every such book shall
contain a printed certificate of the Mayor and City Clerk that the publication
is correct; and such book so published shall be received in evidence in any
court for the purpose of proving the ordinances therein contained the same and
for the same purpose as the original ordinances, books, minutes or journals
would be received.
SECTION 25. ADMINISTRATION.
   The Council may, by ordinance, create such departments and boards to advise
the Council or for the administration of the city’s affairs as may seem
necessary, and abolish the same and from time to time alter the powers and
organization of the same. It shall prepare a complete administrative code for
the city and enact the same in the form of an ordinance which may be amended
only by a four-fifths vote of the Council.
CHAPTER 4. TAXATION AND FINANCE
SECTION 26. COUNCIL TO CONTROL FINANCES.
   The Council shall have full authority over the financial affairs of the
city, and shall provide for the collection of all revenue and other assets, the
auditing and settlement of accounts, and the safe keeping and disbursement of
public moneys.
SECTION 27. SYSTEM OF TAXATION.
   Subject to the state constitution, and except as forbidden by it or by state
law, the Council shall have full power to provide by ordinance for a system of
local taxation and to change the same from time to time. In so far as the city
procures a revenue from taxes upon real estate and person all property on an ad
valorem basis, it shall conform as fully as possible to the general laws of the
state as to the assessment of such property and the collection of such taxes.
SECTION 28. FISCAL PERIOD.
   The fiscal period of the city shall begin on the first day of July and end
on the last day of June in each year.
SECTION 29. PREPARATION OF THE ANNUAL BUDGET.
   The City Clerk shall prepare the estimates for the annual budget and submit
the budget to the Council for approval. The estimates of expenditures shall be
arranged for each department or division of the city in such manner as to give
the following information: (1) Ordinary expenses (for operation, maintenance
and repairs) subdivided into (a) Salaries, showing each salaried office
separately; (b) Wages; (c) Printing, advertising, telephone, express and
freight charges and other like items; and (d) Supplies and repairs, with
supporting details; (2) Capital outlays (for new construction, new equipment,
and all improvement of a lasting character); and (3) Fixed charges. All
increases and decreases as compared with the preceding year shall be clearly
shown. In parallel columns shall be shown the amounts appropriated and the
amounts expended or obligated under similar heads for the past two completed
fiscal years. The estimates of revenue shall be arranged under the following
headings: sums derived from (a) general property tax, (b) fines, (c) fees, (d)
interest, (e) sales and rentals, (f) operation of public utilities, (g) special
assessments, (h) sales of bonds or other obligations, and (i) miscellaneous,
not included in any other item. In parallel columns shall be shown the actual
revenues and uncollected balances receivable under similar headings for the
last two fiscal years. The budget estimates shall also show the funds into
which each item of receipts will be paid and the funds out of which each item
of expenditure will be paid. Copies of the budget estimates shall be given to
each member of the Council, the City Clerk, and the City Treasurer and they
shall be published.
SECTION 30. PASSAGE OF THE BUDGET.
   The budget shall be the principal item of business at the first regular
meeting of the City Council in August of each year, and the Council shall hold
adjourned meetings from time to time until all the estimates have been
considered. The meetings shall be conducted in the nature of public hearings
and the budget shall be explained in detail to members of the public who may be
present. The annual budget finally agreed upon shall be a resolution setting
forth in detail the complete financial project of the city for the ensuing
fiscal year. It shall indicate the sums to be raised and from what sources, and
the sums to be spent and for what purposes, and a reasonable amount may be
included, not allotted to any item of expenditure as a contingency fund, which
may be used for any lawful purpose upon a four-fifths vote of all the members
of the Council. The total sum appropriated shall be less than the total
estimated revenue by a safe margin. The Council shall adopt the budget
resolution not later than the first day in October of each year.
SECTION 31. ENFORCEMENT OF THE BUDGET.
   It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to enforce strictly the provisions of
the budget. He shall not approve any order on the City Treasurer for any
expenditure unless an appropriation has been made for it in the budget, nor for
an expenditure mentioned in the budget unless there is a sufficient unexpended
balance left after deducting the total past expenditures and encumbrances
against the item in question. No expenditure except for salaries may be made
except in pursuance of a signed requisition or contract. Such requisitions and
contracts shall be charged against the budget items as they are approved and
shall be deemed to be encumbrances thereupon to the same extent as though the
expenditure thereof or had actually been made. No person shall place any order
or make any purchase on behalf of the city except for the purposes and to the
amounts authorized in the budget. Any person who incurs any obligation on
behalf of the city in violation of this section shall be personally liable to
the city therefor.
SECTION 32. ALTERATIONS IN THE BUDGET.
   After the budget shall have been duly adopted, the Council shall have no
power to increase the amounts therein fixed (by the insertion of new items or
otherwise) beyond the estimated revenue. The sums fixed in the budget shall be
appropriated as of the first day of October for the purposes named therein, and
no other. The Council may by resolution passed by a four-fifths vote of all its
members reduce salaries or the sums appropriated for any other purpose.
Balances remaining in any budget item at the end of a fiscal period shall
revert to the treasury and shall be used to reduce the amount necessary to be
raised for the ensuing budget year.
SECTION 33. LEVY AND COLLECTION OF TAXES.
   On or before the first day of October of each year the Council shall by
resolution levy the taxes necessary to meet the requirements of the budget for
the ensuing budget period, taking into account estimated revenues from sources
other than taxation. The City Clerk shall transmit to the county auditor
annually, not later than the tenth of October, a statement of all taxes and
assessments levied, and such taxes and assessments shall be collected with and
the payment thereof enforced in like manner as state taxes. No tax shall be
invalid by reason of any informality in the manner of levying the same.
SECTION 34. BOARD OF EQUALIZATION.
   A board of equalization made up of the Mayor, the City Clerk, and the city
assessor shall meet in the city hall on the last Monday in June annually to
equalize assessments according to law.
SECTION 35. RECEIPTS.
   All income of the city from any source shall be paid to the City Clerk who
shall receipt for it in duplicate and keep one copy of the receipt as a
permanent record. The City Clerk shall deposit with the City Treasurer daily
all money received by him in his official capacity. The City Treasurer shall
deposit such funds only in such depositories as may be designated by the
Council, and then only after such depositories shall have furnished such
security as may be required by the Council.
SECTION 36. DISBURSEMENTS.
   Disbursements other than those made to pay the principal or interest on
bonds of the city shall be made only upon orders signed by the Mayor or
president pro-tem of the Council, in the absence of the Mayor, and by the City
Clerk. Every such order shall specify the purpose for which the disbursement is
made, and indicate the fund out of which it is to be paid. Each such order
shall be directed to the City Treasurer, and the latter shall pay the same if
there is sufficient money in the proper fund. If no money is in such fund, the
City Treasurer shall endorse the order “not paid for want of funds” with the
date of such endorsement, and such order shall draw the legal rate of interest
from the date of such endorsement until the day upon which the treasurer shall
give public notice that there is money in his hands with which to pay the same.
The City Treasurer shall keep a register of such endorsements and pay such
warrants in the order of their registry as soon as there is sufficient money in
the proper fund.
SECTION 37. PURCHASE AND CONTRACTS.
   Requisitions and contracts, bonds and other instruments to which the city
shall be a party shall be signed by the Mayor and City Clerk on behalf of the
city.
SECTION 38. CONTRACTS.
   In all cases of work to be done by contract, or for the purchase of property
of any kind, when the amount involved is more than one thousand dollars,
(unless the Council by an emergency ordinance shall provide otherwise) the
Council shall give not less than five days public notice of the time and place
of receiving bids therefor. No contract requiring the payment of money by the
city shall be valid unless the particular fund out of which the same is to be
paid is specified in such contract and adequate provision has been made for the
payment. The Council shall regulate by ordinance the making of bids and the
letting of contracts.
SECTION 39. FUNDS.
   There shall be maintained in the city treasury the following funds: (a) A
general fund for the payment of such expense of the city as the Council may
deem proper. Into this fund shall be paid all money not herein provided to be
paid into any other fund; (b) A bond and interest fund for the purchase or
payment when due of the principal of and interest upon any bonds or debt of the
city, other than public utility bonds. The Council shall annually levy a tax
sufficient to meet all obligations against this fund when due, unless otherwise
provided for; (c) A public utility fund into which shall be paid all money
derived from the sale of bonds issued on amount of any municipally owned
utility, and all money derived from the sale of utility services, and from the
sale of any property acquired for or used in connection with any such utility.
There shall be paid out of this fund the cost of the purchase, construction,
extension, operation, maintenance and repair of such utility, including the
principal of and interest upon obligations which have been or shall be issued
on its account. When all bonds issued for utility purposes are paid, the annual
surplus in this fund shall be invested by the City Treasurer in interest
bearing certificates or bonds as provided by law for sinking funds and approved
by the Council for the purpose of creating a fund for the rebuilding of the
utility plants, and the present rates shall remain in effect until this fund
has reached a sum sufficient to reproduce the plant. The fund so created shall
be available only for the purpose of maintaining and reconstructing the utility
system. Separate accounts shall be kept for all utilities which are operated
separately; (d) A permanent improvement revolving fund into which shall be paid
all moneys received from special assessments for local improvements and from
the sale of bonds issued in anticipation of the collection of special
assessments or bonds issued for the city’s share of the cost of any local
improvement. Any other contribution by the city to the cost of an improvement
shall be transferred from the general fund to this fund. The Council may order
the issuance and sale of bonds representing the aggregate sum of special
assessments made payable in installments, and the city’s share of the making of
any local improvement. There shall be paid out of this fund such amounts as may
become due on account of the making of any public improvement in the city, the
cost of which has been specially assessed in full or in part.
SECTION 40. ACCOUNTING AND REPORTS.
   The City Clerk shall be the chief accounting officer of the city. The
Council may prescribe and enforce proper accounting methods, forms, blanks and
other devices consistent with the law, this charter and the ordinances passed
under it. The Clerk shall submit to the Council a monthly statement showing the
amount of money in the custody of the City Treasurer, the status of all funds,
the amounts spent or chargeable against each of the budget allowances and the
balances left in each, and such other information relative to the finances of
the city as the Council may require.
SECTION 41. BONDED DEBT.
   No bonds shall ever be issued to pay current expenses or to refund
certificates of indebtedness issued to provide for temporary deficiencies in
the revenues for current expenses. The Council may by a four-fifths vote of all
its members submit to the electors propositions for the issuance of bonds for
any public purpose not prohibited by law, and for such purpose may issue bonds
under any or all of the provisions of Chapter 10, General Statutes of 1923 and
acts amendatory thereof and supplemental thereto. Except as otherwise provided
in this charter, no bonds or other term obligations of the city may be issued
except pursuant to a favorable vote of a majority of those voters who vote on
the proposition of their issuance.
SECTION 42. FORM AND REPAYMENT OF BONDS.
   All bonds issued by the city shall be serial bonds, and as nearly as
practicable, an equal amount of each series shall fall due each year. No bonds
issued shall be issued to run for a longer period than the reasonable life or
the property or improvement for which the bonds are authorized as ascertained
and set forth in the proposition submitted at the election authorizing such
bonds, and in no case shall bonds be issued to run for longer than thirty
years. The purpose for which bonds are authorized shall be set forth in the
proposition submitted to the voters at the election authorizing them, and the
proceeds from such bonds shall not be diverted to any other purpose. No bonds
may be sold unless the sale has been advertised by five days public notice,
provided that the Council may reject any and all bids and sell the bonds at
private sale if a better price can be obtained.
SECTION 43. EMERGENCY DEBT CERTIFICATES.
   If in any year the receipts of the city shall from some unforeseen cause
become insufficient for the ordinary expenses of the city, or if any calamity
or other public emergency should make necessary extraordinary expenditures, the
Council may by a resolution approved by four-fifths of the members thereof
authorize the sale of emergency debt certificates to run not to exceed one
year, and to bear interest at a rate of not more than six per cent per annum. A
tax sufficient to redeem all such certificates at maturity shall be levied as a
part of the budget of the next year following the issuance of such
certificates.
CHAPTER 5. PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION 44. CITY PLAN.
   The City Council shall, with the assistance of the City Clerk, and, if
desired, of an advisory city planning commission, prepare and adopt a complete
plan for the future physical development of the city. Such plan may be altered
from time to time. It may include provisions for zoning, for the planning and
development of new areas, for the planning and location of public buildings,
parks, playgrounds, bridges, and other public facilities and for the laying
out, grading and improvement of streets and public places, as well as for all
other matters which may seem essential to such plan.
SECTION 45. PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   The city shall have power to make any and every type of public improvement
not forbidden by the laws of this state, and to levy special assessments for
all such as are of local character. The amounts assessed to benefitted property
to pay for local improvements may equal the cost of the improvements with
interest until paid. The Council may, by a four-fifths vote of all its members,
order that the cost and expense of all or any part of the making of any local
improvement shall be paid out of the general fund or the public utility fund as
the case may be, without assessment on the property benefitted.
SECTION 46. LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS.
   After this charter takes effect, all local improvements shall continue for
the time being to be made under the laws previously applicable thereto as far
as possible. The Council shall prepare and adopt a comprehensive ordinance,
prescribing the procedure which shall be followed thereafter in making all
local improvements and such ordinance when adopted shall supplant all other
provisions of the law on the same subject and may be amended only by a vote of
four-fifths of all of the members of the Council. Such ordinance shall provide
for such notice and hearing in the ordering of improvements and the making of
assessments therefore as shall be necessary to meet constitutional
requirements.
SECTION 47. EMINENT DOMAIN.
   Condemnation proceedings by this city shall be carried out as provided in
Chapter 41, General Statutes, 1923, and acts amendatory thereof.
CHAPTER 6. FRANCHISES
SECTION 48. DEFINITION OF FRANCHISE.
   The word “franchise” as used in this chapter shall be construed to include
all privileges granted to any person, firm, association or corporation in,
over, upon, or under any of the highways or public places of the city, whether
such privileges have been or shall hereafter be granted either by the city or
by the State of Minnesota.
SECTION 49. FRANCHISE ORDINANCES.
   The Council may, by ordinance adopted by an affirmative vote of four-fifths
of all its members, grant a franchise for the construction or operation of any
and every type of public utility, subject to the limitations and conditions
prescribed in this charter. The grantee shall bear the cost of publication of
franchise ordinances and shall deposit sufficient cash to guarantee the
publication before the ordinance is passed.
SECTION 50. TERM LIMITED.
   The Council in granting any franchise shall fix the term thereof. No
franchise shall be granted for a longer term than twenty years.
SECTION 51. PUBLICATION OF FRANCHISE.
   Every ordinance granting or extending any franchise shall contain all the
terms and conditions of the franchise. A franchise shall be without any
validity whatever until it has been unconditionally accepted in all its terms
by the grantee.
SECTION 52. POWER OF REGULATION.
   The city shall have the power through its Council to regulate and control
the exercise of any franchise whether such franchise has been or shall
hereafter be granted by the city or by the State of Minnesota.
SECTION 53. RATES AND CHARGES.
   Every grantee of a franchise to operate a public utility shall give
courteous, efficient and adequate service at reasonable rates. A reasonable
rate shall be construed to be one which will, with efficient management
normally yield above all operating expenses and depreciation, a fair return on
all money honestly and efficiently invested in the plant and equipment of the
grantee. This shall not be construed to be a guarantee of a return.
SECTION 54. CONDITIONS OF FRANCHISE.
   Every franchise shall contain the conditions set forth in this section, and
every franchise which does not contain them and all of them shall be absolutely
void and incapable of ratification by estoppel or otherwise. Every franchise
shall contain a provision:
   (1)   That the Council shall have the right:
      (a)   To hear and determine what are just, fair and reasonable rates, to
order that only reasonable rates be charged, and to make effective such order
by penalties and forfeitures. The granting of any franchise shall not be deemed
to confer any right to include in the charges for service any return on the
value of the franchise;
      (b)   To require reasonable extensions of services;
      (c)   To make such rules and regulations as may be required to secure
adequate and proper service, and to provide sufficient accommodations for the
public.
   (2)   That no sale, assignment or lease of said franchise shall be effective
until the vendee, assignee, or lessee shall have filed in the office of the
City Clerk, an Instrument, duly executed, reciting the fact of such sale,
assignment, or lease, accepting the terms of the franchise, and agreeing to
perform all the conditions thereof.
   (3)   That in the case of franchises granted for the erection of poles or
masts on, over, or along the highways or other public places, or the stringing
of wires thereon, the Council may require the placing underground, or in any
other safe or convenient position or manner, of wires carrying electricity, and
wires for other purposes.
   (4)   That the city shall have free access to all books, records and papers
of the grantee which in any way deal with, affect or record its operations
within the city.
   (5)   That the violation by the grantee of the provisions of the franchise
shall be cause for the forfeiture of the franchise by resolution of the
Council.
SECTION 55. FURTHER LIMITATIONS.
   The enumeration in this charter of particular matters which must be included
in every franchise shall not be construed to impair the right of the city to
insert in such franchise such other and further conditions and restrictions as
the Council may deem proper to protect the city’s interests, nor shall anything
contained in this charter limit any right or power possessed by the city over
existing franchises.
CHAPTER 7. MISCELLANEOUS AND TRANSITORY PROVISIONS
SECTION 56. CHARTER A PUBLIC ACT.
   This charter shall be a public act and need not be pleaded nor proved in any
case. It shall take affect thirty days from and after its adoption by the
voters of the city.
SECTION 57. OATH OF OFFICE.
   Every elected or appointed officer of the city shall before assuming his
official duties, appear before the City Clerk and take and subscribe the oath
of office prescribed by law and file the same with the City Clerk. Every
officer of the city shall hold over until his successor has been elected or
appointed and has duly qualified.
SECTION 58. OFFICIAL BONDS.
   The City Clerk shall furnish, before assuming the duties of his office, a
good and sufficient corporate surety bond for the faithful performance of his
duties in a sum fixed by the Council and sufficient amply to protect the city.
Such official bond shall be approved by the Council and shall be furnished by
surety companies authorized to do business in this state. The bonds for other
elective and appointive officers may be surety or private bonds as approved by
the Council. The premium on such bonds shall be paid by the city.
SECTION 59. OFFICERS NOT TO ACCEPT FAVORS.
   No officer or employee of the city shall solicit or receive any pay,
commission, money or thing of value or derive any benefit, profit or advantage,
directly or indirectly, from or by reason of, any improvement, alteration or
repair required by the city, or any contract to which the city shall be a
party, except his lawful compensation or salary as such officer or employee, or
except as his property may be benefitted incidentally by the making of public
improvements. No officer or employee of the city, except as otherwise provided
in this charter or by law, shall solicit, accept or receive directly or
indirectly from any public utility company or the grantee of any franchise any
service upon terms more favorable than those granted to the public generally.
SECTION 60. FORFEITURE OF OFFICE.
   Any willful violation by any elected or appointed officer of any of the
provisions of this charter or of the ordinances lawfully enacted under its
authority or of his official oath, and any willful omission to perform any of
the duties imposed upon such officer by this charter, the city ordinances, or
such official oath shall constitute malfeasance or nonfeasance in office. The
district court of Fillmore County is hereby given exclusive jurisdiction to try
such cases of malfeasance or nonfeasance in a summary manner, upon complaint of
any five taxpayers, and a judgment of conviction by such court shall work an
immediate forfeiture of office.
SECTION 61. OFFICIAL PUBLICATION.
   The Council shall designate an official newspaper. Whenever any public
notice shall be required either by this charter or by any ordinance of the
city, such notice may be given either by publication once in such official
newspaper or by posting for ten days in three public places in said city
designated for the purpose by the Council or by both such methods. The Council
may designate which method shall be used in each case, or require that both be
used. Unless otherwise provided by the Council, public notice shall be given by
publication in the official newspaper.
SECTION 62. APPLICATION OF GENERAL LAWS.
   All general laws of the state applicable to cities of the fourth class, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this charter shall apply to the City of
Rushford, and shall be construed as supplementary to the provisions of this
charter. All acts and parts of acts giving the city authority and powers to be
exercised outside of the corporate limits are hereby expressly retained.
SECTION 63. VACATION OF STREETS.
   The Council shall have the exclusive power, by ordinance passed by a four-
fifths vote of all the members thereof, to vacate or discontinue streets and
alleys within the city. Such vacations may be made upon such terms and by such
procedure as the Council may, by ordinance, prescribe. A record of each such
vacation shall be filed in the office of the register of deeds of Fillmore
County.
SECTION 64. ADVERSE POSSESSION.
   No right, title, estate or easement of the city in any property shall be
lost by adverse possession or occupancy, and no statute of limitations shall
operate against the city in favor of any person occupying any public property
or highway whether such highway shall have been improved or not.
SECTION 65. DAMAGE SUITS.
   No action shall be maintained against the city on account of any injuries or
damages to persons or property unless such action shall be commenced within one
year from the occurrence of such injury or damage nor unless notice shall have
been given in writing to the City Clerk within thirty days after the occurrence
of such injury or damage, stating the time when and the specific place where
and the circumstances under which the same occurred and that the person injured
or damaged will claim damages of the city therefore, and the amount of such
claim.
SECTION 66. RECOVERY OF JUDGMENT.
   If any judgment shall be recovered in any action against the city for any
injury or damage caused by any obstruction, excavation, opening or defect in
any public place caused or occasioned by the act or omission of any person,
firm, association or corporation, the city shall have the right to recover the
amount of such judgment from the person or persons responsible for such defect.
SECTION 67. ORDINANCES TO CARRY OUT CHARTER.
   The Council shall by ordinance make such rules and regulations as may be
necessary to carry out and make effective the provisions of this charter.
SECTION 68. EXISTING ORDINANCES CONTINUED.
   All ordinances not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter and in
force when this charter takes effect are hereby continued in full force and
effect until amended or repealed by the Council. As soon as this charter takes
effect, the Council shall provide for the revision and codification of the
ordinances of the city in the manner provided in this charter.
SECTION 69. PENDING CONDEMNATION AND EASEMENTS.
   Any condemnations or assessment proceedings in progress when this charter
takes effect shall be completed under the laws under which such proceedings
were begun. All assessments made by the city prior to the time when this
charter goes into effect shall be collected and the lien thereof enforced in
the same manner as if this charter had not been adopted.
SECTION 70. WHEN OFFICIALS TAKE OFFICE.
   All elective and appointive officers shall take office upon their
qualification. All officers in office when this charter takes effect shall
remain in office until twelve o’clock noon on the fourth Tuesday in July, 1927,
and no longer, and the officers first elected under this charter shall take
office at that time. At the first election under this charter a Mayor shall be
elected for one year, two aldermen shall be elected for two years, and two
aldermen shall be elected for one year; and two justices of the peace shall be
elected for two years. At the second election, and annually there after the
voters shall elect a Mayor for a one year term, two aldermen for a two year
term, and such justices of the peace for a two year term, as may be necessary.
SECTION 71. RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   The City of Rushford shall remain vested with and continue to have, hold and
enjoy all property, property rights, rights of action, and rights of every kind
now belonging to or pertaining to said city, and shall be subject to all
liabilities which now exist against said city.
CERTIFICATE OF COMMISSION
STATE OF MINNESOTA   )
County of Fillmore         )   ss
Whereas, the Hon. Judge N. E. Peterson, judge of the District Court in and for
the Tenth Judicial District of Minnesota, did on the 11th day of December 1926,
duly make and file his order under and pursuant to Article Iv, Section 36 of
the Constitution of the state of Minnesota and laws enacted pursuant thereto,
appointing a board of freeholders to frame and submit a charter for the City of
Rushford. Fillmore County, Minnesota, for its own government as a city;
And Whereas, said Board of freeholders did on the 14th day of December 1926
qualify in the manner required by law;
And Whereas, said Board of Freeholders in obedience to said order, did
thereafter duly prepare and frame a proposed charter for the said city of
Rushford, of which the foregoing document composed of 71 sections, numbered
from 1 to 71 inclusive, is a draft;
Now, Therefore, We, the Undersigned members of said Board of Freeholders, under
and pursuant to the power conferred upon us as aforesaid, and acting in
accordance with the statutes in such cases made and provided, do hereby affix
our signatures to said draft in testimony of our approval thereof, and do
deliver the same to the Honorable Magnus Johnson, Mayor of the City of
Rushford, to be submitted to the voters of the City of Rushford for adoption in
the manner prescribed by law.
Dated at Rushford, Minnesota, this 3rd day of March 1927.
 
C. C. Jensen, Chairman Geo. H. Julsrud, Secretary Geo. H. Miles
A.J. Holle             Otto Julsrud               C. A. Eggen
Andrew Ness            E.S. Habberstad            Ed. Quickstad
Francis M. Smith       Andrew Tagland             John A. Frisvold
Dr. R. V. Williams     Ole K. Quarve              J. G. Roberton
 
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
General Provisions
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Rules of interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Official time
   
10.11   Reasonable time
   
10.12   Ordinances repealed
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
   
10.18   Copies of code
   
10.19   Adoption of statutes and rules and supplements by reference
   
10.20   Enforcement
Administrative Citations
   
10.35   Purpose
   
10.36   Offenses; issuance
   
10.37   Procedure; ticket books
   
10.38   Issuing citations
   
10.39   Payment of citations
   
10.40   Processing citations
   
10.41   Enforcement
 
   
10.99   General penalty
   
Appendix A: Notice of Code Violation
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city, as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“Rushford City Code”, for which designation “code of ordinances”, “codified
ordinances” or “code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter and section
headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to the
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “traffic code”. Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§
10.01”. Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of
state law.
   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances
of the city shall be by the following rules, unless that construction is
plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of
the same ordinance.
      (1)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or”, whenever the context requires.
      (2)   Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions or ordinance
requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as
the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the
act by an authorized agent or deputy.
      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
      (4)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CITY. The City of Rushford, Minnesota. The term CITY, when used in this
code, may also be used to refer to the City Council and its authorized
representatives.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. The city code as modified by
amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or sections.
      COUNTY. The County of Fillmore, Minnesota.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath and, in those cases, the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED. All terms shall mean a pledge
taken by the person and administered by an individual authorized by state law.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of the city unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as
applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Minnesota.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.10 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within the city for the transaction of all city
business.
§ 10.11 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
§ 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this
indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.17 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred
or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities,
proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or forfeitures
shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In
particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-way,
contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or
vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate officers shall remain
valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.18 COPIES OF CODE.
   The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk
for public inspection. The Clerk shall provide a copy for sale for a reasonable
charge.
§ 10.19 ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES AND SUPPLEMENTS BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this code
of ordinances, all future amendments to any state or federal rules and statutes
adopted by reference in this code or referenced in this code are hereby adopted
by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this
code was adopted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the code to the
contrary.
   (B)   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this code
of ordinances, all future supplements are hereby adopted as if they had been in
existence at the time this code was enacted, unless there is clear intention
expressed in the code to the contrary.
§ 10.20 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any licensed peace officer of the city’s Police Department, or the
County Sheriff, or any Deputy Sheriff shall have the authority to enforce any
provision of this code.
   (B)   As permitted by M.S. § 626.862, as it may be amended from time to
time, the City Clerk shall have the authority to administer and enforce this
code. In addition, under that statutory authority, certain individuals
designated within the code or by the Clerk or City Council shall have the
authority to administer and enforce the provisions specified. All and any
person or persons designated may issue a citation in lieu of arrest or
continued detention to enforce any provision of the code.
   (C)   The City Clerk and any city official or employee designated by this
code who has the responsibility to perform a duty under this code may with the
permission of a licensee of a business or owner of any property or resident of
a dwelling, or other person in control of any premises, inspect or otherwise
enter any property to enforce compliance with this code.
   (D)   Every licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of property
within the city shall permit at reasonable times inspections of or entrance to
the property by the City Clerk or any other authorized city officer or employee
only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to protect the
health, safety and welfare of the people are being complied with and to enforce
these provisions. Unreasonable refusal to permit the inspection of or entrance
to the property shall be grounds for termination of any and all permits,
licenses or city service to the property. Mailed notice shall be given to the
licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of the property, stating
the grounds for the termination, and the licensee, owner, resident or other
person in control of the property shall be given an opportunity to appear
before the City Clerk to object to the termination before it occurs, subject to
appeal of the Clerk’s decision to the City Council at a regularly scheduled or
special meeting.
   (E)   If the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of a
premises objects to the inspection of or entrance to the property, the City
Clerk, peace officer or any employee or official charged with the duty of
enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon a showing that probable cause
exists for the issuance of a valid search warrant from a court of competent
jurisdiction, petition and obtain a search warrant before conducting the
inspection or otherwise entering the property. This warrant shall be only to
determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the people are being complied with and to enforce these
provisions only, and no criminal charges shall be made as a result of the
warrant. No warrant shall be issued unless there be probable cause to issue the
warrant. Probable cause occurs if the search is reasonable. Probable cause does
not depend on specific knowledge of the condition of a particular property.
   (F)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of
the city to enter private property in urgent emergency situations where there
is an imminent danger in order to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
§ 10.35 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish procedures and provide for
the use and processing of administrative citations by the city’s Police
Department. An ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSE is a violation of any local ordinance
within the city when one performs a non-criminal prohibited act, or fails to
act when the failure is thereby prohibited. Administration citations shall be
issued for petty misdemeanor traffic, misdemeanor check and city ordinance
violations occurring within the city.
(Ord. passed 7-14-2003)
§ 10.36 OFFENSES; ISSUANCE.
   It is the policy of the city’s Police Department to issue administrative
citations for all petty misdemeanor traffic violations if the driver has no
more than one moving violation within the previous year. Administrative
citations shall also include, but not be limited to, parking violations, noise
violations, bicycle violations, pet violations, snow emergency violations,
snowmobile, golf cart and all- terrain vehicle violations, curfew violations,
as well as any other action in violation of a city ordinance.
(Ord. passed 7-14-2003)
§ 10.37 PROCEDURE; TICKET BOOKS.
   Officers of the city’s Police Department will be issued separate tickets
books to be used for issuing administrative citations. These ticket books will
include necessary space for all pertinent vehicle information, driver
information, month, date and time of the violation, ordinance number and the
officer’s signature and badge number.
(Ord. passed 7-14-2003)
§ 10.38 ISSUING CITATIONS.
   At the time of a traffic stop or during first contact by an officer,
violators will be given the option of being issued an administrative citation,
or the summons and complaint to appear in District Court for the violation
which has occurred. Every person has the right to plead not guilty for any
charge issued against them and to seek judicial determination in a court of
law. No administrative citation shall be issued to persons wishing to seek
remedy in a court of law. For persons seeking remedy in court, a county summons
to District Court (i.e., traffic ticket or citation of offense ticket) shall be
issued for the violation. If the person wishes to handle the matter locally,
without seeking judicial determination, an administrative citation shall be
issued. Local ordinance numbers will be used on administrative citations in
place of state statute numbers whenever an appropriate ordinance exists for the
violation. A brief incident report shall also be prepared and placed on file
for all administrative citations issued.
(Ord. passed 7-14-2003)
§ 10.39 PAYMENT OF CITATIONS.
   When issuing the administrative citation, the payment due date will be
written on the citation and the violator will be given two weeks (ten business
days) to pay the monetary penalty at the City Clerk’s office, in person, by
mail or depositing in one of the city payment dropboxes. Payment shall be
admission of the violation, but the offense will not appear on the violator’s
driving or criminal history record. Failure to pay the administrative penalty
on or before the date specified on the citation will result in the appropriate
county summons and complaint to appear in District Court (i.e., traffic ticket
or citation of offense ticket) being issued and mailed to the violator. If an
individual makes payment after the county summons has been issued, he, she or
they shall be told to appear in County District Court on his, her or their
assigned date with the receipt indicating payment was made and that the
Prosecuting City Attorney will make the final decision regarding the
disposition of the county summons.
(Ord. passed 7-14-2003)
§ 10.40 PROCESSING CITATIONS.
   (A)   The City Clerk’s office will receive a copy of all issued
administrative citations to coordinate and account for payments as they are
received. Receipts will be issued for cash payments received. All proceeds
received and data collected pertaining to payment of an administrative penalty
shall be maintained by the City Clerk’s office.
   (B)   Each administrative citation will be classified as paid, unpaid or
void. No administrative citation will be dismissed or voided without prior
approval of the Chief of Police. If a citation is dismissed or voided for any
reason, it must be marked and filed as such.
   (C)   All data collected from the issuance of administrative citations shall
be maintained by the city’s Police Department.
(Ord. passed 7-14-2003)
§ 10.41 ENFORCEMENT.
   Enforcement of this subchapter shall be the responsibility of the Chief of
Police.
(Ord. passed 7-14-2003)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for
any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota Statutes
specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90 days
or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both. The cost of prosecution may be
added to the penalty imposed on every person convicted of violating any
provision of this code, pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from
time to time.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300. The
cost of prosecution may be added to the penalty imposed on every person
convicted of violating any provision of this code, pursuant to M.S. § 631.48,
as it may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   Unless otherwise provided, a separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each act of violation and each day during which a violation
occurs or continues.
   (D)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
   (E)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section or in §
10.98 of this chapter, if any person, firm or corporation fails to comply with
any provision of this code, the Council, or any city official designated by it,
may institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct
or abate the violation.
APPENDIX A: NOTICE OF CODE VIOLATION
 
To: (Name and address of person who is alleged to have violated the code)
 
From: (Name and title of city official giving the notice)
 
Re: Alleged violation of Section of the City Code, relating to (give title of section)
 
Date: (Date of notice)
 
I hereby allege that on (date of violation) you violated §       of the City Code relating to                                      
.
 
The City Council has by resolution established an administrative penalty in the amount of $         for this violation.
 
Payment of this administrative penalty is voluntary, but if you do not pay it the city may initiate criminal proceedings for this
alleged violation.
 
Payment is due within 14 days of the date of this notice. Before the due date, you may request an additional 14-day extension of the
time to pay the administrative penalty.
 
As an alternative to the payment of this administrative penalty, if the situation that gave rise to this alleged violation is
corrected by (establish date), then the payment of the administrative penalty will be waived.
 
Even if the administrative penalty is paid, the city reserves the right to institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to
restrain, correct or abate the violation.
 
Before the due date, you may request to appear before the City Council to contest the request for payment of the penalty. After a
hearing before the Council, the Council may determine to withdraw the request for payment or to renew the request for payment.
Because the payment of the administrative penalty is voluntary, there shall be no appeal from the decision of the Council.
 
If you pay the administrative penalty, the city will not initiate criminal proceedings for this alleged violation. However, the
Council, or any city official designated by it, may institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or
abate the violation.
 
Payment of the administrative penalty may be made by check, cash or money order to the City Treasurer.
 
Signed:                                                               
      (Name and Title of Person Giving Notice)
 
 
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
      
31.   ORGANIZATIONS
      
32.   FINANCE AND REVENUE; TAXATION
CHAPTER 30: OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
City Administrator
   
30.01   Position established
   
30.02   Appointment
   
30.03   Duties
   
30.04   Budget supervision
   
30.05   Meeting attendance
   
30.06   Purchasing supervision
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
§ 30.01 POSITION ESTABLISHED.
   The office and position of City Administrator is hereby created for the
city. The City Council may combine the office of the Administrator with that of
the City Clerk.
(Ord. passed 7-23-1990)
§ 30.02 APPOINTMENT.
   The City Administrator shall be appointed by the Council and serve for an
indefinite term. Selection shall be made solely on the basis of executive,
administrative, educational and experience qualifications. Unless expressly
stated otherwise by this subchapter, or by Council action, the Administrator
shall be subject to the city personnel policy.
(Ord. passed 7-23-1990)
§ 30.03 DUTIES.
   The City Administrator shall:
   (A)   Serve as chief administrative officer of the city and be responsible
to the City Council for the proper administration of all the policies of the
city;
   (B)   Know and understand this code of ordinances and the laws of the state
and the United States of American in relation to city administration;
   (C)   Supervise and manage the administration of all departments, offices
and divisions of the city, except as otherwise provided by law;
   (D)   Recommend from time to time the adoption of such measures as may be
deemed necessary or expedient for the health, safety and welfare of the
community or for the improvement of the city’s administration;
   (E)   Work with city commissions and boards as necessary to carry out and
implement Council policies and coordinate commission activities with elected
city officials;
   (F)   Stay abreast of developments in the public administrative field and
cooperate with other governmental units and municipalities on matters of mutual
interest;
   (G)   Coordinate and supervise the work of the City Attorney, Auditor,
Engineer, consultants and contractors;
   (H)   Be the city’s Personnel Officer and be responsible for implementation
of city personnel policies. Make recommendations to the Council concerning the
employment, discipline or removal of city employees;
   (I)   Develop and issue all administration rules, regulations and procedures
necessary to ensure the proper functioning of all city departments, offices and
divisions as permitted by law and as approved by the City Council;
   (J)   Prepare and update job descriptions for all city employees and conduct
periodic evaluation of all city employees;
   (K)   Schedule work for city employees, including overtime; and
   (L)   Perform other duties as may be required by the City Council.
(Ord. passed 7-23-1990)
§ 30.04 BUDGET SUPERVISION.
   The City Administrator shall supervise the city budget as follows:
   (A)   Manage the preparation of the city’s annual budget for approval by the
City Council. Advise the City Council of the financial condition of individual
departments and funds; make appropriate recommendations;
   (B)   Manage the effective utilization of city assets and recommend
additions or changes to the Council;
   (C)   Invest available funds to secure the maximum income therefrom and
supervise the City Clerk to obtain effective and proper accounting practices,
appropriate insurance coverage and effective financial planning; and
   (D)   Maintain familiarity with alternate and supplemental sources of
revenue, including federal and state aids, loans, grants and other sources of
revenue. Submit recommendations to the City Council for actions necessary to
take advantage of the sources.
(Ord. passed 7-23-1990)
§ 30.05 MEETING ATTENDANCE.
   The Administrator shall be responsible to attend meetings concerning city
business as follows:
   (A)   Attend and participate in discussion at all meetings of the City
Council. Represent the city at functions as may be directed by the Council.
Coordinate meetings and represent the Council as directed with other
governmental agencies and associations;
   (B)   Work closely with the Council, including performing research on agenda
items and other Council requests, attend meetings to report on city affairs and
problems, present recommendations concerning policies and objectives as well as
specific actions, participate in discussions as appropriate of all significant
matters. Present all items which require Council action or approval to the City
Council; and
   (C)   Supervise preparing agendas for Council meetings and provide
supporting data.
(Ord. passed 7-23-1990)
§ 30.06 PURCHASING SUPERVISION.
   The Administrator shall supervise all city purchases as follows:
   (A)   Control the fiscal expenditures of all departments and divisions of
the city, except where limited by law. All purchases and acquisitions shall be
made in the name of the city; and
   (B)   Purchase or enter into contracts for previously budgeted items when
the amount thereof does not exceed an amount as set by City Council from time
to time. Purchase or enter into contracts for previously budgeted items after
obtaining two or more quotations when the amount is over, but does not exceed,
an amount as set by the City Council from time to time. Obtain Council approval
on all budgeted items after obtaining quotations. Solicit sealed bids by public
notice on all items in excess of an amount as set by City Council from time to
time and present them to the City Council for official action.
(Ord. passed 7-23-1990)
CHAPTER 31: ORGANIZATIONS
Section
   
31.01   Library Board
   
31.02   Electric Utility Commission
   
31.03   Airport Commission
§ 31.01 LIBRARY BOARD.
   (A)   Establishment of Rushford Public Library. The city hereby creates a
Library Board, the purpose of which is to supervise public library service
within the city pursuant to M.S. Chapter 134, as it may be amended from time to
time hereafter.
   (B)   Board composition and appointment.
      (1)   The city’s Public Library Board shall be composed of seven members
appointed by the Mayor with approval of the City Council. All members shall be
residents of the city, with the exception that one Board member may be a
resident of the county from outside the corporate limits of the city so long as
the city receives financial assistance from the county for the provision of
library services. No more than one member of the Board shall also be a member
of the City Council.
      (2)   Initially, appointments to the Library Board shall be as follows:
three appointments for one- year terms; two appointments for two-year terms;
and two appointments for three-year terms. Thereafter, all appointments, except
those for a vacancy during a term, shall be made for three years. In the event
of a vacancy during a term, the Mayor shall, with the approval of the City
Council, fill the vacancy by appointment for the balance of the unexpired term.
      (3)   No Library Board member shall serve more than three consecutive
three-year terms.
      (4)   The Library Board members will receive no compensation for their
services, but may be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the discharge of
Library Board duties and activities.
      (5)   The Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, may remove any
Board member for misconduct or neglect.
   (C)   Organizations and duties of the Board.
      (1)   Immediately after appointment, the Library Board shall organize
itself by electing one of its members as President and one member as Secretary,
and from time to time may appoint such other officers as it deems necessary.
The Library Board shall adopt bylaws and regulations for the governing of the
library and for the conduct of its business as may be expedient and conformable
to law.
      (2)   The Library Board shall have control of the expenditure of money
collected for and placed to the credit of that portion of the capital outlay
budget for books and videos. All moneys received for the library shall be paid
to the City Treasurer within five days of receipt and credited to a Library
Fund, separate from other funds of the city. The funds shall only be paid out
on written approval of the Library Board. The Library Board may not spend more
money than is available in the Library Fund in any fiscal year without the
permission of the City Council.
      (3)   The Library Board may lease room for library space and may, with
approval of the City Council, purchase and maintain buildings or other real
property deemed necessary for provision of library services to the city, or
contract with other public agencies for the services.
      (4)   (a)   The Library Board may hire sufficient operational,
administrative, clerical and other staff as may be necessary for the efficient
operation of the library, or contract for the services with other county or
region library systems, or with the city.
         (b)   Any employees hired by the Library Board shall be employees of
the city and shall be subject to the city personnel policy.
      (5)   The Library Board may accept any property as a gift, grant or other
conveyance; except that, no real property may be accepted unless the City
Council approves the donation or acquisition prior to the acceptance by the
Library Board. Title to all such property shall vest in the city and be held in
the name of the city for use of the inhabitants of the city or other persons in
accordance with law and subject to regulations the Library Board may adopt.
   (D)   Report to Council. As soon as practical following the end of the
fiscal year, the Library Board shall report to the City Council all moneys
received during the preceding year and the sources thereof, the moneys expended
and for what purposes, the number of library materials on hand, the number
purchased and loaned and such other information as is advisable or required by
the City Council. All relevant information shall be filed with the state’s
Department of Education by April 1 of each year.
   (E)   Conformance to statute. The Board shall operate in conformance with
M.S. Chapter 134, as it may be amended from time to time, and may cooperate
with any regional library system that the Board deems to provide the best
services available to the city.
(Ord. passed 6-11-1990; Ord. passed 2-22-1993)
§ 31.02 ELECTRIC UTILITY COMMISSION.
   (A)   Establishment of Commission. An Electric Utility Commission for the
city is established. The Commission shall be the city electric utility planning
agency authorized by M.S. Chapter 216, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Purpose and function of the Commission. The general function of the
Electric Utility Commission shall be to advise the City Council as to the
control, management and operation of the electric utilities which are, or shall
be, operated by the city.
   (C)   Membership, terms of office and organization.
      (1)   The Electric Utility Commission in the city will be comprised of
five members. Four members shall be appointed by the Mayor from among the
resident citizens of the city and appointments confirmed by the City Council
and one member shall be appointed by the Council from its own membership and
the terms of office of each shall be two years.
      (2)   Current members of the Electric Utility Commission shall remain in
office until the expiration of their current terms. Future terms shall be
staggered so that one member of the Commission shall be appointed each year on
January 1. Both current and successive appointees shall hold the office until
their successors are appointed and qualified. Vacancies during the term shall
be filled by the Council for the unexpired portion of the term. Every appointed
member shall, before entering upon the discharge of his or her duties, take an
oath to faithfully discharge the duties of the office.
      (3)   The Electric Commission shall elect a Chairperson and Secretary
from among its appointed members for terms of one year; and the Commission may
create and fill such other offices as it may determine necessary, subject to
approval by the City Council. The Commission shall hold at least one meeting
each month. It shall adopt rules for the transmission of city business and keep
records on its resolutions, transactions and findings, which records shall be
public record. On or before December 31 of each year, the Commission shall
submit to the City Council a report on its work during the preceding year.
      (4)   Each of the five Electric Utility Commission members shall have
equal voting privileges. Any member may be removed for cause by majority vote
of the City Council upon written charge and after a public hearing before the
City Council.
   (D)   Duties and powers of the Electric Utility Commission.
      (1)   Power to fix rates. The Commission shall recommend to the City
Council all rates and rents for services for the use of electricity sold by the
city. The rates shall be just and reasonable. The boards shall consider rates
sufficient to defray the cost of the operation maintenance and expansion of
service, and to pay the interest on accounts, and to maintain a reasonable
reserve fund for use at any time in making repairs and expansion.
      (2)   Power to determine units and types of measurements. In recommending
the rate structure, the Electric Utility Commission shall determine the unit of
measurement for each particular service. It shall recommend the time and place
of payment for all such services and may recommend a penalty for failure to pay
on the date determined or for violations of any rules recommended by the
Electric Utility Commission.
      (3)   Audit. The city shall have its utility funds audited each year and
a copy of the audit filed with the City Clerk.
      (4)   Letting bills. In all cases of work to be done by contract, the
purchase of private property and supplies, the Electric Commission shall
recommend to the City Council specifications to advertise for bids. The City
Council will consider for approval all requests for contracts and expenditures
by the Electric Utility Commission. The City Clerk shall sign all orders drawn
upon the treasury.
      (5)   Transfer of earnings to the General Fund of the city. At the end of
each calendar year, the Electric Utility Commission shall recommend to the City
Council a transfer from the Electric Utility Funds to the General Fund of the
net earnings of the public utility as shown by the yearly audit, as determined
by accounting procedures.
      (6)   Report to the Council. Once each year on or before December 31, the
Electric Utility Commission shall submit a written report to the City Council
covering the entire financial operation of the public utility for the past
year. This report shall show the actual cost of receipts and the total cost of
expenditures. In addition, the Council may request the Electric Utility
Commission shall make reports of the operations showing the details the City
Council may request.
      (7)   Powers to enter contracts. The Electric Commission shall recommend
to the City Council the contracts as may be necessary for the proper operation
and management of its electric facilities.
   (E)   Acts; omissions; failure; construction thereof. In carrying out the
provision and duties of this section, the act, omission or failure of any
officer of the Commission acting within the scope of official duties of the
Commission shall, in every case, be deemed to be also the act, omission or
failure of that person.
(Ord. passed 11-23-1992)
§ 31.03 AIRPORT COMMISSION.
   (A)   Establishment of Commission. A City Airport Commission for the city is
hereby established.
   (B)   Composition.
      (1)   The Airport Commission shall consist of not less than three members
appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. Members may be
removed by a majority vote of the City Council. At least two-thirds of the
members of the Commission should be persons that are familiar with flying or
airport operation. All members must be residents of and eligible voters in the
city.
      (2)   The members of the Commission shall be appointed so that the terms
of one-third of the members expire during each calendar year. Ex officio
members may be appointed by either the Mayor or the Council at the request of
the Commission and the terms of the ex officio members shall correspond to
their respective official tenure. Vacancies during the term of office shall be
filled in the same manner as the original appointment, but the term shall be
filled only until it expires. Every appointed member shall, before entering
upon the discharge of his or her duties, take an oath that they will faithfully
discharge the duties of their office. All members shall serve, without
compensation, but may be reimbursed for expenses.
   (C)   Organization.
      (1)   The Commission shall elect a Chairperson from among its appointed
members for a term of one year. The Commission may create and fill such other
offices as it may determine.
      (2)   The Commission shall hold such meetings as it deems necessary. It
shall adopt rules for the transaction of business, and shall keep a record of
its resolutions, transactions and findings which record shall be a public
record. At least once a year, the Commission shall submit to the City Council a
report of its work during the preceding year. The expenditures of the
Commission shall be within amounts appropriated for that purpose by the City
Council.
   (D)   Powers and duties of the Commission. The Airport Commission shall be
in charge of and shall have the following duties:
      (1)   Determining policies for the operation of the Rushford Municipal
Airport;
      (2)   Assist the city’s Planning Commission in determining long range
plans for the future of the airport;
      (3)   Preparing and assisting the city officials in the preparation of a
budget for each years operation of the Rushford Municipal Airport;
      (4)   Supervise the general operation of the Rushford Municipal Airport
subject to the control and regulations as set forth by the City Council; and
      (5)   Submit the reports and recommendations to the City Council as are
herein required or as are requested by the City Council.
(Ord. passed 6-19-2978)
CHAPTER 32: FINANCE AND REVENUE; TAXATION
Section
Local Lodging Tax
   
32.01   Definitions
   
32.02   Imposition of tax
   
32.03   Administration of tax
   
32.04   Collections
   
32.05   Payments and returns
   
32.06   Exceptions and exemptions
   
32.07   Examination of returns, adjustments notices and demands
   
32.08   Refunds
   
32.09   Failure to file a return
   
32.10   Violations and penalties
   
32.11   Examination of records
   
32.12   Confidential information
   
32.13   Advertising no tax
   
32.14   Use of proceeds
LOCAL LODGING TAX
§ 32.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   BOARD. The Rushford Peterson Valley Chamber of Commerce Board of Directors,
as established for the purpose of administering the proceeds of the local
lodging tax for the promotion of tourism in this area.
   CITY. The City of Rushford, Fillmore County, Minnesota.
   LODGER. A person obtaining lodging from an operator.
   LODGING. The consideration of lodging at a hotel, motel, rooming house,
tourist court or resort, other than the renting or leasing thereof for the
continuous period of 30 days or more. LODGING shall not include the renting or
leasing of campgrounds, camper or motor home sites, except for the city’s
municipally-owned campgrounds which are eligible for taxation.
   OPERATOR. Any person who provides lodging to others.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, estate,
receiver trustee, syndicate or any other combination of individuals. Whether
the term PERSON is used in any provision of this subchapter prescribing and
imposing a penalty, the term as applied to a corporation, association or
partnership, shall mean the officers, directors, shareholders, members or
partners thereof as the case may be.
   RENT. The total consideration valued in money charged for lodging whether
paid in money or otherwise.
(Ord. passed 4-10-1995)
§ 32.02 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed a tax of 3% on the rent charged by an operator
for providing lodging to any person after 12:00 a.m. on 6-1-1995.
   (B)   The tax shall be stated and charged separately and shall be collected
by the operator who furnishes lodging.
   (C)   The tax collected by the operator of the lodge shall be a debt owed by
the operator to the city and shall be extinguished only by payment to the City
Clerk.
(Ord. passed 4-10-1995; Ord. passed 1-25-2016)
§ 32.03 ADMINISTRATION OF TAX.
   (A)   The city shall administer and enforce the assessment and collection of
the tax imposed by this subchapter.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall prepare blank forms for the returns required by
this subchapter and shall distribute the same throughout the city and furnish
them on application, but failure to receive or secure them shall not relieve
the operator from any obligation to collect and pay the tax imposed to the
city.
(Ord. passed 4-10-1995)
§ 32.04 COLLECTIONS.
   Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this subchapter at the time
the rent is paid. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the rent
charged for the lodging and those persons paying the tax shall receive a
receipt of payment from the operator.
(Ord. passed 4-10-1995)
§ 32.05 PAYMENTS AND RETURNS.
   (A)   The tax imposed by this subchapter shall be paid by the operator to
the City Clerk, not later than 25 days after the end of the quarter in which
sales taxes were collected. At the time of payment, the operator shall submit a
return on forms and containing information as the city may require.
   (B)   The return shall contain the following minimum information:
      (1)   The total amount of rent for lodging during the period covered by
the return, whether collected in cash or charged to the lodger;
      (2)   The amount of tax required to be collected and due for the period;
      (3)   The signature of the person filing the return;
      (4)   The period covered by the return; and
      (5)   State sales tax report.
(Ord. passed 4-10-1995)
§ 32.06 EXCEPTIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.
   An exemptions shall be granted to any person as to whom occupancy it is
beyond the power of the city to tax. No exemption shall be granted, except upon
a claim therefor made at the time of the rent is collected. All such claims
shall be forwarded to the city when returns and collections are submitted as
required by this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 4-10-1995)
§ 32.07 EXAMINATION OF RETURNS, ADJUSTMENTS NOTICES AND DEMANDS.
   The city shall provide a quarterly report of the amount of lodging tax
collected and shall disperse the net proceeds to the city and the Board.
Ninety-five percent of the gross proceeds shall be paid to the Board and 5% of
the gross proceeds shall be retained by the city quarterly. The city shall
attempt to contact the lodging facility operator once and provide written
notice by certified or registered mail, postage prepaid, of the failure to file
the return and pay the tax due. If the violation has not been cured within 30
days of the written notice, the city shall commence enforcement proceedings.
(Ord. passed 4-10-1995; Ord. passed 1-25-2016)
§ 32.08 REFUNDS.
   (A)   Any person may apply to the city for a refund of tax paid in excess of
the amount legally due for that period; provided that, no application for
refund shall be considered unless filed within one year after the tax was paid
or within one year from the filing of the return, whichever period is longer.
The city shall examine the claim and make and file written findings thereon
denying or allowing the claim in whole or in part and shall mail a notice
thereof by mail to the person at the address stated upon the return.
   (B)   If the claim is allowed in whole or in part, the city shall credit the
amount of the allowance against any taxes due under this subchapter from the
claimant and the balance of the allowance, if any, shall be paid by the city to
the claimant.
(Ord. passed 4-10-1995)
§ 32.09 FAILURE TO FILE A RETURN.
   (A)   (1)   If any operator required by this subchapter to file a return
shall fail to do so within the time prescribed, or shall make, willfully or
otherwise, an incorrect, false or fraudulent return, the operator shall, upon
written notice and demand, immediately file the return or corrected return.
      (2)   If the operator does not file a return or amend its return upon
request, the city may file a return for the operator with any knowledge and
information as the city can obtain, and assess a tax on the basis thereof,
which tax (less any payments theretofore made on account of the tax for the
taxable period covered by return) shall be immediately paid upon written notice
and demand.
      (3)   Any return or assessment by the city shall be prima facie correct
and valid, and the person shall have the burden of establishing its in
correctness or invalidity in an action or proceeding in respect thereto.
   (B)   If any portion of a tax imposed by this subchapter, including
penalties thereon, is not paid within 30 days after it is required to be paid,
the city shall direct the City Attorney as may be necessary to recover the
amount due.
(Ord. passed 4-10-1995)
§ 32.10 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   If any tax imposed by this subchapter is not paid within the time
herein specified for the payment, or an extension thereof, there shall be added
thereto a specific penalty equal to 10% of the amount remaining unpaid.
   (B)   In case of any failure to make and file a return within the time
prescribed by this subchapter, unless it is shown that the failure is not due
to willful neglect, there shall be added to the tax in lieu of the 10% specific
penalty provided in division (A) above, 10% if the failure is not for more than
30 days with an additional 5% for each additional 30 days or fraction thereof
during which the failure continues, not exceeding 25% aggregate. If the penalty
as computed does not exceed an amount as set by City Council from time to time,
a minimum penalty shall be assessed. The amount so added to any tax shall be
collected at the same time and in the same manner as a part of the tax unless
the tax has been paid before the discovery of the negligence, in which case the
amount as added shall be collected in the same manner as the tax.
   (C)   If any person willfully fails to file any return or make any payment
required by this subchapter, or willfully files a false or fraudulent return or
willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat any tax or payment thereof,
there shall also be imposed a penalty an amount equal to 50% of any tax (less
any amounts paid on the basis of the false or fraudulent return) found due for
the period to which the return related. The penalty imposed hereby shall be
collected as part of the tax and shall be in addition to any other penalties
provided by this subchapter.
   (D)   All payment received shall be credited first to penalties, next to
interest and then to the tax due.
   (E)   The amount of tax not timely paid, together with any penalty provided
by this section shall bear interest at the rate of 8% per annum from the time
the tax should have been paid until paid. Any interest and penalty shall be
added to the tax and be collected as part thereof.
   (F)   Any person who shall refuse to make a return required by this
subchapter, or who shall refuse to pay the tax, or who shall refuse to remit
the taxes collected or any penalty or interest imposed by this subchapter, or
shall refuse to permit the city, or any duly authorized employee to examine the
books, records and papers under the person’s control, or who shall willfully
make any incomplete, false or fraudulent return, or who shall attempt to do
anything whatsoever to avoid a full disclosure of the amount of taxes imposed
by this subchapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. passed 4-10-1995) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 32.11 EXAMINATION OF RECORDS.
   The city, or its designated agents authorized in writing, may examine the
books, papers and records of any operator in order to verify the accuracy of
any return made, or if no return was made, to ascertain the tax as provided in
this subchapter. Every operator is directed and required to give to the city or
to its duly authorized agent or employee the means, facilities and opportunity
for examination/investigations as are hereby authorized.
(Ord. passed 4-10-1995)
§ 32.12 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   No officer or employee of the city, nor the Board, shall divulge or
otherwise make known in any manner any particulars disclosed in any return
required by this subchapter, or any information concerning the affairs of the
person making the return acquired from the person’s records, officers or
employees while performing an examination or audit, except in connection with a
proceeding involving taxes due under this subchapter from the person making a
return. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit the city or the
Board from publishing statistics so classified as not to disclose the identity
of particular returns and the contents thereof.
(Ord. passed 4-10-1995)
§ 32.13 ADVERTISING NO TAX.
   It shall be unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state to
the public or any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part
thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be
added to the rent or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded;
except that, in computing the tax to be collected amounts of the tax less than
one-half of one cent may be disregarded and amounts of tax with one-half cent
or more may be considered an additional cent.
(Ord. passed 4-10-1995) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 32.14 USE OF PROCEEDS.
   (A)   All gross proceeds less administrative costs and not less than 95% of
the gross proceeds obtained from the collection of tax pursuant to this
subchapter shall be used in accordance with M.S. § 469.190, as it may be
amended from time to time, to fund marketing and promoting of the area as a
tourist destination and shall have complete and independent control over the
use of the funds.
   (B)   The Board shall use the money paid to it pursuant to this subchapter
to market and promote the city as a tourist center. The Board shall submit
quarterly reports to the city in writing concerning its activities which report
shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Financial statement;
      (2)   Summary of promotion efforts;
      (3)   Trade shows attended;
      (4)   Telephone contacts received; and
      (5)   Future plans of the Board.
(Ord. passed 4-10-1995; Ord. passed 1-25-2016)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   SNOW REMOVAL
      
51.   ELECTRICITY
      
52.   WATER
      
53.   SEWERS
CHAPTER 50: SNOW REMOVAL
Section
   
50.01   Purpose
   
50.02   Responsibilities
   
50.03   Goals and priorities
   
50.04   Monitoring weather conditions
   
50.05   Use of salt and chemicals
   
50.06   How snow plowed/removed
   
50.07   Snow removal from public sidewalks
   
50.08   Placing snow or ice on public streets or city property
   
50.09   Public complaints or requests
   
50.10   Other snow-related concerns
   
50.11   Vehicle parking; towing
   
50.12   Accidents during snow removal operations
   
50.13   Snow emergency declaration
   
50.14   Severe weather/emergency vehicle assistance
   
50.15   Policy review
   
50.16   Personnel and phone numbers
§ 50.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this policy is to provide a common understanding of the
extent of the city’s winter road maintenance activity regarding snow and ice
removal, to define the scope and level of services, to describe priority roads
or routes and to inform the public as to their responsibilities.
   (B)   The city’s Public Works Department reserves the right to exercise
flexibility in these general guidelines depending upon the type of snow, wind
and times of day the snow falls. In the delivery of snow removal service,
efforts will be made to balance the needs of road safety, traffic demands,
employee safety, as well as constraints involving time, money and equipment
availability.
(Ord. passed 11-13-2001; Ord. passed - -2015; Ord. passed - -2017; Ord. passed
- -2018; Ord. passed - -2024)
§ 50.02 RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The Public Works Director or his or her designated representative is
responsible to ensure that operators are on the job in time to make roads
accessible. When possible, plowing or sanding will be scheduled prior to heavy
traffic levels to prevent snow compaction.
   (B)   The Department will be responsible for preventative maintenance
programs for all equipment to ensure availability and reliability when needed.
The Department will plan for and recommend necessary equipment upgrades and/or
replacements in a timely manner to allow for proper budgeting of those
expenditures.
   (C)   The Department is responsible for the selection, storage and
application of abrasives, salt and chemicals for controlling snow and ice under
differing weather conditions.
   (D)   Necessary safety equipment, safety training and operator training will
be made available for employees to foster ongoing improvements in snow and ice
control. Employees will be expected to follow basic traffic rules (i.e., stop
signs), but will be allowed some discretion in direction and routes of plowing
in an effort to most effectively remove snow while always keeping in mind
employee and citizen safety.
   (E)   Wherever possible, cooperative efforts between the county or state may
be arranged to coordinate services, avoid duplication of effort and in the
joint use of facilities or materials. The sharing of winter maintenance
information with other governmental units will be utilized to enhance the cost
effectiveness and efficiency of service.
   (F)   To better obtain cooperation from the public, the Department will
periodically communicate to residents, through city newsletters, posted notices
and public access notices, the policies and ordinances regarding snow and ice
removal and what services the public can reasonably expect.
(Ord. passed 11-13-2001; Ord. passed - -2015; Ord. passed - -2017; Ord. passed
- -2018; Ord. passed - -2024)
§ 50.03 GOALS AND PRIORITIES.
   (A)   It is the goal and intent of the city’s Public Works Department to
have all driving lanes in the city plowed within a 12-hour period. In case of
snowfall long in duration, the streets will be plowed every 12 hours. The snow
plowing procedure varies with the depth of snow fall as follows:
      (1)   Trace to one inch = ice control; and
      (2)   One-plus inch = plowing of streets.
   (B)   The above amount is a benchmark only, used to signal when plowing
efforts typically begin. Other conditions such as wind or icy rain may warrant
an earlier response. Other maintenance, such as sanding, may begin earlier than
plowing or as road conditions dictate, even when plowing is unnecessary.
      (1)   Priority 1:
         (a)   Central Business District streets, including city-owned parking
lots; and
         (b)   Bridges; Pine Meadows Lane and Eiken Drive access to RP School
site.
      (2)   Priority 2: arterial streets;
      (3)   Priority 3: clearing of sidewalks on bridges and around all city-
owned buildings;
      (4)   Priority 4: city alleyways; and
      (5)   Priority 5: airport.
   (C)   Snow will be piled from the city-owned parking lots and central
business district to be loaded and hauled away when arterial sheets have been
sufficiently cleared of snow. At no time will piles of snow be allowed to
accumulate so as to become a hazard or impede the normal flow of traffic.
   (D)   Snow and ice control operations will proceed as long as weather
conditions do not endanger the safety of employees. Other conditions, such as
equipment breakdown, or shortage of equipment operators, may necessitate
changes from normal operations.
(Ord. passed 11-13-2001; Ord. passed - -2015; Ord. passed - -2017; Ord. passed
- -2018; Ord. passed - -2024)
§ 50.04 MONITORING WEATHER CONDITIONS.
   The Public Works Department will continue to monitor weather conditions
during regular operating hours, via the Weather Channel and on the computer via
state and national weather links. During off hours for the Public Works
Department, the Police Department will monitor the streets and notify the
Public Works Department if slippery or hazardous conditions develop that
warrant immediate attention. The Police Department will notify the Public Works
Department during off-hours if snowfall accumulations reach one-half to three-
fourths inch or of freezing rain. This notification will allow time to begin
salting and sanding before the snow becomes too thick or ice develops. If
necessary, the Police Department will place traffic-control devices in
hazardous areas to indicate conditions to the driving public.
(Ord. passed 11-13-2001; Ord. passed - -2015; Ord. passed - -2017; Ord. passed
- -2018; Ord. passed - -2024)
§ 50.05 USE OF SALT AND CHEMICALS.
   In compliance with state legislation, the Public Works Department shall
utilize salt and chemicals only at such places as upon hills, intersections or
upon high speed or arterial roadways where vehicle traction is particularly
critical and only if, in the opinion of the road authorities, removal of snow
and ice or reduction of hazardous conditions by blading, plowing or sanding
cannot be accomplished within a reasonable period of time.
(Ord. passed 11-13-2001; Ord. passed - -2015; Ord. passed - -2017; Ord. passed
- -2018; Ord. passed - -2024)
§ 50.06 HOW SNOW PLOWED/REMOVED.
   Snow will be plowed in a manner so as to minimize any traffic obstructions.
The center of the roadway will be plowed first. The snow shall be pushed to the
right side of the roadway (traffic side) whenever possible. The discharge shall
go onto the boulevard’s areas of the streets. Plow operators will take extreme
care so as not to push snow onto residential sidewalk areas. In times of
extreme snowfall, streets will not always be able to be completely cleared of
snow immediately after snowfalls have ceased, final street cleanup may not be
completed until the second day of plow operations. City crews are responsible
for snow removal and ice control on all city-owned sidewalks. Normally, this
will involve dispatching crews to facilitate snow removal starting with
sidewalk sweeping for lighter snowfalls, to plowing and/or blowing snow as
necessary.
(Ord. passed 11-13-2001; Ord. passed - -2015; Ord. passed - -2017; Ord. passed
- -2018; Ord. passed - -2024)
§ 50.07 SNOW REMOVAL FROM PUBLIC SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   In accordance with city ordinance, the accumulation of snow or ice
upon any public sidewalk constitutes a public nuisance which shall be removed
by the owner or occupant of the property abutting the sidewalk within 12 hours
after the snow or ice has ceased to be deposited.
   (B)   If the owner or occupant fails to remove the snow or ice accumulation,
the City Clerk’s office will inform the owner or occupant by letter that they
must comply or the city will cause the snow or ice to be removed at a rate as
set by City Council from time to time per hour, with a one-hour minimum charge.
If the owner fails to pay the charges for snow or ice removal, the city may,
pursuant to M.S. Chapter 429, as it may be amended from time to time, assess
the charges against the property benefitted and certify the assessment to the
County Auditor for collection as a special assessment on the property tax
rolls.
(Ord. passed 11-13-2001; Ord. passed - -2015; Ord. passed - -2017; Ord. passed
- -2018; Ord. passed - -2024)
§ 50.08 PLACING SNOW OR ICE ON PUBLIC STREETS OR CITY PROPERTY.
   It is unlawful for any person not acting under contract with the city to
remove snow or ice from private property, such as driveways and sidewalks, and
place in the quantity or manner as to cause a hazard to travel on public
streets without proper arrangements for the immediate removal. It is unlawful
for any person not acting under contract with the city to place or deposit any
snow or ice upon city property. It is also the responsibility of the resident
to clean snow from the following areas: driveway approaches; around trash cans;
mailboxes; and newspaper tubes. Residents are also encouraged to “adopt” any
fire hydrant located near their property to ensure clear access by the Fire
Department.
(Ord. passed 11-13-2001; Ord. passed - -2015; Ord. passed - -2017; Ord. passed
- -2018; Ord. passed - -2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.09 PUBLIC COMPLAINTS OR REQUESTS.
   Residents with requests, complaints or concerns regarding snow and ice
removal should call the City Hall at 507-864-2444, where staff will relay the
information to the Public Works Department. Depending on the nature of the
request or concern, the Department will either take the appropriate action
necessary or direct City Hall staff to respond to the resident.
(Ord. passed 11-13-2001; Ord. passed - -2015; Ord. passed - -2017; Ord. passed
- -2018; Ord. passed - -2024)
§ 50.10 OTHER SNOW-RELATED CONCERNS.
   In the process of plowing snow, crew members at times do inadvertently allow
the plow to “climb” the curb and disturb the sod. This is especially true in
late fall/early spring plowing, and in cul-de-sac areas. If sod is damaged,
properly owners are responsible for minor repairs. If damage is excessive,
residents should call the City Hall to report the damage. Mailboxes that are
physically hit or damaged by city snowplows will be repaired by the city.
Mailboxes knocked down by the weight of the snow thrown from the plow are
considered the owner’s responsibility to replace.
(Ord. passed 11-13-2001; Ord. passed - -2015; Ord. passed - -2017; Ord. passed
- -2018; Ord. passed - -2024)
§ 50.11 VEHICLE PARKING; TOWING.
   (A)   As there is no official policy for alternate side parking covering the
entire city, residents are obligated to move or remove parked vehicles from the
roadway to facilitate the effective plowing of the roadway. If snowplows are
forced to go around parked vehicles, the snow surrounding the car can create a
hazard to the traveling public as well as plow operators and equipment.
   (B)   In areas where streets are of substandard width, the city may
designate seasonal alternate side parking to ensure effective plowing and safe
travel for residents and emergency vehicles. Alternate side parking will be
required for the following areas: Green Street; Northview Street; and Ferry
Street. Residents on these streets will be provided an annual reminder notice
of this regulation and signage will be installed on the streets.
   (C)   From November 15 to March 15, vehicles parked on the above streets
between 12:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. must be on the even-numbered side of the
street when the date is even and on the odd- numbered side of the street when
the date is odd.
   (D)   To allow for safe and efficient snow removal in alleyways, vehicles
will not be allowed to be parked parallel on the side of an alley or to be
parked in any manner which would obstruct or deter snowplow trucks from being
able to clear the entire width of the alleyway.
   (E)   Vehicles that have been parked on any street or alley way or public
parking lot longer than 12 hours and have prohibited the complete clearing of
the street, alley or lot may be ticketed by the city’s Police Department and
may be towed at the owner’s expense.
(Ord. passed 11-13-2001; Ord. passed - -2015; Ord. passed - -2017; Ord. passed
- -2018; Ord. passed - -2024)
§ 50.12 ACCIDENTS DURING SNOW REMOVAL OPERATIONS.
   Should an employee have an accident of any type during snow removal
operations, he, she or they must immediately notify his, her or their
supervisor stating the type of accident and the conditions that created the
accident. If the accident involves personal injury or a vehicle accident, the
operator must remain on the scene of the accident until the police arrive.
After the operator has informed the police of conditions and other pertinent
data concerning the accident, the supervisor will determine whether the
operator will continue with plowing operations. In the event of a very minor
accident that does not involve another vehicle or personal injury; the
supervisor will determine if the accident warrants calling the Police
Department. This is done to ensure that the police are not contacted for
insignificant accidents such as bent sign posts and the like and the plow truck
may continue its plowing.
(Ord. passed 11-13-2001; Ord. passed - -2015; Ord. passed - -2017; Ord. passed
- -2018; Ord. passed - -2024)
§ 50.13 SNOW EMERGENCY DECLARATION.
   The declaration of a snow emergency will be made by the Public Works
Director or his or her designated representative. The public will be informed
via announcements on area radio and television stations, on the local access
cable channels and on the city’s Facebook page that no parking will be allowed
on city streets and roadways until sufficient plowing has occurred for safe
travel.
(Ord. passed 11-13-2001; Ord. passed - -2015; Ord. passed - -2017; Ord. passed
- -2018; Ord. passed - -2024)
§ 50.14 SEVERE WEATHER/EMERGENCY VEHICLE ASSISTANCE.
   In the interest of public safety, city crews may provide assistance to
emergency vehicles when requested, within a reasonable response distance. This
may include plowing and applying ice-control materials to county, state,
township and private roadways if manpower and equipment are available.
(Ord. passed 11-13-2001; Ord. passed - -2015; Ord. passed - -2017; Ord. passed
- -2018; Ord. passed - -2024)
§ 50.15 POLICY REVIEW.
   In an effort to evaluate the effectiveness of snow removal operations and in
consideration of equipment improvements, technological advances, changes in
manpower, plowing routes, financing, new laws or ordinances, this policy will
be reviewed annually each fall by the Public Works Department and City Council.
(Ord. passed 11-13-2001; Ord. passed - -2015; Ord. passed - -2017; Ord. passed
- -2018; Ord. passed - -2024)
§ 50.16 PERSONNEL AND PHONE NUMBERS.
   All public works personnel carry cell phones for communication between
themselves, City Hall and the Police Department.
(Ord. passed 11-13-2001; Ord. passed - -2015; Ord. passed - -2017; Ord. passed
- -2018; Ord. passed - -2024)
CHAPTER 51: ELECTRICITY
Section
   
51.01   Rates
§ 51.01 RATES.
   The city’s electric rates and charges, and any and all amendments and
revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as it set
out in full.
(Ord. passed 3-24-1986)
CHAPTER 52: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Use of water system restricted
   
52.02   Application for service
   
52.03   Service connection charges
   
52.04   Accounting, billing and collection
   
52.05   Plumbing
   
52.06   Liability for expenses, loss or damage
Water System Regulations
   
52.20   Discontinuation of service
   
52.21   Supply from one service
   
52.22   Turning on water; tapping mains
   
52.23   Repair of leaks
   
52.24   Hydrant usage
   
52.25   Private water supply
   
52.26   Private wells
   
52.27   Abandoned or unused services
   
52.28   Curb boxes; location
   
52.29   Restricted hours
Meters
   
52.40   Meters required
   
52.41   Maintenance
   
52.42   Property of city
   
52.43   Reading and inspection
   
52.44   Testing
   
52.45   Consumer line needs
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 USE OF WATER SYSTEM RESTRICTED.
   No persons, other than a city public works employee, shall uncover or make
or use water service installation connected to the city water system, except
pursuant to application and permit as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-14-2001) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.02 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
   (A)   Procedure. Application for a water service installation and for water
service shall be made at the City Clerk’s office on forms provided by the
Zoning Administrator and furnished by the city. The application shall state the
size and location of service connection required. The applicant’s signature
shall be an agreement to conform to this chapter and to rules and regulations
that may be established by the city as conditions for the use of water.
   (B)   Service area. The city shall not provide a connection to city water
services to any owners or occupants of properties located outside the
territorial boundaries of the city without the properties first being annexed
into the city.
   (C)   Fees or deposits. Application for service installation shall be made
by the owner of the property to be served or by the owner’s agent. The
applicant shall, at the same time of making application, pay to the city the
amount of the fees and deposit required for installation of the service
connection as provided in the attached schedule established by the City
Council, from time to time. When a water service connection has been installed,
application for water service may be made either by the owner, or the owner’s
agent or by the tenant or occupant of the premises.
(Ord. passed 1-14-2001)
§ 52.03 SERVICE CONNECTION CHARGES.
   (A)   Permit and fee. No connection shall be made to the city water system
without a permit received at the City Clerk’s office. The fee for each permit
shall be as per attached schedule for a water connection permit. The connection
fee contributes to the payment of the costs of the public water system
facility.
   (B)   Meter security deposit. No permit shall be issued to connect with any
water main unless and until the applicant for the permit pays to the city a
security deposit as per attached schedule for the city- owned water meter and
remote read which will be installed with the connection by the customer or his,
her or their agent. All water meters and remote reads shall be owned by the
city.
(Ord. passed 1-14-2001)
§ 52.04 ACCOUNTING, BILLING AND COLLECTION.
   (A)   Owner responsibility. The owner shall be liable for water supplied to
the owner’s property, whether the owner is occupying the property or not, and
any charges unpaid shall be a lien upon the property.
   (B)   Bills for service. Water service charges shall be billed on a monthly
basis, starting at the time of the installation of the water meter, or in the
event the meter is not installed, seven days after completion of outside piping
and shall be calculated upon a pro-rated basis, according to a rate schedule,
attached hereto, established by the City Council, from time to time. A schedule
of the rates shall be available for inspection at the office of the City Clerk.
Bills shall be mailed to the customer monthly and shall be due on the date
specified on the billing. If the water service charge is not paid when due, a
penalty of 10% shall be added thereto.
   (C)   Delinquent accounts. The city shall endeavor to collect delinquent
accounts promptly. In any case where satisfactory arrangements for payments
have not been made, the city may, after the procedural requirements of division
(D) below have been complied with, cause discontinuance of service to the
delinquent customer by shutting off the water to the curb box. When water
service to any premises has been discontinued, service shall not be restored
upon the payment of all delinquent bills and a fee as per attached schedule.
Delinquent accounts shall be certified and prepared by the City Clerk providing
for the assessment of the delinquent amount against the respective properties
served. The assessment roll shall be delivered to the Council for the adoption
on or before October 1 of each year for certification to the County Auditor for
collection along with taxes. The action is optional and may be subsequent to
taking legal action to collect delinquent accounts.
   (D)   Procedure or shutoff of service. Water shall not be shut off under
division (C) above or for a violation of rules and regulations affecting
utility service until notice and an opportunity for a hearing have first been
given the occupant of the premises involved. The notice shall be served by
registered mail and shall state that if payment is not made within ten days
after the date on which the notice is given, the water supply to the premises
will be shut off. The notice shall also state that the occupant may before the
date, demand a hearing on the matter, in which the case the supply will not be
cut off until after the hearing. If the customer requests a hearing, the
hearing shall be held at the next regularly scheduled Council meeting. If as a
result of the healing, the Council finds that the amount claimed to be owing is
actually due and unpaid and that there is no legal reason why the water supply
of the delinquent customer may not be shut off in accordance with this chapter,
the city may shut off the supply.
(Ord. passed 1-14-2001)
§ 52.05 PLUMBING.
   The provisions of the Minnesota Plumbing Code formulated by the state’s
Department of Health, are adopted as the “Plumbing Code of the City of
Rushford” and incorporated herein by reference.
(Ord. passed 1-14-2001)
§ 52.06 LIABILITY FOR EXPENSES, LOSS OR DAMAGE.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by
reason of the violation.
(Ord. passed 1-14-2001)
WATER SYSTEM REGULATIONS
§ 52.20 DISCONTINUATION OF SERVICE.
   The city may discontinue service to any water consumer without notice for
necessary repair, or upon notice as provided in §
52.04(D) of this chapter, for non-payment of charges, or for violations of
rules and regulations affecting utility service.
(Ord. passed 1-14-2001)
§ 52.21 SUPPLY FROM ONE SERVICE.
   No more than one house or building shall be supplied from one service
connection, except by special permission of the City Council. Whenever two or
more parties are supplied from one pipe connecting with a service main, each
building or part of a building separately supplied shall have a separate valve
and separate meter.
(Ord. passed 1-14-2001) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.22 TURNING ON WATER; TAPPING MAINS.
   No person, except an authorized city employee, shall turn on any water
supply at the curb box or tap any distributing main or pipe of the water supply
system or inset a stop cork or other appurtenance therein without a city
permit. All piping connections from the curb box to the building supply piping
shall be made under the supervision of a licensed plumber and all connections
to the city water supply must be inspected by the city’s Public Works
Department.
(Ord. passed 1-14-2001) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.23 REPAIR OF LEAKS.
   Based on the information supplied by the property owner or available to the
city, the city will make a determination whether a problem exists in the
portion of the service which is the city’s responsibility. The consumer or
owner shall be responsible for maintaining the service pipe from the main into
the building served and shall be responsible for correction of the problem. If
the consumer fails to repair any leak in the service within 24 hours after
notice by the city, the city may turn the water off. When the waste of water is
great or damage is likely to result from the leak, the city shall turn the
water off immediately upon giving notice if repair is not commenced
immediately.
(Ord. passed 1-14-2001)
§ 52.24 HYDRANT USAGE.
   No persons other than an authorized city employee, or the city’s Fire
Department in the course of extinguishing fires, shall operate a fire hydrant
or interfere in any way with the city water system without first obtaining
authority to do so from the Public Works Department.
(Ord. passed 1-14-2001) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.25 PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY.
   No water pipe of the city water supply system shall be connected with any
pump, well or tank that is connected with any other source of water supply.
When any such connection is found, the owner shall be notified by the city to
sever the connection and if this is not done immediately, the city shall turn
off the water supply immediately. Before any new connection to the city system
is permitted, public works employees shall ascertain that no cross-connections
will exit when the new connection is made.
(Ord. passed 1-14-2001) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.26 PRIVATE WELLS.
   No new private wells shall be constructed, nor existing wells reconstructed
or repaired in the city which is designed or intended to provide water for
human consumption; Private wells to provide water for other than human
consumption may be maintained and continued in use after connection is made to
the city water system; provided, there is no means of cross-connection between
the private well and municipal water supply at any time.
(Ord. passed 1-14-2001) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.27 ABANDONED OR UNUSED SERVICES.
   If the premises served by water has been abandoned, or if the service has
not been used for one year, the service shall be shut off at the curb box by
the city and the water meter shall be removed. When new buildings are erected
on the site of old ones, and it is desired to increase or change the old water
service, no connections with the mains shall be made until the old service has
been removed and the main taps plugged or yoked connections installed by the
city at the owner’s expense.
(Ord. passed 1-14-2001)
§ 52.28 CURB BOXES; LOCATION.
   Curb stop boxes will be installed on the right-of-way line or easement
limits to be best suitable to the property and shall be left in a vertical
position when backfilling is completed. Curb boxes will be installed at an
approximately depth of seven feet below the finished ground elevation and the
top of the curb box shall be adjusted to be flush with the finished ground
elevation. No person shall erect any fence or plant any tree or other
landscaping within a ten-foot radius of the curb box that would obstruct the
use of the curb box or cause damage to the same.
(Ord. passed 1-14-2001) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.29 RESTRICTED HOURS.
   Whenever the Council determines that a shortage of water supply threatens
the city, it may, by order, limit the times and hours during which city water
may be used for sprinkling, irrigation, car washing, air conditioning or other
specified uses.
(Ord. passed 1-14-2001)
METERS
§ 52.40 METERS REQUIRED.
   Except for extinguishing fires, no person other than an authorized public
works employee shall use water from the city water supply system or permit
water to be drawn unless the water passes through a meter supplied or approved
by the city. No person unauthorized by the city shall connect, disconnect, take
part or in any manner change or interfere with any such meter or its use. A
meter shall be installed on the water valve in the house and a remote register
outside regardless of whether inside piping is connected.
(Ord. passed 1-14-2001) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.41 MAINTENANCE.
   The city shall maintain and repair, at its expense, any meter and/or remote
read that has become unserviceable through ordinary wear and tear and shall
replace if necessary. Where repair or replacement is made necessary by act or
neglect of the owner or occupant of the premises it serves (including damage
from freezing or hot water backup) or carelessness of the owner or occupant of
the premises, any expenses of the city for repair shall be charged and
collected from the water consumer and water service may be discontinued until
the cause is corrected and the amount charged is paid.
(Ord. passed 1-14-2001)
§ 52.42 PROPERTY OF CITY.
   Water meters and remote reads shall be the property of the city and may be
removed or replaced as to size and type when deemed necessary by the Public
Works Department.
(Ord. passed 1-14-2001)
§ 52.43 READING AND INSPECTION.
   Authorized public works employees shall have free access at reasonable hours
of the day to all parts of every building and premises connected with the city
water supply system in order to read meters and make inspections. It shall be
the responsibility of the customer to notify the city to request a final
reading at the time of the customer’s billing change.
(Ord. passed 1-14-2001)
§ 52.44 TESTING.
   A consumer may request to have his or her meter tested if he, she or they
feel it is not registering properly. If tests results show an error of over 5%
of the water consumed, a correctly registering meter will be installed and the
bill will be adjusted accordingly. This adjustment shall not extend back more
then one billing period from the date of request. In case the meter is found to
have stopped, or to be operating in a faulty manner, the amount of water used
will be estimated in accordance with the amount used previously in comparable
periods of the year.
(Ord. passed 1-14-2001)
§ 52.45 CONSUMER LINE NEEDS.
   When a consumer has a need for a larger line in addition to his or her
domestic line, as in the case of a commercial consumer requiring a one-inch
line normal use and a six-inch or large line for a fire sprinkler system the
consumer will be permitted to run one line into the premises and “Y” off into
two lines at the building. When this is done, the meter will be attached to the
small or domestic line and a check valve as well as one-inch detection meter
shall be put on the large line.
(Ord. passed 1-14-2001)
CHAPTER 53: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
53.001   Explanation and purpose
   
53.002   Definitions
   
53.003   Payment; disposition of revenue
   
53.004   Annual audit
   
53.005   Violations; appeals
   
53.006   Residential equivalency units chart
Management, Operation and Control
   
53.020   Authority
   
53.021   Construction of lines and the like
   
53.022   Maintenance of services
   
53.023   Condemnation of real estate
   
53.024   Title to real estate and personality
User Rules and Regulations
   
53.035   General
   
53.036   Plumbers
   
53.037   Private systems prohibited
   
53.038   Applications for service
   
53.039   Use of sewers
   
53.040   Utility responsibility
   
53.041   Building sewer construction
   
53.042   Extensions of sewer mains
   
53.043   Septage acceptance location
   
53.044   Additional authority
Regulations and Conditions
   
53.055   General discharge prohibitions
   
53.056   Limitations on wastewater strength
   
53.057   Accidental discharges
   
53.058   Special agreements
Sewer Service Charge System
   
53.070   Definitions
   
53.071   Policy
   
53.072   Basis for residential equivalency charge
   
53.073   Debt service charge
   
53.074   Sewer use charge
Industrial and Septage Wastewaters; Control
   
53.085   Discharge conditions
   
53.086   Wastewater sampling
   
53.087   Pretreatment
   
53.088   Grease, oil and/or sand interceptors
   
53.089   Analyses
   
53.090   Submission of information
   
53.091   Submission of basic data
 
   
53.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.001 EXPLANATION AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter regulates the use of public and private sewers and
drains, discharge of septage into the public sewerage system and the discharge
of waters and wastes into the public sewerage systems within the city. It
provides for and explains the method used for levying and collecting wastewater
treatment service charges, sets uniform requirements for discharges into the.
wastewater collection and treatment systems and enables the city to comply with
administrative provisions and other discharge criteria which are required or
authorized by the state or federal law. Its intent is to derive the maximum
public benefit by regulating the characteristics of wastewater discharged into
the city sewerage system.
   (B)   This chapter provides a means for determining wastewater and septage
volumes, constituents and characteristics, authorizes the setting of charges
and fees and the issuing of permits to certain users. Revenues derived from the
application of this chapter shall be used to defray the costs of operating and
maintaining adequate wastewater collection and treatment systems and to provide
sufficient funds for capital outlay, debt service costs and capital
improvements. The charges and fees herein authorized are to be established
pursuant to authority of the M.S. § 444.075, as it may be amended from time to
time. This chapter shall supersede and repeal any previous ordinance, rules or
regulations or all parts thereof that may be inconsistent with this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995)
§ 53.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   APPROVING AUTHORITY. The City Council of the City of Rushford, or its duly
authorized committee, agent or representative.
   AMMONIA NITROGEN (NH3-N). One of the oxidation states of nitrogen, in which
nitrogen is combined with hydrogen in molecular form as NH3 or in ionized form
as NH4. Quantitative determination of AMMONIA NITROGEN shall be made in
accordance with procedures set forth in the most recent edition of “Standard
Methods”.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter in five days at 20°C, expressed in
milligrams per liter. Quantitative determination of BOD shall be made in
accordance with procedures set forth in the most recent edition of “Standard
Methods”.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from waste and other drainage pipes inside
the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning
approximately five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public area,
also referred to as the lateral. Except as specifically provided in this
chapter, the city shall not be responsible for the construction and maintenance
of building sewers or laterals.
   CHEMICAL ELEMENTS AND COMPOUNDS. Typically found in wastewater and may be
regulated by this chapter:
Ammonia nitrogen NH3
Arsenic          As
Cadmium          Cd
Copper           Cu
Chromium         Cr
Cyanide          Cn
Lead             Pb
Mercury          Hg
Nickel           Ni
Nitrogen         N
Phosphorus       P
Radium           Ra
Zinc             Zn
 
   COMMERCIAL USER. Any user whose premises are used primarily for the conduct
of a profit-oriented enterprise in the fields of construction, wholesale or
retail trade, finance, insurance, real estate or services and who discharges
primarily normal domestic sewage.
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS. Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids,
phosphorus, nitrogen or pH, plus additional pollutants identified in the WPDES
permit for the wastewater treatment works receiving the pollutant, if such
works were designed to treat such additional pollutants to a substantial
degree.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater or septage shall be considered free of floatable fat if
it is property pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the
collection or treatment systems.
   GARBAGE. The residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food,
and from the handling, storage and sale of food products and produce.
   GROUND GARBAGE. The residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food that has been shredded to such degree that all particulates will be no
greater than one-half inch in any dimension and will be carried freely in
suspension under normal flow conditions in sewers.
   HOLDING TANK SERVICE AREA. The area outside the city’s sewer service area,
but inside or equal to the city’s planning area where a contract has been
developed for holding tank wastewater to be treated at the wastewater treatment
works.
   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS OR WASTEWATER. Wastewater or septage with pollutants
that will adversely affect or disrupt the wastewater treatment processes,
effluent quality or sludge quality if discharged to the wastewater facilities.
   INDUSTRIAL USER. Any user whose premises are used primarily for the conduct
of a profit-oriented enterprise in the fields of manufacturing, dairy products
processing, meat processing, other food and drink products, painting or
finishing operations, transportation, communications or utilities, mining,
agriculture, forestry, fishing or other similar uses.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Wastewater from an industrial process, trade or business,
as distinct from sanitary sewage, and includes cooling water and the discharge
from pretreatment facilities.
   LICENSED DISPOSER. A person or business holding a valid license to do
septage servicing.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissible.
   MILLIGRAMS PER LITER (mg/l). A weight-to-weight ratio; the milligrams per
liter value (mg/l) multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds
per million gallons of water.
   MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER. The wastewater of a community. From the standpoint of
source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together
with any ground water, surface water and storm water that may have
inadvertently entered the sewer system.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers, into a watercourse,
pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or ground water.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE. Sanitary sewage resulting from the range of normal
domestic activities, in which BOD, SS and total kjeldahl nitrogen
concentrations meet the following:
      (1)   A five-day, 20°C BOD of not more than 250 mg/l;
      (2)   A suspended solids content of not more than 250 mg/l; and
      (3)   A total kjeldahl nitrogen content of not more than 25 mg/l.
   PARTS PER MILLION (ppm). A weight-to-weight ratio; the parts per million
value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million
gallons of water. Equivalent to milligrams per liter (mg/l).
   PERSON. Any and all persons, including any individual, firm, company,
municipal or private corporations, association, society, institution,
enterprise, government agency or other entity.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. The
concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams per liter of solution.
Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and a hydrogen ion
concentration of 10-7.
   PRETREATMENT. An arrangement of devices and structures, for the preliminary
treatment of processing of wastewater required to render such wastes acceptable
for admission to the public sewers.
   PRIVATE SEWER. Any sewer outside of a public right of way or public
easement. Except as provided in this chapter, a PRIVATE SEWER shall not be
subject to the jurisdiction of the city and the city shall not be responsible
for the construction and/or maintenance of such sewer.
   PUBLIC SEWER. Any sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the
city. It shall also include sewers within or outside the corporate boundaries
that serve more than one person and ultimately discharge into the city sanitary
sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been constructed with city
funds. PUBLIC SEWERS shall not include private sewers or building sewers.
   SANITARY SEWAGE. A combination of water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial plants (other than industrial
wastes from such plants), together with such ground, surface and storm waters
as may be present.
   SANITARY SEWER. A combination of liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together
with small quantities of ground, storm and surface waters that are not admitted
intentionally.
   SEPTAGE. The wastewater or contents of septic or holding tanks, dosing
chambers, seepage beds, seepage pits, seepage trenches, privies, portable
restrooms or RV or trailer holding tanks.
   SEWAGE. The spent water of a community. The preferred term is MUNICIPAL
WASTEWATER.
   SEWER SERVICE AREAS. The areas presently served and anticipated to be served
by a municipal wastewater collection system. The SEWER SERVICE AREA is
delineated in the most recently approved facility plan.
   SEWER SERVICE CHARGE. A service charge levied on users of the wastewater
collection and treatment facilities for payment of capital expenses as well as
the operation, maintenance costs and replacement of said facilities.
   SEWER SYSTEM. The common sanitary sewers within a sewerage system which are
primarily installed to receive wastewaters directly from facilities which
convey wastewater from individual structures or from private property, and
which include service connection “Y” fittings designed for connection with
those facilities. The facilities which convey wastewater from individual
structures, from private property to the public sanitary sewer, such as a
building drain or its equivalent, are specifically excluded from the definition
of “sewerage collection system”; except that, pumping units and pressurized
lines for individual structures or groups of structures may be included as part
of a SEWER SYSTEM when such units are cost-effective and are owned and
maintained by the city.
   SEWERAGE SYSTEM. All structures, conduits and pipes, by which sewage is
collected, treated and disposed of, except plumbing inside and in connection
with buildings served, and service pipes (building drain), from building to
street main.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SLUG LOAD. Any substance released at a discharge rate and/or concentration
which causes interference to wastewater treatment processes or plugging or
surcharging of the sewer system.
   STANDARD METHODS. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
most recent edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water, Sewage
and Industrial Wastes”, published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution
Control Federation.
   STORM DRAIN. (Sometimes termed STORM SEWER.) A drain or sewer for conveying
surface water, ground water, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any
source.
   STORM WATER RUNOFF. The portion of the rainfall that is collected and
drained into the storm sewers.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in, water, wastewater, septage or other liquids, and that is
removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in “Standard Methods” and is
referred to as non-filterable residue.
   TOXIC DISCHARGES. A discharge containing a substance or mixture of
substances which, through sufficient exposure, or ingestion, inhalation or
assimilation by an organism, either directly from the environment or indirectly
by ingestion through the food chain, will on the basis of information available
to the city, cause death, disease, behavioral or immunological abnormalities,
cancer, genetic mutations or developmental or physiological malfunctions,
including malfunctions in reproduction or physical deformations, in such
organisms or their offspring.
   USER. Persons whose property is connected to the sewer system of the city.
   USER CLASSES. Categories of users having similar flows and water
characteristics; that is, levels of biochemical oxygen demand, suspended
solids, nitrogen and the like. For the purposes of this chapter, there shall be
four USER CLASSES: residential; commercial; industrial; and public authority.
   WASTEWATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment and processes required to
collect, carry away, store and treat domestic and industrial waste and septage
to acceptable standards and dispose of the effluent and sludge.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, septage, industrial waste and sludge. Sometimes used as
synonymous with SEWAGE TREATMENT FACILITY.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water,
either continuously or intermittently.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995)
§ 53.003 PAYMENT; DISPOSITION OF REVENUE.
   (A)   Payment and penalty. The residential equivalency charge shall be for
the corresponding period of the water bills, and shall be payable to the City
Clerk not later than 20 days after the end of each period. Interest at the rate
of 8% per year shall be added to all bills not paid by the date fixed for final
payment.
   (B)   Charges a lien. All sewage charges shall be a lien upon the property
serviced pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, and shall be collected in the manner
therein provided.
   (C)   Disposition of revenue. The amounts received from the collection of
charges authorized by this chapter shall be credited to a wastewater facilities
account which shall show all receipts and expenditures of the wastewater
facilities. All present outstanding sewer system general obligation bonds,
including refunding bonds, shall be paid from this fund including both
principal and interest. Charges collected for replacement expenses shall be
credited to a segregated, non-lapsing replacement account. These funds are to
be used exclusively for replacement. When appropriated by the City Council, the
credits to the account shall be available for the payment of costs of
wastewater facilities.
   (D)   Excess revenues. Any surplus remaining after payment of debt service
charges, operation and maintenance and replacement costs shall be credited to
the following year’s operation and maintenance account. Excess revenues
collected from a user class will be applied to operation and maintenance costs
attributable to that class for the next year.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995)
§ 53.004 ANNUAL AUDIT.
   The City Council shall have an independent periodic audit completed, the
purpose of which shall be to maintain the proportionality between users and
user classes of the sewer user charge system and to ensure that adequate
revenues are available relative to necessary operation, maintenance and
replacement costs and debt service charges. A separation of costs and charges
shall be made to show the actual costs and disbursements for the wastewater
treatment works and the sewer collection facility.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995)
§ 53.005 VIOLATIONS; APPEALS.
   (A)   Written notice of violation.
      (1)   Any user connected to the wastewater facilities found to be
violating a provision of this chapter shall be served by the city with a
written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable
time for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the
period of the stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
      (2)   Any licensed disposer discharging to the wastewater facilities
found to be violating a provision of this chapter or of any conditions of the
city’s approval for septage disposal, may have his, her or their approval
immediately revoked. This revocation shall be done in writing and state the
reasons for revoking the septage disposal approval.
   (B)   Deleterious discharge. Any person found to be responsible for
accidentally allowing a deleterious discharge into the wastewater facilities
which causes damage to the facilities and/or receiving waterbody shall pay the
amount to cover all damages, the amount of which will be established by the
City Council.
   (C)   Discharge reporting. Any user who discharges anything that may have a
detrimental impact on the sewerage system shall immediately report the nature
and amount of the discharge to the City Clerk.
   (D)   Liability to city for losses. Any person violating any provision of
this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage
incurred by the city by reason of such violation.
   (E)   Appeal procedures. Any user affected by any decision, action or
determination, including cease and desist orders, made by the interpreting or
implementing provisions of this chapter may file with the City Council a
written request for reconsideration within ten days of the date of such
decision, action or determination, setting forth in detail the facts supporting
the user’s request for reconsideration. The City Council shall render a
decision on the request for reconsideration to the user in writing within 15
days of receipt of request. If the decision is not satisfactory to the user,
the user may appeal the decision to the District Court in the state having
jurisdiction over the city. Any appeal taken must be commenced within 90 days
after the date the decision of the City Council has been made.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995)
§ 53.006 RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENCY UNITS CHART.
   (A)   The following list of residential equivalent units (REU) shall be
assigned for new connections where water usage records are not available:
Barber shops and beauty parlors                     1 REC
Bowling alleys                                      0.5 REC/alley
Car wash                                            2 REC/stall
Churches                                            1 REC
City Hall                                           1 REC
Commercial establishments utilizing garbage grinder Additional 2 REC
Dentists                                            1 REC per care station
Domestic                                            Same as industrial/REC
Funeral homes                                       1 REC
Greenhouses                                         1 REC
Halls                                               2 REC
Hotel/motel                                         0.25/rentable unit
Laundromats                                         0.333 REC/machine
Medical clinics                                     2 REC
Mobile home                                         1 REC/unit
Multiple family                                     1 REC/unit
Municipal Building                                  1 REC
Nursing homes                                       0.5 REC/room
Office buildings                                    1 REC/10 employees
Post office                                         1 REC
Refreshment stand (carry-out)                       1 REC
Restaurants                                         1 REC/20-person capacity
Retail stores, warehouses, shops, banks
   10 employees or less                          1 REC
   Over 10 employees                             2 REC
Schools
   Without shower                                1 REC/75 students
   With shower                                   1 REC/15 students
Seasonal dwellings                                  1 REC/unit
Single family                                       1 REC
Taverns - for each 50 capacity                      1 REC
Telephone exchange                                  1 REC
Theaters                                            2 REC
Vacant lot                                          0 REC
Vehicle service garage
   10 employees or less                          1 REC
   Each 10 employees over                        1 REC
 
   (B)   Any category of users not listed shall be assigned residential
equivalent units by the City Council after a recommendation by the City
Engineer.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995)
MANAGEMENT, OPERATION AND CONTROL
§ 53.020 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The management, operation and control of the wastewater facilities of
the city is vested in the City Council.
   (B)   All records, minutes and all written proceedings thereof shall be kept
by the City Clerk.
   (C)   The City Clerk shall keep all the financial records.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995)
§ 53.021 CONSTRUCTION OF LINES AND THE LIKE.
   All future extension of city sewer services may be made only to property
which is located within the city limits. If the owner of property requesting
sewer service is not located within the city limits, the city may assist the
property owner with necessary detachment and annexation procedures. All legal
and administrative costs associated with such actions will be the
responsibility of the requesting property owner.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995; Ord. passed 10-13-1998)
§ 53.022 MAINTENANCE OF SERVICES.
   (A)   The property owner shall maintain the building sewer and all controls
from the building to the sewer main, without expense to the city, except when
they are damaged as a result of negligence or carelessness on the part of the
city.
   (B)   All building sewers must be maintained free of defective conditions,
by and at the expense of the owner or occupant of the property.
   (C)   When any building sewer is to be relaid and there are two or more
buildings on such service, each building shall be disconnected from such sewer
and a new building sewer will be installed for each building.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995; Ord. passed 9-27-1999)
§ 53.023 CONDEMNATION OF REAL ESTATE.
   Whenever any real estate or any easement therein, or use thereof, shall in
the judgment of the City Council be necessary to the wastewater facilities, and
whenever, for any cause, an agreement for the purchase thereof, cannot be made
with the owner thereof, the City Council shall proceed with all necessary steps
to take such real estate, easement or use by condemnation in accordance with
the Minnesota Statutes and the Uniform Relocation and Real Property Acquisition
Policy Act of 1970, if federal funds are used for the project associated with
the real estate or easement.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995)
§ 53.024 TITLE TO REAL ESTATE AND PERSONALITY.
   All property, real or personal acquired for the construction of the
wastewater facilities, and all diagrams, papers, books and records connected
with the wastewater facilities, and all buildings, machinery and fixtures
pertaining thereto, shall be the property of the city.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995)
USER RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 53.035 GENERAL.
   The rules and regulations of the city, hereinafter set forth, shall be
considered a part of the contract with every user who is connected to or uses
the sewer system or wastewater treatment works and every such user by
connecting with the sewer system or wastewater treatment works shall be
considered as expressing their assent to be bound thereby. Whenever any
provision of this chapter or of the rules and regulations now in existence or
hereinafter adopted are violated, the use or service may be shut off from the
building or place of such violation and shall not be re-established, except by
order of the City Council and on payment of all arrears, the expenses and
charges of shutting off and putting on, and such other terms as the City
Council may determine, and a satisfactory understanding with the party that no
further cause for complaint shall arise. In case of such violation, the City
Council may declare any payment made for the service by the party or parties
committing such violation to be forfeited.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995)
§ 53.056 PLUMBERS.
   No plumber, pipe fitter or other person will be permitted to do any plumbing
or pipe fitting work in connection with the sewer system without first
receiving a license from the state and obtaining permission from the City
Council. All service connections to the sewer main shall comply with the
state’s Plumbing Code.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995)
§ 53.037 PRIVATE SYSTEMS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Septic tanks prohibited. The installation, maintenance and use of
septic tanks, holding tanks and other private sewage disposal systems within
the area of the city serviced by its sewer system or extensions thereof, are
hereby declared to be a public nuisance and a health hazard. The use of septic
tanks, holding tanks or any other private sewage disposal system within the
area of the city serviced by the sewer system is hereby prohibited.
   (B)   Mandatory hook-up. The owner of each parcel of land adjacent to a
sewer main on which there exists a building, building sewer or private system
on the date this chapter is adopted or amendments made thereto, that is
adjacent to a sewer main or any extension thereof, shall connect to such system
within 12 months of notice in writing from the City Council.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995; Ord. passed 9-27-1999; Ord. passed 10-12-2010) Penalty,
see §
53.999
§ 53.038 APPLICATIONS FOR SERVICE.
   (A)   Application for sewer service.
      (1)   Every person desiring to connect to the sewer system shall file an
application in writing to the City Clerk on such form as is prescribed for that
purpose. Such application forms will be furnished at the office of the City
Clerk. The application must state fully and truthfully all the wastes which
will be discharged. If the applicant is not the owner of the premises, the
written consent of the owner must accompany the application.
      (2)   If it appears that the service applied for will not provide
adequate service for the contemplated use, the City Clerk may reject the
application. New connections shall not be permitted unless there is adequate
capacity in all downstream collection and treatment facilities. If the City
Clerk approves the application, a permit shall be issued for services as shown
on the application upon payment of the connection charge.
   (B)   Connection charge. Persons attaching to a public sewer main shall pay
a connection charge as set by resolution of the City Council.
   (C)   Application for septage disposal.
      (1)   Each licensed disposer wishing to discharge septage to the city
wastewater treatment works shall file a non-refundable filing fee and an
application in writing to the City Clerk on such form as is prescribed for that
purpose. Forms for such application will be furnished at the office of the City
Clerk. The application must state fully and truly the type, frequency,
quantity, quality and location of generated septage to be disposed in the
wastewater treatment works.
      (2)   (a)   The City Council will evaluate the applications and make a
determination as to the amount and conditions of septage disposal. The City
Council shall approve or reject all applications promptly. If the city cannot
accept all the proposed septage disposal, then consideration shall be given
first to those generators of septage that are within the sewer service or
holding tank service areas.
         (b)   The person(s) or party disposing waste shall furnish bond to the
city in the amount of $1,000 to guarantee performance. The performance bond
shall be delivered to the City Clerk prior to the issuance of the permit
hereunder. Any person or party disposing of septage shall carry public
liability insurance in an amount not less than $100,000 to protect any and all
persons or property from injury and/or damage caused in any way or manner by
any act, or failure to act, by any of the applicant’s employees. The applicant
shall furnish the City Clerk with a certificate certifying such insurance to be
in full force and effect for the term of the permit. All City Council approvals
for septage disposal shall have the condition that any time the sewerage system
has operational problems, maintenance problems or threat of NPDES permit
violations that are indirectly or directly related to septage disposal, the
city may immediately restrict septage disposal until such time as corrective
action or mitigative measures have been taken.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995)
§ 53.039 USE OF SEWERS.
   (A)   User to keep in repair. All users shall keep their own building sewers
in good repair and protected from frost, at their own risk and expense, and
shall prevent any unnecessary overburdening of the sewer system.
   (B)   Backflow preventor. In areas where sewer main surcharging is known to
occur, the City Council may order that all floor drains shall have a backflow
prevention valve installed at the owner’s expense.
   (C)   User use only. No user shall allow other persons or other services to
connect to the sewer system through their building sewer.
   (D)   Vacating sewer of premises and discontinuance. Whenever premises
served by the system are to be vacated, or whenever any person desires to
discontinue service from the system, the City Clerk must be notified in
writing.
   (E)   User to permit inspection. Every user shall permit the city or its
duly authorized agent, at all reasonable hours of the day, to enter his, her or
their premises or building to examine the pipes and fixtures, and the manner in
which the drains and sewer connections operate.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.040 UTILITY RESPONSIBILITY.
   No claim shall be made against the city or the city’s representative by
reason of the breaking, clogging, stoppage or freezing of any service pipes;
nor from any damage arising from repairing mains, making connections or
extensions or any other work that may be deemed necessary. The right is hereby
reserved to cut off the service at any time for the purpose of repairs of or
any other necessary purpose, any permit granted or regulations to the contrary
notwithstanding. Whenever it shall become necessary to shut off the sewer
within any location, the City Clerk shall, if practicable, give notice to each
and every user within the effected area of the time when such service will be
shut off.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995)
§ 53.041 BUILDING SEWER CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Excavations. In making excavations in streets, highways or boulevard
for laying building sewers or making repairs, the paving and the earth removed
shall be deposited in a manner that will result in the least inconvenience to
the public. No person shall leave any such excavation open at any time without
barricades and, during the night, warning lights must be maintained at such
excavations.
   (B)   Layering work. In refilling the opening, after the pipes are laid, the
earth must be laid in layers of not more than nine inches in depth, and each
layer thoroughly compacted to prevent settling. This work, together with the
replacing of sidewalks, base course and paying, must be done so as to make the
street as good as before it was disturbed, and satisfactory to the city. No
opening of the streets for tapping the pipes will be permitted when the ground
is frozen.
   (C)   Tapping the mains. No persons, except those having special permission
from the city or persons in the service and approved by the city, will be
permitted, under any circumstances, to tap the public sewer or collection
pipes. The kind and size of the connection with the pipe shall be that
specified in the permits from the city to ensure that new sewers and
connections to the sewer system are properly designed and constructed.
   (D)   Location of tap. Pipes shall be tapped on top, and not within six
inches (15 cm) of the joint, or within 24 inches (60 cm) of another lateral
connection. All service connections to mains must comply with the state’s
Plumbing Code. Lateral connections to existing sewers shall be made into
saddles and by coring the existing sewer or by inserting (cutting-in) a wye or
tee into the existing sewer. The wye or tee shall be of the same pipe material
as the existing sewer. The lateral/tee connection shall be made with approved
adapters or couplings.
   (E)   Installation of building sewers (house laterals). All building sewers
pipes (laterals) on private property will be installed in accordance with state
regulations. All laterals shall be inspected by the city. The building sewer
and/or private interceptor main sewer shall be inspected upon completion of
placement of the pipe and before backfilling and tested before or after
backfilling.
   (F)   Clear water connection prohibited. No person shall make connections of
roof downspouts, foundation drains, yard drains or other sources of surface
runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which is connected
directly or indirectly to the public sewer. Any existing connections of surface
runoff or ground water shall be disconnected within 60 days of written notice
from the city. If they are not disconnected upon notice, the city may cause
such disconnection to be made and shall bill the cost thereof the owner of the
premises.
   (G)   Inspection of connection. The applicant for connection shall notify
the City Clerk when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection
to the public sewer. The actual connection shall be made under the supervision
of the city.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.042 EXTENSIONS OF SEWER MAINS.
   The city shall extend sewer mains to a new user in accordance with the
following charges and the following conditions.
   (A)   Application. When an extension of a sewer main is required by the
prospective user, the person shall make an application for such an extension in
writing to the City Clerk by filing of a written application. After the filing
of such an application, the city representative, in consultation with the City
Engineer, shall first determine the logical location of the next manhole or
manholes. Next, the city representative shall determine the length and location
of the extension, taking into consideration the prospective demands for
service, the capacity of downstream facilities and the orderly development of
the particular area. A report shall be given to the City Council by the city
representative concerning the application which report shall contain a
recommendation as to whether or not the City Council should approve or deny the
application. No extension shall be made for a distance less than to the next
manhole. All sewer extensions shall be constructed in compliance with local and
state laws, ordinances and regulations.
   (B)   Payment by users. The person who requests the extension shall pay the
entire cost of the extension including the manhole or manholes that are part of
the extension. If more than one user is involved, the entire cost shall be
divided among these users in the proportion determined by the City Council. The
City Council may extend sewer service to encourage or facilitate development
with payment from city funds and/or future users of the extension.
   (C)   Method of dividing cost. After making the decision as to the length
and location of the extension and prior to the time of making the charge to the
person(s), the City Council shall determine the benefits to be received by any
parcel that can be served by the extension. Before making a determination as to
benefits received, the City Council shall first divide the area to be served
into logical building lots. The City Council may consider the recommendations
of the landowner in determining the number of building lots if the landowner as
part of his or her application accompanies the application with a proposed
division of the land into lots for sale or use. In determining the amount to be
paid by the original users, if more than one user is involved, the division of
the charge shall be made by considering each building lot as a separate user.
Payments are to be considered contributions to construction.
   (D)   Future users. After the original contribution, any future connection
by reason other than to a lot owned by a party making a previous contribution,
such user may be required to pay to the City Council their pro rata share of
the lot or lots owned by the new attaching user in the entire extension cost as
if the new user had been one of the original contributors. No refund shall be
made to the original contributors unless a reimbursement plan has been agreed
to by the city prior to the installation of the connection. In addition to the
charge made as above provided to each lot, each user shall pay the connection
charge and the full cost of the building sewer from the main to their building.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995)
§ 53.043 SEPTAGE ACCEPTANCE LOCATION.
   (A)   Discharge. Septage shall only be discharged to the city’s sewerage
system by city-approved and state-licensed disposers and at locations, times
and conditions as specified by the City Council. Septage discharges to the
receiving facility at the wastewater treatment works shall be limited to the
posted, normal working hours of the facility. Documentation of the discharge
shall be submitted to the City Clerk within one working day of the discharge.
   (B)   Alternate discharge. Septage discharges to specified manholes may,
under special circumstances, be allowed provided discharge rates are restricted
as necessary to facilitate mixing, prevent a backup in the receiving sewer and
prevent a slug load to the wastewater treatment facility. Discharges shall be
limited to the normal working hours of the city and be approved in advance of
each such discharge.
   (C)   Application forms. The forms prescribed for the purpose of
documentation of the discharge will be furnished at the City Clerk’s office and
will include the following information:
      (1)   Name, address and telephone number of the hauler;
      (2)   License number;
      (3)   Type of septage;
      (4)   Quantity of septage;
      (5)   Estimated quality of septage;
      (6)   Location, date, time and feed rate of discharge;
      (7)   Source of septage;
      (8)   Name and address of septage generator; and
      (9)   Other information as required by the city.
   (D)   RV septage. The city may authorize any person to establish an RV
septage disposal site. The form required by division (C) above shall be
completed by any applicant. The City Council, by resolution, may impose a fee
for authorizing the RV disposal site which fee shall be based on the estimated
annual.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995)
§ 53.044 ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY.
   The City Council may, at any time, establish specific connection and lateral
charges for any main not covered by other provisions in this chapter or when
the city has made an extension and the City Council has failed to provide
lateral or connection charges.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995)
REGULATIONS AND CONDITIONS
§ 53.055 GENERAL DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
   No person shall contribute or cause to be discharged, directly or
indirectly, any of the following described substances into, the wastewater
facilities of the city:
   (A)   Any liquids, solids or gases which, by reason of their nature or
quantity, are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction to cause
fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the operation of the
wastewater facilities or wastewater treatment works;
   (B)   Solid or viscous substances which will or may cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater
system;
   (C)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or higher than 9.0 or having
any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment or personnel of the system unless the system is specifically designed
to accommodate such wastewater;
   (D)   Any wastewater containing arsenic; cadmium, copper, chromium, cyanide,
lead, mercury, nickel, zinc or other toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction, to injure or interfere with any wastewater
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or to exceed the
limitation set forth in special agreements, state or federal categorical
pretreatment standards;
   (E)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either singly
or by interaction are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life
or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and
repair;
   (F)   Any substance which may cause the wastewater treatment works effluent,
treatment residues, sludges or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse
or to interfere with the reclamation process;
   (G)   Any substance which will cause violations of the NPDES and/or other
disposal system permits;
   (H)   Any substance with objectionable color not removed in the treatment
process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions;
   (I)   Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the wastewater treatment works resulting in interference; but in no
case, wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the public sewer
which exceeds 120°F unless the wastewater facilities are designed to
accommodate such temperature;
   (J)   Any slug load, which shall mean any pollutant, including oxygen-
demanding pollutants (BOD), released in a single extraordinary discharge
episode of such volume or strength as to cause interference to the wastewater
treatment works;
   (K)   Any unpolluted water including, but not limited to, non-contact
cooling water. Non-contact cooling water may be discharged to the city storm
sewer;
   (L)   Any wastewaters which may be acutely or chronically toxic to aquatic
life or wild and domestic animals;
   (M)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such
half-life or concentration as exceed limits established by the city in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
   (N)   Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public
nuisance; and/or
   (O)   Any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof run-off or surface
drainage or any other connections from inflow sources to the public sewer. Such
waters may be discharged to a storm sewer or other waterway with permission of
the City Council.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.056 LIMITATIONS ON WASTEWATER STRENGTH.
   (A)   National categorical pretreatment standards. National categorical
pretreatment standards, if applicable, shall, as promulgated by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, be met by all dischargers of waste.
   (B)   State requirements. State requirements shall be met by all dischargers
which are subject to such standards in any instance in which they are more
stringent than other applicable requirements.
   (C)   Dilution. No user shall increase the use of potable or process water
in any way, nor mix separate waste streams for the purpose of diluting a
discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve
compliance with the standards set forth in this chapter unless approved in
writing by the city.
   (D)   Supplementary limitations.
      (1)   No user shall discharge wastewater containing concentrations of the
following enumerated materials exceeding the following values unless prior
approval is. granted by the City Council.
 
Material                   Concentration (mg/l)
Biochemical oxygen demand  350 mg/l
Fats, oil and grease (FOG) 100 mg/l
Suspended solids           350 mg/l
 
      (2)   The City Council may also impose mass limitations on users which
are using dilution to meet the pretreatment standards or requirements of this
chapter, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is deemed
appropriate by the City Council.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995)
§ 53.057 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES.
   (A)   Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited or regulated materials or substances established by this chapter.
Where necessary, facilities to prevent additional discharge of prohibited
materials shall be provided and maintained at the user’s cost and expense.
Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted
to the city for review, and shall be improved by the city before construction
of the facility. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures by
the city shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify its
facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Dischargers shall notify the city immediately upon the occurrence of a
“slug load” or accidental discharge of substances prohibited by this chapter.
The notification shall include location of discharge, date and time thereof,
type of waste, concentration and volume and corrective actions. Any user who
discharges a slug load or prohibited materials shall be liable for any expense,
loss or damage to the city’s wastewater facilities on wastewater treatment
works, in addition to the amount of any forfeitures imposed on the city on
account thereof under state or federal law.
   (C)   Signs shall be permanently posted in conspicuous places on industrial
user’s premises, advising employees whom to call in the event of a slug or
accidental discharge. Employers shall instruct all employees who may cause or
discover such a discharge with respect to emergency notification procedures.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.058 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.
   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting any
special agreement between the city and any person whereby an industrial waste
of unusual strength or character may be admitted to the wastewater treatment
works, either before or after pretreatment; provided that, there is no
impairment of the functioning of the wastewater treatment works by reason of
the admission of such wastes, and no extra costs are incurred by the city
without recompense by the person; provided that, all rates and provisions set
forth or authorized in this chapter are complied with.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995)
SEWER SERVICE CHARGE SYSTEM
§ 53.070 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   DEBT SERVICE CHARGES. All costs associated with repayment of debts incurred
for the construction and/or rehabilitation of wastewater collection system and
treatment facilities. Collection system and treatment expenses shall be
segregated.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTEWATER. Wastewater with concentrations of BOD5
no greater than 250 milligrams per liter (mg/l) and suspended solid no greater
than 250 milligrams per liter (mg/l) respectively.
   NORMAL USER. A user whose contributions to the sewerage system consist only
of normal domestic strength wastewater originating from a house, apartment, or
other living quarters occupied by a person or persons constituting a distinct
household, business or commercial enterprise.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE (O&M) COSTS. All costs associated with the
operation and maintenance of the wastewater collection and treatment
facilities. These costs, including costs associated with clear water flows (I/
I), shall be divided proportionately among the various sewer users. Collection
system and treatment expenses shall be segregated.
   REPLACEMENT COSTS (R). All costs necessary to accumulate the resources to
replace equipment as required to maintain capacity and performance during the
design life of the facility. A separate, segregated, distinct replacement fund
shall be established and used only for replacement of equipment designated by
the fund.
   RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENCY CHARGE (REC). The total sewer service charge levied
on users of the sewer system for payment of capital expenses, including debt
service charges, as well as the operation and maintenance costs, including
replacement of said facilities. The RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENCY CHARGE is the total
of the debt service charge and the sewer use charge.
   RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENCY UNITS (REU). Assigned to each sewer user based on
the relationship to a single-family dwelling. A “single-family dwelling” is
defined as a mobile home, a seasonal dwelling, a duplex unit, an apartment
unit, a single family detached dwelling or a multi-family unit. Residential
users are assigned one REU per unit. Commercial, industrial and public users
are assigned REC based on water usage or, where water usage records are not
available. Water usage shall be compared to the average water usage of single-
family dwellings as measured by the water utility. In no event shall any user
be assigned a residential equivalent unit less than one, except for single-
family dwellings that have been unoccupied for more than 12 consecutive months.
Upon written request to the City Council, these unoccupied dwellings may be
assigned a standby REU of 0.5. A list of assigned REUs is provided in §
53.006 of this chapter. Section 53.006 of this chapter shall be reviewed each
year by the city and modified to reflect any change in water usage, number of
units or classification.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995)
§ 53.071 POLICY.
   It shall be the policy of the city to obtain sufficient revenues to pay the
costs for debt service arid the proper operation and maintenance of the
wastewater facilities, including a replacement fund, through a system of sewer
service charges as defined in this section. The system shall assure that each
user of the wastewater facilities pays their proportionate share of the cost of
such facilities.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995)
§ 53.072 BASIS FOR RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENCY CHARGE.
   The debt service charge shall be sufficient to pay the debt service costs.
The sewer use charge shall be sufficient to pay the costs of operation and
maintenance, including any replacement fund, of the wastewater facilities. The
rates in this chapter shall be reviewed not less than biennially by the City
Council. Rates shall be adjusted, as required, to reflect the actual number and
size of users and actual costs. Users shall be notified annually of the portion
of service charges attributable to operation, maintenance, replacement and debt
service.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995)
§ 53.073 DEBT SERVICE CHARGE.
   A debt service charge is hereby imposed upon each lot, parcel of land,
building or premises served by the sewerage system or otherwise discharging
sewage, including non-domestic and industrial wastes, into the system. The debt
service charge shall established by resolution of the City Council from time to
time and notice of any rate established shall be sent to each user at least one
month before the change is effective.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995)
§ 53.074 SEWER USE CHARGE.
   A sewer use charge is hereby imposed on all users of the sewerage system.
Such sewer use charge shall be payable as hereinafter provided and in an amount
determinable as follows.
   (A)   (1)   CATEGORY A is defined as normal or domestic strength wastewater
having organic concentrations, of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5) no greater
than 250 milligrams per liter (mg/l) and suspended solids no greater than 250
milligrams per liter (mg/l). The sewer service charge (O,M&R) for Category A
wastewater shall be established by resolution of the City Council from time to
time and notice of any rate established shall be sent to each user at least one
month before the change is effective.
      (2)   If the City Council approves a volumetric charge, the sewer use
charge shall be calculated as follows:
         Sewer Use Charge = (CF + 0.00208 CB + 0.00208 CS) x V = Cv x V
         CF = Flow unit price
         CB = BOD unit price
         CS = SS unit price
         V = Total volume of water used during billing periods in units of
1,000 gallons
         CV = Volume unit price plus per REU
   (B)   CATEGORY B is defined as wastewater having organic concentrations of
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5) greater than 250 milligrams per liter (mg/l)
and/or suspended solids (SS) greater than 250 milligrams per liter (mg/l). The
minimum Category B charge will be based on a concentration of 250 mg/l BOD5 and
250 mg/l SS. Flow metering and sampling shall be provided for all Category B
users. The equation for the monthly Category B charge is as follows:
Sewer Use Charge =
Category A charge +  BOD  x V x 0.00834 x CB+  SS  x V x 0.00834 x CS
            1,000             1,000
BOD = Total biochemical oxygen demand expressed in mg/l - 250
SS = Total suspended solids expressed in mg/l - 250
CB = BOD unit price
CS = SS unit price
V = Total volume of water used during billing period in units of 1,000 gallons
   (C)   CATEGORY C is defined as septage which has organic concentrations of
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) greater than 250 milligrams per liter (mg/l)
and/or suspended solids (SS) greater than 250 milligrams per liter (mg/l). The
equation for the charge is the same as Category B with an additional debt
service and administrative charge as established by the City Council. It will
be assumed that holding tank wastewater has a BOD of 600 mg/l and a SS of 1,800
mg/l and septic tank wastewater has a BOD of 5,000 mg/l and SS of 15,000 mg/
l unless an actual analysis is furnished by the discharger.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995)
INDUSTRIAL AND SEPTAGE WASTEWATERS; CONTROL
§ 53.085 DISCHARGE CONDITIONS.
   If any wastewaters or septage are discharged, or proposed to be discharged,
to the wastewater facilities which contain substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in §§
53.055 through
53.058 of this chapter and which, in the judgment of the City Council may be
detrimental to the wastewater facilities, the City Council may:
   (A)   Reject the wastes; or
   (B)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
sewer system.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995)
§ 53.086 WASTEWATER SAMPLING.
   (A)   Industrial wastes and septage discharged into the public sewers shall
be subject to periodic inspection and a determination of character and
concentration of the waste as specified by the city.
   (B)   Samples shall be collected in such a manner as to be representative of
the composition of the wastes. The sampling may be accomplished either manually
or by the use of mechanical equipment acceptable to the city.
   (C)   Laboratory analysis shall be the responsibility of the person
discharging the wastewater or septage and shall be subject to the approval of
the City Council or its duty authorized representatives. Every care shall be
exercised in the collection of samples to ensure their preservation in a state
comparable to that at the time the sample was taken. All analysis shall be
performed by a state-certified laboratory.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995)
§ 53.087 PRETREATMENT.
   When required by the city to modify or eliminate wastes that are harmful to
the structures, processes or operation of the wastewater facilities, the
discharger shall provide, at his, her or their expense, such preliminary
treatment or processing facilities as may be required to render this waste
acceptable for admission to the public sewers.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995)
§ 53.088 GREASE, OIL AND/OR SAND INTERCEPTORS.
   When required by the city, grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be
provided by the discharger and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these
interceptors, the discharger shall be responsible for the proper removal and
disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain
records of the dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by the
city. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by the
discharger’s personnel must be performed by currently licensed disposal terms.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995)
§ 53.089 ANALYSES.
   (A)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of water,
waste and septage to which reference is made in the ordinances shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of “Standard Methods”.
Sampling methods, locations, times, durations and frequencies are to be
determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the City Engineer.
   (B)   Determination of the character and concentration of the industrial
wastewater shall be made by the person discharging them or their agent as
designated and required by the city. The city may also make its own analyses of
the wastes and these determinations shall be used as a basis for charges. If
the user discharging the waste contests the determination, the city may elect
to have an independent laboratory determine character and concentration of the
waste. Said independent laboratory shall be certified and be acceptable to both
the city and user discharging the waste. All costs incurred by the independent
laboratory in making the determination shall be assumed by the discharger.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995)
§ 53.090 SUBMISSION OF INFORMATION.
   Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to
proposed flow equalization, pretreatment or wastewater processing facilities
shall be submitted for review by the City Engineer prior to the start of
construction if the effluent from such facility is to be discharged into the
public sewers.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995)
§ 53.091 SUBMISSION OF BASIC DATA.
   (A)   Within three months after passage of this chapter, each person who
discharges industrial wastes to a public sewer shall prepare and file with the
city, a report that shall include pertinent data relating to the quantity and
characteristics of the waste discharged to the sewerage system. The city shall
be notified 60 days in advance of any plans that change the discharge by more
than 15% of flow or strength. Such a request shall be reviewed as provided in §
53.085 of this chapter.
   (B)   Any person desiring to make a new connection to a public sewer for the
purpose of discharging industrial wastes shall prepare and file with the city a
report that shall include actual or predicted data relating to the quantity and
characteristics of the waste to be discharged.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995)
§ 53.999 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter may be charged with a
misdemeanor. Each day in which a violation continues shall be deemed to be a
separate violation.
(Ord. passed 6-26-1995)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC AND PARKING
      
71.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Exhibition driving
Parking
   
70.15   Definitions and interpretations
   
70.16   State Traffic Code adopted
   
70.17   Presumption of permission
   
70.18   General prohibitions
   
70.19   Parallel parking
   
70.20   Angle parking
   
70.21   Streets without curbs
   
70.22   Parking hours
   
70.23   Truck parking
   
70.24   City parking lots
   
70.25   Vehicle repairs on streets
   
70.26   Advertising or selling merchandise
   
70.27   Parking on private property without consent
   
70.28   Limit on quantity and type of vehicles in residential district
   
70.29   Winter parking
   
70.30   Parking in city parks
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 EXHIBITION DRIVING.
   Any person driving or operating a vehicle in the city in such a manner that
creates or causes unnecessary engine noise or tire squeal, skid or slide upon
acceleration or stopping, or that simulates a temporary race, or that causes
the vehicle to unnecessarily turn or sway shall be guilty of “exhibition
driving”.
(Ord. T400, passed 3-26-1979) Penalty, see §
70.99
PARKING
§ 70.15 DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS.
   (A)   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all
terms shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. The singular shall
include the plural and the plural shall include the singular. The masculine
shall include the feminine and neuter and vice-versa. The term “shall” means
mandatory and the term “may” means permissive.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle over 12,000 pounds gross vehicle weight
that is used primarily for commercial uses in the operation of a business. This
also includes vehicles for hire or contracted by a business that is not owned
by the business that has hired or contracted the vehicle or driver and vehicle.
      MOTOR VEHICLES. A machine propelled by power other than human power
designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides
and transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include, without
limitation, automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, tractors, wagons, ATVs
and UTVs. MOTOR VEHICLE does not include lawnmowers, snowmobiles or personal
assistive mobility devices.
      RECREATIONAL CAMPING VEHICLE. Any of the following.
         (a)   CAMPING TRAILER. A folding structure, mounted on wheels and
designed for travel recreation and vacation uses.
         (b)   MOTOR HOME. A portable, temporary building to be used for
travel, recreation and vacation, constructed as an integral part of a self-
propelled vehicle.
         (c)   PICKUP COACH. A structure designed to be mounted on a truck
chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation.
         (d)   TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular, portable structure built on a
chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational
and vacation uses, permanently identified TRAVEL TRAILER by the manufacturer.
      TRUCK. Any of the following:
         (a)   Vehicles commonly known as trucks that have a capacity of more
than 8,000 pounds according to the manufacturer’s rating;
         (b)   Vehicles commonly known as trucks having an overall length of
more than 25 feet or width at any point of more than eight feet;
         (c)   Dump trucks, tractors, truck-tractors, semi-trailers or any
heavy machinery; and/or
         (d)   Any vehicle commonly referred to as trucks, trailer or semi-
trailer which is being used for the transportation of livestock or has been
used for the transportation of livestock and has not been cleaned.
(Ord. 15, passed 4-12-2021)
§ 70.16 STATE TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED.
   The city hereby adopts the Minnesota Traffic Code by reference. The
regulatory provisions of M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be amended from time to
time, are hereby incorporated and made part of this section as completely as if
set out in full herein. The penalty for violation of the provisions of state
statues adopted by reference in this section shall be identical with the
penalty provided for in the statutes for the same offense.
(Ord. 15, passed 4-12-2021)
§ 70.17 PRESUMPTION OF PERMISSION.
   It shall be presumed that any vehicle parking in violation of this
subchapter or any other ordinance regulating parking, when the driver is not
present, that the owner parked the vehicle or that the driver of the vehicle
was acting as the agent of the owner.
(Ord. 15, passed 4-12-2021)
§ 70.18 GENERAL PROHIBITIONS.
   It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
specific directions of a law enforcement officer or traffic- control device in
any of the following locations:
   (A)   On a sidewalk;
   (B)   In front of or within ten feet of a public or private driveway;
   (C)   Within an intersection or on a crosswalk;
   (D)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at any intersection;
   (E)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;
   (F)   In a sign-posted fire lane;
   (G)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or
traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
   (H)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the
side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of
the entrance when posted;
   (I)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when the
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
   (J)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street;
   (K)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street;
   (L)   At any place where official signs prohibit or restrict stopping,
parking or both;
   (M)   In any alley, except for loading or unloading and then only so long as
reasonably necessary for the loading and unloading to or from adjacent
premises;
   (N)   On any boulevard which has been curbed;
   (O)   In front of mailboxes or in such a manner as to impede the access of
postal mail carrier vehicles to the mailboxes;
   (P)   Within a bicycle lane, except when posted signs permit parking; or
   (Q)   In any areas where the curb is painted yellow.
(Ord. 15, passed 4-12-2021) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.19 PARALLEL PARKING.
   Except where angle parking is specifically allowed and indicated by curb
marking or sign-posting, or both, each vehicle stopped or parked upon a two-way
road where there is an adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the right-
hand wheels of the vehicle parallel with and within 12 inches of the right-hand
curb and where painted markings appear on the curb or the street, the vehicle
shall be within the markings, front and rear. Upon a one-way roadway, all
vehicles shall also be so parked; except that, the left-hand wheels of the
vehicle may be parallel with and within 12 inches from the left-hand curb, but
the front of the vehicle in any event and with respect to the remainder of the
vehicle, shall be in the direction of the flow of traffic upon the one-way
street. Motorcycles may park, as is customary, by backing up to the curb at an
angle.
(Ord. 15, passed 4-12-2021) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.20 ANGLE PARKING.
   Where angle parking has been established and is allowed, as shown by curb
marking or sign-posting or both, each vehicle stopped or parked shall be at an
angle between 45 and 60 degrees (approximately), with the front wheel touching
the curb and within any parking lines painted on the curb or street; provided
that, the front wheel not touching the curb shall be the portion of the vehicle
farthest in the direction of one-way traffic.
(Ord. 15, passed 4-12-2021) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.21 STREETS WITHOUT CURBS.
   Upon streets not having a curb, each vehicle shall be stopped or parked
parallel and to the right of the street paving, improved or main traveled
portion of the street.
(Ord. 15, passed 4-12-2021) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.22 PARKING HOURS.
   Parking on streets shall be limited as follows.
   (A)   Continuous period. It is unlawful for any person to stop, park or
leave any vehicle upon any street for a continuous period in excess of 72
hours. See winter parking provisions in §
70.29 of this chapter.
   (B)   Designated prohibited parking zones. Prohibited parking zones shall be
established from time to time. Certain streets, blocks or portions of streets
or blocks shall be designated as prohibited parking zones whenever necessary
for the convenience of the public or to minimize traffic hazards and preserve a
free flow of traffic. These prohibited zones shall be marked by appropriate
signs when established. Parking may be prohibited in varying blocks of
specified time or times of day or days of the week.
   (C)   Time measurement. It is unlawful for any person to remove, erase or
otherwise obliterate any mark or sign placed upon a tire or other part of a
vehicle by a law enforcement officer for the purpose of measuring the length of
time the vehicle has been parked.
   (D)   “Stationary” defined. For the purpose of enforcement of this section,
any vehicle moved less than 50 feet in a limited time parking zone shall be
deemed to have remained STATIONARY.
(Ord. 15, passed 4-12-2021) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.23 TRUCK PARKING.
   Restrictions for truck parking are as follows.
   (A)   Semi-trailer. No detached semi-trailer shall be parked on any city
street, city-owned parking lot or other public property, except streets as
specifically designated by the Police Chief.
   (B)   Trucks. No truck, as identified in §
70.15 of this chapter, shall park on any street or alley way in a residential
district for more than one hour unless the vehicle is a personal vehicle or
work vehicle parked in front of a resident’s property.
   (C)   Commercial vehicle. No commercial vehicle, as identified in §
70.15 of this chapter, shall park upon any street in the business district,
except streets as specifically designated and sign-posted; however, parking of
the vehicle for a period of not more than 30 minutes shall be permitted in the
space for the purpose of necessary access to abutting property while actively
loading or unloading when the access cannot reasonable be secured from any
alley or from an adjacent street where truck parking is not so restricted.
Parking of commercial vehicles is permitted in duly designated and sign-posted
loading zones and in alleys, for a period of up to 30 minutes; provided that,
the alley parking does not prevent the flow of traffic therein, all of which
shall be for the purpose of access to abutting or adjacent property while
actively loading or unloading.
   (D)   Truck/vehicle and trailer and bus. No truck or other vehicle using or
equipped with a trailer or extended body or other extension or projection
beyond the original length of the vehicle or any passenger bus shall park
diagonally along any street, except for a time sufficient to load or unload and
in such case, only parallel parking shall be permitted; provided, however,
that, a truck may stand backed up to the curb if the weight or bulk of the load
makes parallel parking impracticable, but then only for a period of time
sufficient to load or unload.
   (E)   Construction, repair equipment, loaders, backhoes and so forth. No
construction equipment, such as loaders, backhoes, skid loaders and dozers,
shall be allowed to be parked on any street, except during the course of
conducting repairs or construction in the immediate vicinity of the area where
they are parked and then, only during the time the repair or construction is
being conducted. When the repair or construction is complete, the equipment
must be moved off of the city street.
(Ord. 15, passed 4-12-2021) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.24 CITY PARKING LOTS.
   In city-owned parking lots, hours of parking, prescribed method of parking
and sizes and types of motor vehicles to be parked may be limited from time to
time. The limitations and restrictions shall be marked and sign posted. At no
time shall any vehicle be parked, or left standing, backed into a parking place
or driven in a direction opposite the flow of traffic marked by “one-way” signs
or arrows or parked in any city-owned lot contrary to the restrictions or
limitations marked or sign-posted.
(Ord. 15, passed 4-12-2021) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.25 VEHICLE REPAIRS ON STREETS.
   No person shall service, repair, assemble or dismantle any vehicle parked
upon a street or attempt to do so, except to service the vehicle with gasoline
or oil or to provide emergency repairs thereon, but in no event for more than
24 hours.
(Ord. 15, passed 4-12-2021) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.26 ADVERTISING OR SELLING MERCHANDISE.
   No person shall park a vehicle on any street for the purpose of advertising
the vehicle for sale, for the purpose of advertising for sale or selling
merchandise thereon or therein, or advertising any merchandise for sale or
advertising a forthcoming event. Residents may, however, advertise a
personally-owned vehicle for sale in front of their own residence. Food trucks
or vendors may park on city streets for special events or seasonal sales of
merchandise upon registration at City Hall.
(Ord. 15, passed 4-12-2021) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.27 PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY WITHOUT CONSENT.
   It shall be a misdemeanor to park or abandon a motor vehicle on the property
of another or upon an area developed as an off-street parking facility without
the consent of the owner or person in charge of any such property or facility.
(Ord. 15, passed 4-12-2021) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.28 LIMIT ON QUANTITY AND TYPE OF VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   In a residential district, the following is permitted:
      (1)   Indoor parking of motor vehicles, licensed or unlicensed, in any
quantity or condition; and
      (2)   Outdoor parking of motor vehicles on a driveway or an asphalt,
concrete or brick or block paver surface, except as prohibited below.
   (B)   In a residential district, it shall be unlawful to park outdoors:
      (1)   Any unlicensed or unregistered motor vehicles; and/or
      (2)   Any inoperable motor vehicle.
(Ord. 15, passed 4-12-2021) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.29 WINTER PARKING.
   (A)   All motor vehicles, trailers or other vehicles shall be removed from
all city streets and alleyways within 12 hours after the snow or ice has ceased
to be deposited or until the street or alleyway is plowed/sanded. Vehicles may
be moved temporarily to a street or a side of a street which has been plowed.
Should a snow/ice event occur between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.,
vehicles should be moved as soon as practicable but no later than 8:00 a.m.
Vehicles not in compliance shall be towed at the owner’s expense and shall be
subject to penalty listed below.
   (B)   This section also incorporates the provisions of the city’s snow
removal policy, as amended from time to time by Council review and as set out
in Chapter 50 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 15, passed 4-12-2021) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.30 PARKING IN CITY PARKS.
   (A)   Overnight camping in any city park is hereby permitted for one night
only, subject to the owner or operator of the motor vehicle used by the campers
obtaining a permit from the City Clerk or the police.
   (B)   Persons camping in city parks, and found in possession of and/or using
marijuana or other controlled substances, or engaging in disorderly conduct,
shall leave the park on order from a police officer.
(Ord. passed 6-18-1979) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating any provisions of §
70.01 of this chapter shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
   (C)   Any person who violates a provision of §§
70.15 through
70.29 of this chapter and is convicted of the violation shall be punished as
follows.
      (1)   Petty misdemeanor. Any person found to have violated §§
70.15 through
70.29 of this chapter may be charged with a petty misdemeanor.
      (2)   Impounding and removing vehicles. When a vehicle standing upon a
street or city-owned parking lot is in violation of any part of §§
70.15 through
70.29 of this chapter, the law enforcement officer shall require the driver or
other person in charge of the vehicle to remove the same to a position in
compliance with §§
70.15 through
70.29 of this chapter. When a vehicle standing upon a street or city-owned
parking lot is in violation of any part of §§
70.15 through
70.29 of this chapter, the law enforcement officer may impound the vehicle and
provide for the removal thereof and to remove the same to a convenient garage
or other facility or place of safety; provided that, if any charge be placed
against the vehicle for cost of removal or storage or both, by anyone called
upon to assist therewith the same shall be paid prior to removal from the place
of storage or safekeeping. Any charges so incurred shall be charged to the
owner of the vehicle.
   (D)   Any camper who refuses or fails to leave the park forthwith on order
from a police officer, per §
70.30 of this chapter, shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
(Ord. T400, passed 3-26-1979; Ord. passed 6-18-1979; Ord. 15, passed 4-12-2021)
CHAPTER 71: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
All-Terrain and Utility Task Vehicles
   
71.01   Purpose
   
71.02   Authority
   
71.03   Definitions
   
71.04   Permit required
   
71.05   Requirements and regulations
Golf Carts
   
71.20   State law adopted
   
71.21   Motorized golf carts on city streets
   
71.22   Definition
   
71.23   Permits; issuing officer
   
71.24   Permit requirements
   
71.25   Operation and equipment
   
71.26   Assumption of liability
Bicycles
   
71.40   Purpose
   
71.41   Definitions
   
71.42   Locks; required equipment
   
71.43   Mechanical condition
   
71.44   Obedience to traffic laws
   
71.45   Headphone usage
   
71.46   Parental responsibility
   
71.47   Impoundment and disposal
   
71.48   Enforcement
Snowmobiles
   
71.60   State law compliance
   
71.61   Speed limits
   
71.62   Operation and condition
 
   
71.99   Penalty
ALL-TERRAIN AND UTILITY TASK VEHICLES
§ 71.01 PURPOSE.
   The purposes of this subchapter are as follows:
   (A)   To provide reasonable regulations for the use of certain all-terrain
vehicles and utility task vehicles on public and private property in the city;
and
   (B)   To ensure public safety and prevent public nuisances related to all-
terrain vehicle and utility task vehicle use within the city.
(Ord. T-500, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 71.02 AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter is authorized by M.S. § 169.045, subd. 1 and 2, as it may be
amended from time to time.
(Ord. T-500, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 71.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE. Any vehicle defined as an “all-terrain vehicle” by M.S.
§ 84.92, subd. 8, 9 and 10, as it may be amended from time to time, and also
has exactly four wheels.
   DRIVER. The driver is a person driving, operating or in having physical
control over the all-terrain vehicle.
   UTILITY TASK VEHICLE. Any vehicle defined as a utility task vehicle by M.S.
§ 169.045, subd. 1(3), as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. T-500, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 71.04 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle or utility task vehicle
on sheets, alleys or other public property without obtaining a permit, as
provided herein.
   (B)   Every application for a permit shall be made on a form supplied by the
city and shall contain all of the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   The nature of the applicant’s physical handicap, if any;
      (3)   Model name, make and year and number of the all-terrain vehicle or
utility task vehicle;
      (4)   Current driver’s license; and
      (5)   Other information as the city may require.
   (C)   The permit fee shall be as set forth in the annual adoption of the
city’s fee schedule as may be amended from time to time.
   (D)   Permits shall be granted for a period of three years and may be
renewed.
   (E)   No permit shall be granted or renewed unless the following conditions
are met.
      (1)   The applicant may be required to submit a certificate signed by a
physician that the applicant is able to safely operate an all-terrain vehicle
or utility task vehicle on public roadways, as authorized by this subchapter.
      (2)   The applicant must provide evidence of insurance in compliance with
the provisions of state statutes concerning insurance coverage for the all-
terrain or utility task vehicle.
      (3)   The applicant has not had his or her driver’s license revoked as
the result of criminal proceedings.
(Ord. T-500, passed 5-26-2020) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.05 REQUIREMENTS AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All-terrain and utility task vehicles may be operated on all roadways
controlled by the city between the hours from one-half hour before sunrise to
one-half hour after sunset, unless clearly marked with a “No ATV/UTV Operation”
sign. The city may restrict all-terrain and utility task vehicle use on any
city street by resolution of a majority of the members of the City Council.
All-terrain and utility task vehicles may not be operated on state or federal
highways, except to cross at designated intersections.
   (B)   All-terrain and utility task vehicles shall be equipped with a rear-
view mirror to provide the driver with adequate vision from behind as required
by M.S. § 169.70, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   Every person operating an all-terrain or utility task vehicle pursuant
to a permit under this subchapter on designated roadways has all the rights and
duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle under the provisions of
M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be amended from time to time, except as otherwise
specifically provided in M.S. § 169.045, subd. 7, as it may be amended from
time to time.
   (D)   The City Council may suspend or revoke a permit granted hereunder upon
a finding that the holder thereof has violated any of the provisions of this
subchapter or M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be amended from time to time, or if
there is evidence that the permit holder cannot safely operate the all-terrain
or utility task vehicle on the designated roadways.
   (E)   The number of occupants on the all-terrain or utility task vehicle may
not exceed tire design occupant load.
   (F)   A person less than 18 years of age shall not drive or ride on an all-
terrain or utility task vehicle without a helmet and properly fastened safety
belt at all times on those all-terrain or utility task vehicles that were
equipped with a safety belt by the vehicle’s manufacturer.
   (G)   Any person operating or riding an all-terrain or utility task vehicle
with a saddle type seat must wear a helmet.
   (H)   No person under 18 years of age shall operate an all-terrain or
utility task vehicle while carrying a passenger under the age of 20 or who is
not an immediate family member. A person 18 years of age or older may only
operate an all-terrain or utility task vehicle with passengers if the number of
passengers is equal to or less the number of passengers for which the vehicle
was designed.
   (I)   It shall be unlawful to operate an all-terrain or utility task vehicle
as follows:
      (1)   On private property of another without specific written permission
of the owner of the property. Written permission may be given by a posted
notice of any kind or description, so long as it specifies the kind of vehicles
allowed, that the owner, occupant or lessee prefers, such as by saying “All-
Terrain/Utility Task Vehicles Allowed”, “ATVs/UTVs Allowed” or words
substantially similar;
      (2)   On publicly-owned land, including school, park property,
playgrounds, recreation areas and paved or unpaved walking or bike paths,
except where permitted by this subchapter;
      (3)   Without standard mufflers properly attached and in constant
operation to reduce the noise of operation of the motor to the minimum
necessary for operation. No person shall use a muffler cutout, by-pass,
straight pipe or similar device on the all-terrain or utility task vehicle and
the exhaust system shall not emit or produce a sharp popping or crackling
sound;
      (4)   On a public sidewalk or walkway provided or used for pedestrian
travel;
      (5)   While under the influence of intoxicating liquor or controlled
substances;
      (6)   At a rate of speed greater than reasonable and prudent under the
conditions;
      (7)   For the purpose of intentionally driving, chasing or running over
any animal, wild or domestic;
      (8)   In a careless or reckless manner, as defined by M.S. § 169.13, as
it may be amended from time to time;
      (9)   Within any public recreational areas or places where there are
large gatherings of people, except for the occasional use of all-terrain or
utility task vehicles on private property for the purpose of loading or
unloading it from a trailer or performing emergency maintenance; and
      (10)   Without properly functioning equipment including brakes and
lights, and without a headlight and taillight illuminated at all times.
(Ord. T-500, passed 5-26-2020)
GOLF CARTS
§ 71.20 STATE LAW ADOPTED.
   Except as herein specifically addressed or modified, the provisions of M.S.
§ 169.045, as it may be amended from time to time, are herewith incorporated by
reference.
(Ord. passed 11-12-2002)
§ 71.21 MOTORIZED GOLF CARTS ON CITY STREETS.
   (A)   The state legislature has authorized the use of motorized golf carts
on designated roadways within a city, on streets under their jurisdiction.
   (B)   The City Council sees the need to limit the availability of access to
city streets and roadways using golf carts to persons who are over the age of
16, who have possessed a valid driver’s license in the past, or who currently
possess a valid driver’s license, and who are physically disabled, as herein
defined, consistent with this subchapter and all other laws and regulations
applicable, making it difficult or impossible for the person to operate a
standard motor vehicle, without modifications to the vehicle, within the city.
   (C)   The City Council also giants a special exemption to the Good Shepherd
Lutheran Nursing Home for access to designated streets and roadways for the
transportation of residents to the downtown area of the city by use of a
motorized golf cart, consistent with this subchapter and all other laws and
regulations that apply.
(Ord. passed 11-12-2002)
§ 71.22 DEFINITION.
   For those who are PHYSICALLY DISABLED, to be eligible for a golf cart
permit, the applicant must document that operating a standard vehicle without
modifications would be difficult or impossible. Complete and accurate
information regarding the disability must be provided. Failure to provide,
complete and accurate information may result in the cancellation of the
applicant’s permit. In addition, it may cause the applicant to receive a
request for additional medical information and will cause the application to be
returned. A person who is an applicant for a permit hereunder may be required
to provide a physician’s statement deeming the applicant capable of operating a
golf cart prior to issuance of a permit.
(Ord. passed 11-12-2002)
§ 71.23 PERMITS; ISSUING OFFICER.
   The City Council shall authorize the issuing of all permits and shall
determine the streets or roadways of operation and the hours of operation if
more restrictive than state statute and deemed necessary for public safety
reasons and may recommend the denial of a permit if the applicant’s driving
status is revoked, suspended or cancelled for prior violations. The Chief of
Police may revoke a permit at any time upon finding that the holder has
violated any of the provisions of this subchapter or M.S. Chapter 169, as it
may be amended from time to time, or if there is any evidence that the permit
holder cannot safely operate the motorized golf cart.
(Ord. passed 11-12-2002)
§ 71.24 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   Every application for a permit shall be made on a form supplied by the city
and shall contain the information listed below. All permits shall be issued for
a specific golf cart and a specific individual.
   (A)   The permit shall be carried in the vehicle, indicating the number and
year for which issued.
   (B)   All motorized golf carts, and their drivers must carry liability
insurance at all times when operating on a public street or roadway. A
certificate of insurance must be provided at the time of permit application.
   (C)   Model name, make, year and serial number of the motorized golf cart or
all-terrain vehicle is required.
   (D)   Name and address of applicant, nature of applicant’s physical
disability, if any and current driver’s license or reason for not having a
current license is required.
   (E)   As a condition of obtaining a permit, the applicant may be required to
submit a physician’s certificate stating the applicant is able to safely
operate a motorized golf cart on designated streets or roadways.
   (F)   The applicant shall present a certificate signed by a competent and
experienced mechanic indicating the golf cart is in good mechanical condition,
complete with rear view minor, lights, (including brake lights, head lights and
turn signals), brakes and a slow moving vehicle emblem and that it is safe for
transportation of passengers.
   (G)   The annual permit fee shall be determined by the City Council and must
be paid prior to issuance of permit. The permit fee may be adjusted upon annual
review by the Council.
   (H)   Other pertinent information may be required.
(Ord. passed 11-12-2002)
§ 71.25 OPERATION AND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Motorized golf carts must display the slow moving vehicle emblem
provided for in M.S. § 169.522, as it may be amended from time to time, when
operated on a public streets or roadway.
   (B)   Every operator has all the rights and duties applicable to the driver
of any other vehicle under the provisions of M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be
amended from time to time, except when these provisions cannot reasonably be
applied to motorized golf carts and except as otherwise specifically provided
in M.S. § 169.045, subd. 7, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   Motorized golf carts may only be operated on streets and roadways as
designated on the permit authorized by the City Council. The operator may cross
any highway intersecting a designated street or roadway.
   (D)   Hours of permitted operation shall be from sunrise to sunset.
Operation of a golf cart shall not be permitted during inclement weather or
when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog or other conditions or at
any time wherein there is insufficient light to clearly see persons and
vehicles on the street or roadway at a distance of 500 feet.
   (E)   If a licensed golf cart is disabled through mechanical failure or for
needed repairs, the permit may be temporarily transferred to another golf cart
for a seven-day period, but only upon verification of mechanical condition and
insurance coverage of the substitute vehicle.
(Ord. passed 11-12-2002) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.26 ASSUMPTION OF LIABILITY.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as an assumption of liability
by the city for any injuries to persons or property which may result from the
operation of a motorized golf cart by a permit holder or the failure by the
Chief of Police to revoked the permit.
(Ord. passed 11-12-2002)
BICYCLES
§ 71.40 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to protect the public’s safety through the
establishment of rules for the safe operation of bicycles in the city, and to
deter bicycle theft through registration and other procedures.
(Ord. passed 4-8-1991)
§ 71.41 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   BICYCLE. Every device propelled by human power upon which a person may ride,
having two tandem wheels either of which is over 14 inches in diameter, and
including any device generally recognized as a bicycle though equipped with two
front or rear wheels.
   BICYCLE DEALER. A person, firm, partnership, association or corporation
which is engaged, wholly or partly, in the business of selling bicycles, or
buying or taking in trade bicycles for the purpose of resale, selling or
offering for sale, or otherwise dealing in bicycles, whether or not the
bicycles are owned by the person or entity. The term does not include agents or
employees of the person or entity.
(Ord. passed 4-8-1991)
§ 71.42 LOCKS; REQUIRED EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   No owner or operator of a bicycle shall leave or park it unattended on
any street, sidewalk, alley, park area or other public ground without first
affixing a lock on it to prevent theft.
   (B)   (1)   Every bicycle, when in use during the hours of darkness, shall
be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible
from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector, of
a type approved by the Commissioner of Highways, on the rear, which is visible
from a distance of 100 feet when directly in front of lawful beams.
      (2)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the
operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
(Ord. passed 4-8-1991) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.43 MECHANICAL CONDITION.
   It is unlawful for any person to ride or operate a bicycle in the city
unless all parts and components of the bicycle are in proper working condition.
(Ord. passed 4-8-1991) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.44 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC LAWS.
   (A)   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the drivers of
other vehicles under the laws of the state and the traffic code, except those
traffic laws and provisions which, by their nature, can have no application.
   (B)   Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official
traffic-control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to
vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
   (C)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left
or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall make such a turn.
If a person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, he, she or they
shall obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians.
   (D)   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
   (E)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped.
   (F)   No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy
vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any car or vehicle upon a roadway.
   (G)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right-hand side of the roadway as practicable in exercising due care when
passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
   (H)   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two
abreast, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use
of bicycles.
   (I)   Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a
roadway, bicycle riders shall use the path and shall not use the roadway.
   (J)   No person shall ride a bicycle on a public sidewalk unless the
sidewalk is specifically marked for use by bicycles.
   (K)   When a person is riding a bicycle upon an appropriately marked
sidewalk, the person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall
give audible signal before overtaking and passing the pedestrian.
   (L)   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than the posted
speed limit, nor greater than is reasonable and prudent.
   (M)   The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or
building, shall upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending
across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on
the sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the
right-of- way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway.
   (N)   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or
article which prevents the rider from keeping a least one hand upon the
handlebars.
(Ord. passed 4-8-1991) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.45 HEADPHONE USAGE.
   No person, while riding a bicycle on a public right-of-way, shall wear
headphones or earphones which may be used in both ears simultaneously for
purposes of receiving or listening to broadcasts or reproductions from radios,
tape decks or other sound producing or transmitting devices. For the purposes
of this section, the term PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY shall include, without
limitations, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, footpaths and parking lots
commonly open to the public.
(Ord. passed 4-8-1991) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.46 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   It is unlawful for the parent or legal guardian of any minor child to
authorize or knowingly permit his, her or their child or ward to violate any
provision of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 4-8-1991) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.47 IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Any bicycle operated or found on any public place within the city
which is not licensed as required by this subchapter shall be impounded by the
Police Department and held until the license required is obtained. In addition,
an impoundment fee as set by City Council from time to time is to be paid to
the city prior to release of the bicycle.
   (B)   Whenever any bicycle has been in the lawful possession of the city for
three or more months, and the bicycle remains unclaimed by the owner thereof,
the Chief of Police may sell the bicycle at public auction or sale. The
proceeds of the sale shall be deposited in the city’s General Fund.
(Ord. passed 4-8-1991)
§ 71.48 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any individual under the age of 16, upon any violation of the
provisions of this subchapter, shall receive a warning ticket issued by the
Police Department. Each individual in this class shall be instructed to have
the warning ticket signed by a parent and returned to the Police Department
within seven days from the date of the violation. If the ticket is not remitted
within the time period set forth, then the matter shall be referred to Juvenile
Court for prosecution.
   (B)   Any individual between the ages of 16 and 18, upon violation of the
provisions of this subchapter, shall receive a tab charge, and the matter will
be prosecuted in Juvenile Court.
   (C)   Any individual over the age of 18, upon any violation of the
provisions of this subchapter, shall receive a tab charge and the matter will
be prosecuted in District Court.
(Ord. passed 4-8-1991)
SNOWMOBILES
§ 71.60 STATE LAW COMPLIANCE.
   No snowmobiles may be operated in the city, except in conformity with
applicable state statutes.
(Ord. passed 12-19-1985) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.61 SPEED LIMITS.
   No snowmobile shall exceed 15 mph upon a city street.
(Ord. passed 12-19-1985) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.62 OPERATION AND CONDITION.
   (A)   Snowmobiles shall stop at all controlled intersections and shall yield
right-of-way to all other vehicles and pedestrians.
   (B)   No snowmobiles shall be operated on city streets between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except in an emergency or when returning directly to
the operator’s own residence.
   (C)   No snowmobile shall be operated on any city sidewalks, boulevards
playgrounds or other city property without the consent of City Council.
   (D)   No snowmobile shall be operated on private property without permission
of the owner of the property.
   (E)   No snowmobile shall be operated in the city by any person under the
age of 18 years; except that, the person have a valid operator’s permit granted
by state on his or her person.
   (F)   No person shall operate a snowmobile, except during daylight hours
unless the snowmobile has necessary and proper equipment such as lights, to be
operated at night.
   (G)   No person shall operate a snowmobile while under the influence of
intoxicating liquor, narcotics or habit-forming drugs.
   (H)   No snowmobiles shall be operated within 200 feet of any church, school
building, nursing home, skating rinks, sliding areas or other area where the
operations would interfere or conflict with the normal use of the property or
would endanger persons or property.
(Ord. passed 12-19-1985) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   A violation of any section of §§
71.01 through
71.05 of this chapter is a misdemeanor.
   (C)   Any person violating any provision of §§
71.20 through
71.26 of this chapter shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
   (D)   Any person, partnership, corporation or other entity violating any
provision of §§
71.40 through
71.48 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
(Ord. passed 4-8-1991; Ord. passed 11-12-2002; Ord. T-500, passed 5-26-2020)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMAL CONTROL
      
91.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
      
92.   CLEAN INDOOR AIR
      
93.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
94.   NOISE CONTROL
CHAPTER 90: ANIMAL CONTROL
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Proper care; humane treatment
   
90.03   Dogs and cats generally
   
90.04   Nuisance animals, behavior
   
90.05   Registration
   
90.06   Pound; Animal Control Warden; reclaiming animals
   
90.07   Farm animals
   
90.08   Wild animals
   
90.09   Dangerous animals
   
90.10   Investigation
   
90.11   Interference
Deer Feeding
   
90.25   Findings
   
90.26   Purpose and intent
   
90.27   Prohibition
   
90.28   Exceptions
   
90.29   Investigation and enforcement
Urban Chickens
   
90.40   Definitions
   
90.41   Purpose
   
90.42   Investigation and enforcement
   
90.43   Permit required; application
   
90.44   Permit requirements
   
90.45   Fees; permit issuance
   
90.46   Permit term
   
90.47   Permit revocation
 
   
90.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   AT LARGE. The animal is off the premises of the owner and not under the
control of any person, either by leash or otherwise.
   ANIMAL CONTROL WARDEN. Any person authorized by the city to enforce the
provisions of this subchapter in the control of animals.
   CUSTODIAN. Any person, partnership, business entity or other organization of
any type, owning, harboring or keeping an animal either permanently or
temporarily.
   FARM ANIMALS. Horses, cattle, swine, goats, sheep, poultry or other animals
commonly kept for their economic value or recreational purposes.
   HOUSEHOLDER. Any person who ordinarily exercises dominion or possession over
a residence, office, store, building, shop or other premises which is generally
deemed to be a single unit of occupancy within the city, whether as an owner,
tenant, landlord or otherwise.
   RESIDENCE. Any dwelling, abode or apartment wherein a single family
customarily resides.
   WILD ANIMALS. Any animal of a type not normally domesticated, or not
specifically mentioned elsewhere in this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 2-26-1990)
§ 90.02 PROPER CARE; HUMANE TREATMENT.
   (A)   Any person who owns, keeps or harbors any animal located within the
city, or permits an animal to enter the corporate limits of the city, shall
exercise sufficient and proper care and control over the animal at all times so
as to prevent the animal from becoming a public nuisance or otherwise violating
this subchapter.
   (B)   The custodian of any animal located within the city shall provide for
the humane treatment and care of the animal, and to include, but not limited
to, necessary shelter, food, water and medical care.
(Ord. passed 2-26-1990)
§ 90.03 DOGS AND CATS GENERALLY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any custodian to possess, harbor, keep or
allow to be kept or to maintain for any purpose whatever, more than two dogs,
cats or combination thereof, over the age of 60 days at his or her residence,
business or at any other location in the city.
   (B)   Temporary permission to keep more than two dogs or cats over the age
of 60 days may be granted for periods as determined by the City Council upon
application being made thereto. The Council shall cause all such applications
to be investigated and shall not grant the temporary permission unless it is
satisfied that it shall not be a nuisance, as herein defined.
   (C)   Every female dog or cat in heat shall be kept confined in a building
or secure enclosure, or in a veterinary hospital or boarding kennel, in the
manner that the female dog or cat cannot come in contact with another animal,
except for intentional breeding purposes.
(Ord. passed 2-26-1990) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 NUISANCE ANIMALS, BEHAVIOR.
   (A)   The owner or custodian of any animal shall prevent the animal from
committing any act which constitutes a nuisance.
   (B)   It is a nuisance for any animal to:
      (1)   Run at large;
      (2)   Frequently bark, cry or howl;
      (3)   To frequent school grounds, parks or other public places;
      (4)   To chase vehicles;
      (5)   To molest or annoy any person; and
      (6)   To damage, defile or destroy public or private property.
(Ord. passed 2-26-1990)
§ 90.05 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   No person, partnership, corporation or other entity shall keep any dog
or cat after the effective date of this subchapter unless the animal is
registered with the City Clerk. The registration shall be issued by the City
Clerk for a fee as set by City Council from time to time for each dog or cat.
Each animal need be registered one time only by each owner. The registration
shall not be transferable.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of each owner of a dog or cat to pay the
registration fee to the City Clerk within 60 days after the enactment of this
subchapter, or upon acquiring ownership or possession of any unlicensed dog or
cat or upon establishing residence in the city or upon a dog or cat reaching
the age of 63 days. The City Clerk shall cause a notice of the necessity of
paying such a registration fee to be printed in the official newspaper of the
city one time prior to March 1 each year. In the event that payment of the
registration fee due as stated herein is not received by the due date, a
penalty as set by City Council from time to time shall be added to the
registration fee. The penalty shall be collected at the time the registration
fee is paid. The owner of a dog or cat newly acquired or a new resident
establishing a residence within the city shall not be subject to the penalty
for 60 days.
   (C)   (1)   Upon payment of the registration fee, the City Clerk shall
execute a receipt in duplicate.
      (2)   The Clerk shall deliver the original to the person who pays the
fee, retaining the duplicate.
      (3)   The Clerk shall also procure a sufficient number of suitable
metallic tags, and shall deliver one appropriate tag to the owner upon payment
of the fee.
   (D)   The owner shall cause the tag to be affixed by a permanent metal
fastening to the collar of the dog or cat so registered in a manner that the
tag may be easily seen by the officers of the city. The owner shall see that
the tag is constantly worn by the dog or cat.
   (E)   In case any tag is lost, a duplicate may be issued by the City Clerk
upon presentation of a receipt showing payment of the current registration. A
charge set by City Council from time to time shall be made for each such
duplicate issued.
   (F)   Any dog or cat found unlicensed, running at large or found in
violation of any provision of this subchapter may be impounded by the Animal
Control Warden, who shall give notice of the impounding as required in this
section.
(Ord. passed 2-26-1990) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 POUND; ANIMAL CONTROL WARDEN; RECLAIMING ANIMALS.
   (A)   (1)   The City Council may, by resolution, establish a pound and
appoint an Animal Control Warden, whose duties shall include the enforcement of
the provisions of this subchapter. The City Council may contract with the
Animal Control Warden for the collection, keeping, redemption or disposal of
any animal when taken into custody in accordance with this subchapter. The
Animal Control Warden or authorized agent shall be empowered to take into
custody and impound any animal reasonably believed to be stray or abandoned or
otherwise in violation of this subchapter.
      (2)   Upon taking up and impounding any dog or cat, the Animal Control
Warden shall forthwith give notice of the impoundment in the following manner.
         (a)   If the animal is registered with the City Clerk, the person who
is listed as the owner of the animal shall be personally notified, if possible,
by either the Animal Control Warden or a representative of the City Clerk’s
office.
         (b)   If the animal impounded is not registered, or the owner cannot
be reasonably notified, notice of the impoundment shall be made by a single
publication in the official newspaper of the city. The notice shall state the
following:
            1.   Date of impoundment;
            2.   Description of the animal;
            3.   Time and date by which the animal must be picked up;
               4.   The animal will be destroyed or disposed of if not picked
up by the time stated; and
            5.   Location where the animal may be picked up.
      (3)   No animal shall be disposed of or destroyed until at least five
days after the notice of impoundment is published. It shall be the duty of the
Animal Control Warden to dispose of each animal not claimed in a humane manner.
      (4)   No unspayed female cat which has been impounded shall be allowed to
be adopted from the pound unless the prospective owner shall agree to have the
animal spayed.
      (5)   Any dog or cat impounded hereunder may be reclaimed upon payment by
the owner to the City Clerk of a sum established by the City Council by
resolution. The owner must also comply with the registration provisions hereof.
   (B)   The following fees shall be levied for the reclaiming of any animal
from the city’s animal impound facility: as set by City Council from time to
time.
(Ord. passed 2-26-1990; Res. passed 8-13-1990)
§ 90.07 FARM ANIMALS.
   (A)   Farm animals may be kept and housed only in zoned agricultural
districts.
   (B)   All facilities for the care, confinement or keeping of farm animals
must be located at least 100 feet from inhabited dwellings, and maintained in
such a manner as to prohibit foul odors as well as unhealthy or unsanitary
conditions.
(Ord. passed 2-26-1990)
§ 90.08 WILD ANIMALS.
   Wild animals may not be kept, housed or maintained in the city by any
person, partnership, corporation or other entity for any purpose whatsoever,
except by competent medical authority for veterinary care, or under permit from
the state’s Department of Natural Resources and the City Council.
(Ord. passed 2-26-1990) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.09 DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   The following proceedings shall be followed for the destruction and
safety of animals which present a danger to public health.
      (1)   A sworn complaint shall be presented to the county’s District Court
stating the reason why the animal presents a danger to public health and
safety. The complaint shall be based on one or more of the following factors:
         (a)   The animal at any time has destroyed property or habitually
trespasses in a damaging manner on the property of persons other than the
owner;
         (b)   The animal at any time has attacked or bitten a person outside
the owner’s or custodian’s premises;
         (c)   The animal is vicious or shows vicious habits or molests
pedestrians or interferes with vehicles on the public streets; and/or
         (d)   The animal is a public nuisance as heretofore defined.
      (2)   A summons shall be directed to the owner of the animal commanding
him to appear before the Court to show cause why the animal should not be
seized by any police officer, Animal Control Warden or otherwise disposed of in
the manner authorized in this part. The summons shall be returnable not less
than two, nor more than six, days from the date thereof and shall be served at
least two days before the time of the scheduled appearance. Upon the hearing
and finding the facts true as complained of, the Court may either order the
owner or custodian to remove it from the city, or may order the owner or
custodian to keep it confined to a designated place. If the owner or custodian
violates the order, any police officer or Animal Control Warden may impound the
animal described in the order and destroy the animal forthwith. The provisions
of this section are in addition to and supplemental to other provisions of this
part. Costs of the proceedings specified by this section shall be assessed
against the owner or custodian of the animal if the facts in the complaint are
found to be true, or to the complainant, if the facts are found to be untrue.
   (B)   Any animal which bites a person shall be quarantined in the location
and for such time as may be directed by the city’s Health Officer. During
quarantine, the animal shall be securely confined and kept from contact with
any other animal. At the discretion of the Health Officer, the quarantine may
be on the premises of the owner. However, if the Health Officer requires other
confinement, the owner shall surrender the animal for the quarantine period to
an animal shelter or veterinary hospital. Any expenses incurred by the owner of
the animal in fulfilling the requirements of this section, including the Health
Officer’s fee if any, shall be borne by the animal owner.
   (C)   Whenever the city’s Health Officer determines that the prevalence of
rabies renders the action necessary to protect the public health and safety,
the Council may, by resolution, issue a proclamation ordering every person
owning or keeping a dog or cat to muzzle it securely so that it cannot bite. No
person shall violate the proclamation and any unmuzzled dog or cat during the
time fixed in the proclamation shall be subject to impoundment as heretofore
provided, and the owner of the dog or cat shall be subject to the penalty
hereinafter provided.
(Ord. passed 2-26-1990) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.10 INVESTIGATION.
   For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by this subchapter and to
enforce its provisions, any agent of the Animal Control Warden or any police
officer is empowered to enter upon any premises upon which an animal is kept or
harbored and to demand the exhibition by the owner of the animal or the license
for the animal. With or without permission, any agent of the Animal Control
Warden or police officer may enter the premises where any animal is kept in a
reported cruel or inhumane manner and demand to inspect the animal. The Animal
Control Warden or police officer may order a veterinary inspection of the
animal or animals and may, upon recommendation of the veterinary doctor, order
the medical care as may be necessary. The cost of the veterinary care is to be
paid by the animal’s owner.
(Ord. passed 2-26-1990)
§ 90.11 INTERFERENCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to break open the city kennel or to
attempt to do so, or to take or let any animal therefrom or to take or attempt
to take from any officer any animal taken up by him or her in compliance with
this subchapter, or in any manner to interfere with or hinder the officer in
the discharge of his or her duties under this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 2-26-1990) Penalty, see §
90.99
DEER FEEDING
§ 90.25 FINDINGS.
   (A)   Recreational feeding of deer often causes deer concentrations which
develop into depredation and other public safety problems.
   (B)   Depredation of garden crops and landscaping plants is increasing as
deer habitat decreases and deer populations increase within particular areas
and neighborhoods in the city.
   (C)   High deer populations can result in increased car/deer crashes within
the community, causing public safety concerns and negative economic impacts
such as increased car insurance premium costs.
   (D)   High deer densities also contribute to the possible spread of chronic
diseases among deer populations and Chronic Wasting Disease.
(Ord. passed 8-12-2013)
§ 90.26 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The intent of the City Council is not to unreasonably infringe upon the
recreational enjoyment of city residents who observe wildlife and enhance
wildlife habitat on their property. The purpose of this artificial feeding ban
is to eliminate these deer attractions which, when combined with other
management strategies, should reduce over time the depredation impacts to
adjacent residents, as well as assure the safety of the traveling public on
city streets and thoroughfares.
(Ord. passed 8-12-2013)
§ 90.27 PROHIBITION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or group to place or permit to be
placed on the ground, or within five feet of the ground surface, either on
property owned or controlled by the person or on property owned by others, any
grain, fodder, fruit, vegetables, nuts, hay or other edible materials, which
may reasonably be expected to intentionally result in deer feeding, unless the
items are screened or protected in a manner that prevents deer from feeding on
them.
   (B)   Also prohibited are salt licks and powder or liquid deer attractants,
unless legally used for deer management control purposes. Living fruit trees
and other live vegetation shall not be considered as deer feeding.
(Ord. passed 8-12-2013) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.28 EXCEPTIONS.
   This prohibition shall not apply to:
   (A)   Veterinarians, city police officers or county, state or federal game
officials, who are in the course of their duties, have deer in custody or under
their management;
   (B)   Persons authorized by the city to implement the deer management
program approved by the City Council;
   (C)   Any food placed upon the property for purposes of trapping or
otherwise taking deer where the trapping or taking is pursuant to a permit
issued by the state’s Department of Natural Resources;
   (D)   Persons feeding birds using self-enclosed feeding devices or
containers;
   (E)   The use of straw, hay or straw-related materials for erosion control,
mulching, gardening or other landscape purposes; and/or
   (F)   Persons on property with a livestock operation not intentionally
feeding deer. For the purposes of this section, LIVESTOCK OPERATION means an
operation commonly associated with the keeping of animals, including but not
limited to, the keeping of chickens raised for home use.
(Ord. passed 8-12-2013)
§ 90.29 INVESTIGATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by this subchapter and to
enforce its provisions, any Police Department officer, other law enforcement
service or agent of the city with prior approval of the City Council is
empowered to enter upon any premises to investigate or inspect the premises for
prohibited deer feeding activities to eliminate the public nuisance. This
section may be enforced by injunction, action for abatement or other
appropriate civil remedy to eliminate a public nuisance.
(Ord. passed 8-12-2013)
URBAN CHICKENS
§ 90.40 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   BROODING. The period of chicken growth when supplemental heat must be
provided, due to the bird’s inability to generate enough body heat.
   CHICKEN. A domesticated bird that serves as a source of eggs or meat.
   COOP. The structure for the keeping or housing of chickens permitted by this
subchapter.
   EXERCISE YARD. A larger fenced area that provides space for exercise and
foraging for the birds when supervised.
   HEN. A female chicken.
   OFFICER. Any person designated by the city as an enforcement officer.
   POULTRY. Domesticated birds that serve as a source of eggs or meat and that
include among commercially important kinds, chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese,
peafowl, pigeons, pheasants and others.
   ROOSTER. A male chicken.
   RUN. A fully enclosed and covered area attached to a coop where the chickens
can roam unsupervised.
(Ord. passed 5-14-2012)
§ 90.41 PURPOSE.
   It is recognized that the ability to cultivate one’s own food is a
sustainable activity that can also be a rewarding past time. Therefore, it is
the purpose and intent of this subchapter to permit the keeping and maintenance
of chicken hens for egg and meat sources in a clean and sanitary manner that is
not a nuisance to or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare of
the community, the keeping of other poultry is prohibited.
(Ord. passed 5-14-2012)
§ 90.42 INVESTIGATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Officers designated by the City Council shall have authority in the
investigation and enforcement of this subchapter, and no person shall interfere
with, hinder or molest any such officer in the exercise of the powers. The
officer shall make investigations as is necessary and may grant, deny or refuse
to renew any application for permit or terminate an existing permit under this
subchapter.
   (B)   Limitations for each single dwelling residential unit are as follows.
      (1)   No more than five chicken hens shall be housed or kept on any one
residential lot in any area of the city zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, PUD, AG with a
permit as outlined below.
      (2)   Roosters are prohibited.
      (3)   Slaughtering of chickens in the city limits is prohibited except at
a licensed processing facility.
      (4)   Leg banding of all chickens is required. The bands must identify
the owner and the owner’s address and telephone number.
      (5)   A separate coop is required to house the chickens. Coops must be
constructed and maintained to meet the following minimum standards:
         (a)   Located in the rear or side yard;
         (b)   Setback at least five feet from the rear or side property lines;
         (c)   Interior floor space: four square feet per bird;
         (d)   Interior height: four to six feet to allow access for cleaning
and maintenance;
         (e)   Doors: one standard door to allow humans to access the coop and
one for birds (if above ground level, must also provide a stable ramp);
         (f)   Windows: one square foot window per ten square feet floor space.
Windows must be able to open for ventilation;
         (g)   Climate control: adequate ventilation and/or insulation to
maintain the coop temperature between 32° to 85°F;
         (h)   Nest boxes: one box per every three hens;
         (i)   Roosts: one and one-half inch diameter or greater, located 18
inches from the wall and two to three inches above the floor;
         (j)   Rodent-proof: coop construction and materials must be adequate
to prevent access by rodents; and
         (k)   Coops shall be constructed and maintained in a workmanlike
manner.
      (6)   A run or exercise yard is required.
         (a)   Runs must be constructed and maintained to meet the following
minimum standards:
            1.   Location: rear or side yard;
            2.   Size: ten square feet per bird, if access to a fenced exercise
yard is also available; 16 square feet per bird, if access to an exercise yard
is not available. If the coop is elevated two feet so the hens can access the
space beneath, that area may count as a portion of the minimum run footprint;
            3.   Height: four to six feet in height to allow access for
cleaning and maintenance;
            4.   Gate: one gate to allow human access to the run;
            5.   Cover: adequate to keep hens in and predators out; and
            6.   Substrate: composed of material that can be easily raked or
regularly replace to reduce odor and flies.
         (b)   Exercise yards must be fenced and is required if the run does
not provide at least 16 square feet per bird. Exercise yards must provide a
minimum of 174 square feet per chicken.
      (7)   Chickens must not be housed in a residential house or an attached
or detached garage, except for brooding purposes only.
      (8)   All premises on which chicken hens are kept or maintained shall be
kept clean from filth, garbage and any substances which attract rodents. The
coop and its surrounding must be cleaned frequently enough to control odor.
Manure shall not be allowed to accumulate in a way that causes an unsanitary
condition or causes odors detectible on another property. Failure to comply
with these conditions may result in the officer removing chickens from the
premises or revoking a chicken permit.
      (9)   All grain and food stored for the use of the hens on a premise with
a chicken permit shall be kept in a rodent-proof container.
      (10)   Chicken hens shall not be kept in such a manner as to constitute a
nuisance to the occupants of adjacent property.
      (11)   Dead chickens must be disposed of according to the state’s Board
of Animal Health rules which require chicken carcasses to be disposed of as
soon as possible after death, usually within 48 to 72 hours. Legal forms of
chicken carcass disposal include offsite burial, off-site incineration or
rendering or off-site composting.
(Ord. passed 5-14-2012) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.43 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall own, keep, harbor or have custody of any live
chicken without first obtaining a permit in writing from the city.
      (2)   The city shall grant a permit for chicken hens after the applicant
has sought the written consent of 100% of the owners or occupants of privately-
or publicly-owned real estate that are located adjacent (i.e., sharing property
lines) on the outer boundaries of the premises for which the permit is being
requested or, in the alternative, proof that the applicant’s property lines are
150 feet or more from any house.
      (3)   Where an adjacent property consists of a multiple dwelling or
multi-tenant property, the applicant need obtain only the written consent of
the owner or manager, or other person in charge of the building. The written
consent shall be required on the initial application and as often thereafter as
the officer deems necessary.
   (B)   Any person desiring a permit required under the provisions of this
subchapter shall make written application to the City Clerk upon a form
prescribed by and containing the information as required by the City Clerk and
officer. Among other things, the application shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   A description of the real property upon which it is desired to keep
the chickens;
      (2)   The breed and number of chickens to be maintained on the premises;
      (3)   A site plan of the property showing the location and size of the
proposed chicken coop and run, setbacks from the chicken coop to property lines
and surrounding buildings (including houses and buildings on adjacent lots),
and the location, style and height of fencing proposed to contain the chickens
in a run or exercise area. Portable coops and cages are allowed, but portable
locations must be included with the site plan;
      (4)   Statements that the applicant will, at all times, keep the chickens
in accordance with all of the conditions prescribed by the officer, or
modification thereof, and that failure to obey the conditions will constitute a
violation of the provisions of this chapter and grounds for cancellation of the
permit; and
      (5)   Such other and further information as may be required by the
officer.
(Ord. passed 5-14-2012)
§ 90.44 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   If granted, the permit shall be issued by the City Clerk and officer
and shall state the conditions, if any, imposed upon the permitted for the
keeping of chickens under this permit.
   (B)   The permit shall specify the restrictions, limitations, conditions and
prohibitions which the officer deems reasonably necessary to protect any person
or neighboring use from unsanitary conditions, unreasonable noise or odors, or
annoyance, or to protect the public health and safety. The permit may be
modified from time to time or revoked by the officer for failure to conform to
the restrictions, limitations, prohibitions. The modification or revocation
shall be effective after ten days following the mailing of written notice
thereof by certified mail to the person or persons keeping or maintain the
chickens.
   (C)   The granting of a permit under this subchapter does not entitle the
permit holder to any other rights as may be granted to farmers or commercial
entities relating to equipment used in the course of conducting animal
husbandry business.
(Ord. passed 5-14-2012)
§ 90.45 FEES; PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   For each residential site, the fee for a permit is as may be imposed, set,
established and fixed by the City Council, by resolution, from time to time.
(Ord. passed 5-14-2012)
§ 90.46 PERMIT TERM.
   The permit period under this subchapter shall expire one year from the date
the permit is issued. Permits must be renewed on an annual basis.
(Ord. passed 5-14-2012)
§ 90.47 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   The city may revoke any permit issued under this subchapter if the person
holding the permit refuses or fails to comply with this subchapter, with any
regulations promulgated by the City Council pursuant to this subchapter, or
with any state or local law governing cruelty to animals or the keeping of
animals. Any person whose permit is revoked shall, within ten days thereafter,
humanely dispose of all chickens being owned, kept or harbored by the person
and no part of the permit fee shall be refunded.
(Ord. passed 5-14-2012)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, partnership, corporation or other entity violating any
provision of §§
90.01 through
90.11 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day’s
violation shall be a separate offense.
   (C)   Notwithstanding anything in city ordinances to the contrary, a person
who violates any provisions of §§
90.25 through
90.29 of this chapter shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor punishable
according to petty misdemeanor limits as established from time to time by the
state. The first violation shall result in a written warning. A subsequent
violation shall result in a citation for the petty misdemeanor offense. Each
act of violation and each day a violation occurs or continues is a separate
offense. In all cases, the city shall be entitled to collect the cost of
investigation.
   (D)   (1)   Any person violating any of §§
90.40 through
90.47 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
      (2)   If any person is found guilty by a court for violation of this
division (D), their permit to own, keep, harbor or have custody of chickens
shall be deemed automatically revoked and no new permit may be issued for a
period of one year.
      (3)   Any person violating any conditions of this permit shall reimburse
the city for all costs borne by the city to enforce the conditions of the
permit including, but not limited to, the pickup and impounding of chickens.
(Ord. passed 2-26-1990; Ord. passed 5-14-2012; Ord. passed 8-12-2013)
CHAPTER 91: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Solid fuels; external outdoor wood-burning stoves and fuel-fired
heating devices
   
91.02   Open burning
Fire Code
   
91.15   Uniform Fire Code adopted
   
91.16   Fire prevention enforcement
   
91.17   Definitions
   
91.18   Liquified petroleum gases; bulk storage; limits
   
91.19   Explosives and blasting agents; storage; limits
   
91.20   Appeals
   
91.21   Permits; new materials, processes or occupancies
 
   
91.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 SOLID FUELS; EXTERNAL OUTDOOR WOOD-BURNING STOVES AND FUEL- FIRED
HEATING DEVICES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly requires a different
meaning.
      EXTERNAL SOLID FUEL-FIRED HEATING DEVICE.
         (a)   A device designed for solid fuel combustion so that usable heat
is derived for the interior of a building, and includes solid fuel-fired
stoves, solid fuel-fired cooking stoves, combination fuel furnaces or boilers
which bum solid fuel and outdoor wood burning stoves or units.
         (b)   SOLID FUEL-FIRE HEATING DEVICES do not include natural gas-fired
fireplace logs or wood-burning fireplaces or wood stoves in the interior of a
dwelling.
      PERSON. An individual, partnership, corporation, company or other
association.
      STACKS or CHIMNEY. Any vertical structure incorporated into a building,
or upon an outdoor solid fuel-fired heating device, and enclosing a flue or
flues that carry off smoke or exhaust from a solid fuel-fired heating device;
especially that part of such a structure extending above a roof.
   (B)   Requirements. No outdoor wood-burning stoves or solid fuel-fired
heating devices designed and intended, and/or used, for the purpose of heating
the principal structure or another accessory structure on the premises are
allowed to be installed within the city.
   (C)   Non-conforming use.
      (1)   The lawful use of any existing wood-burning unit or solid fuel-
fired heating device existing at the time of the effective date of this section
may be continued, although the use may not conform to the provision of this
section.
      (2)   No pre-existing, non-conforming wood-burning unit or solid fuel-
fired heating device shall hereafter be extended, enlarged or expanded.
      (3)   At such time as the useful life of a non-conforming wood-burning
unit or solid fuel-fired heating device has elapsed or would need to be
repaired to function properly, the unit cannot be replaced and must be
abandoned, not used and removed from the property immediately.
   (D)   Officers and enforcement. The City Building Inspector, Zoning
Administrator, Fire Chief, Police Chief and/or their designees, or designated
officials, shall enforce the provisions of this section.
(Ord. passed 1-28-2008) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.02 OPEN BURNING.
   (A)   Adoption by reference of state statutes. Except as herein specifically
addressed or modified, the following provisions of state law are hereby adopted
by reference: M.S. §§ 88.01 to 88.195, as they may be amended from time to
time.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly requires a different
meaning.
      BUILDING MATERIAL. Lumber, wood shakes and other wood products, but shall
not include composite shingles, tar paper, insulation, wall board, wiring or
other similar smoke producing materials.
      CAMPFIRE. A fire set for cooking, warming or ceremonial purposes, which
is not more than three feet in diameter by three feet high, and has had the
ground five feet from the base of the fire cleared of all combustible material.
      COOKING FIRE. A fire contained in -a charcoal grill, camp stove or other
device designed for the purpose of cooking.
      DEMOLITION DEBRIS. Burnable building material generated from demolition
of buildings or structures.
      GARBAGE. Discarded material resulting from the handling, processing,
storage, preparation, serving and consumption of food.
      HAZARDOUS WASTES. No person shall conduct, cause, or permit open burning
of hazardous waste, as defined in state law, and applicable Commissioners
rules.
      HEATING DEVICES. Furnaces or another devices which burn fuel oil, coal,
natural gas, propane, wood or used petroleum products and which conform to all
local, state and federal environmental and safety regulations, intended to
provide heat.
      OPEN BURNING. The burning of any matter which is not contained within a
fully enclosed, fire box or container, and whereby the resulting combustion
products are emitted directly to the atmosphere without passing through a
stack, duct or chimney.
      PROHIBITED MATERIALS. Rubber, plastics, chemically-treated materials or
other materials which produce excessive or noxious smoke including, but not
limited to, tires, railroad ties, chemically treated lumber, composite
shingles, tar paper, insulation, composition board, sheetrock, wiring, paint,
paint filters and oil.
      RUBBISH. Non-putrescible solid waste, such as paper, cardboard, yard
clippings and other natural matter not including garbage.
      SOLID WASTE. Garbage, refuse, sludge from a water supply treatment plant
or air containment treatment facility, and other discarded waste materials and
sludges, in solid, semisolid, liquid or contained, gaseous form, resulting from
industrial, commercial, mining and agricultural operations and from community
activities.
      WILDFIRE. A fire requiring suppression action, burning any forest, brush,
grassland, cropland or any other vegetative material.
   (C)   Restrictions on burning. No person shall cause, allow or permit open
burning of any prohibited materials, hazardous wastes, solid wastes, demolition
debris, motor vehicles, building materials, garbage or rubbish within the city.
   (D)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Open burning is allowed for the following exceptions only,
providing a permit has been issued by the Fire Warden:
         (a)   Campfires and/or cooking fires located within the city, where
fire rings or cooking devices designed for the purpose of cooking or heating
are used;
         (b)   The Rushford Park System shall be inspected annually by the Fire
Chief or the Chief’s designee for use by campers and visitors. Individual
campers will not require separate permits;
         (c)   Ceremonial fires conducted by Scouts, Service Clubs and school
personnel;
         (d)   Ground thawing for utility repair, underground utility
construction and preparation of burial grounds;
         (e)   Bona fide instruction and training of firefighting personnel and
for the testing of fire- extinguishing equipment;
         (f)   Fires set for the elimination of a fire hazard which cannot be
abated by another practicable means; and
         (g)   The burning by city staff of trees, brush, grass and other
vegetative matter in the maintenance of municipal property.
      (2)   Exemption to conduct fires under this section does not excuse a
person from the consequences, damages or injuries which may result therefrom,
nor does it exempt any person from regulations promulgated by the State
Pollution Control Agency, State Department of Natural Resources or any other
governmental unit exercising jurisdiction in matters of pollution or fire
hazard regulations.
   (E)   Permits. The city’s Fire Chief, or a person designated by the Fire
Chief, shall be responsible to issue burning permits. No permit for a fire
issued by any person or agency other than the Fire Chief or the Chief’s
designee shall be valid.
      (1)   Permit form and fee. Application and permit forms shall be prepared
by the Fire Chief. Fees for fire permits may be set from time to time by
resolution of the City Council, but where a particular fire will, in the
discretion and judgment of the Fire Chief, require supervision by Fire
Department personnel, the standard rate of an amount set by City Council from
time to time per hour will be charged to help defray the city’s actual expense
of such supervision.
      (2)   Length of permit. A permit, once issued, shall be for such period
of time as is stated on the permit.
      (3)   Extension of permit. The Fire Chief may grant up to one extension
of a permit, each for a time span not longer than the duration of the initial
permit, without requiring an additional permit fee.
      (4)   Type of permit. The permit must set the conditions for starting and
burning the fire and must also list all the materials which may be burned under
the permit.
      (5)   Permit holder.
         (a)   The permittee must have the permit on his or her person at all
times and must remain with the fire until it is completely extinguished.
         (b)   The permit must be given to a Forest Officer, Fire Warden or
other peace officer when requested for inspection.
      (6)   Site of permit. No person may start or cause a fire to be started
on any land that is not owned by him, her or them or under his, her or their
legal control without the written permission of the owner or lessee of the
land, even if he, she or they have obtained a permit from the Fire Warden or
other authority.
(Ord. passed 8-26-1996) Penalty, see §
91.99
FIRE CODE
§ 91.15 UNIFORM FIRE CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   The Minnesota Uniform Fire Code, one copy of which has been marked as
the official copy and which is on file in the office of the City Clerk is
hereby adopted as the Fire Code for the city for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or
explosion, except the portions as are modified or amended herein.
   (B)   Every provision contained in this Code, except as modified or amended
by this subchapter, is hereby adopted and made a part of this subchapter as if
full set forth herein.
(Ord. passed 4-4-1977)
§ 91.16 FIRE PREVENTION ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Chief of the Fire Department serving the city or his or her
representative authorized by him or her shall enforce the provisions of this
subchapter.
   (B)   (1)   The Chief of the Fire Department may detail the members of the
Fire Department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. The
Chief of the Fire Department may recommend the employment of technical
inspectors, who, when the authorization is made, shall be selected through an
examination to determine their fitness for the position.
      (2)   The examination shall be open to members and non-members of the
Fire Department, and appointments made after examination shall be for an
indefinite term with removal only for cause.
(Ord. passed 4-4-1977)
§ 91.17 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Wherever the word “jurisdiction” is used in the Minnesota Uniform Fire
Code, it shall be held to mean “the City of Rushford”.
   (B)   Wherever the term “corporation counsel” is used in the Minnesota
Uniform Fire Code, it shall be held to mean the “Attorney for the City of
Rushford”.
(Ord. passed 4-4-1977)
§ 91.18 LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES; BULK STORAGE; LIMITS.
   The limits referred to in the state’s Uniform Fire Code, in which bulk
storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are hereby established by
City Council from time to time.
(Ord. passed 4-4-1977)
§ 91.19 EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS; STORAGE; LIMITS.
   The limits referred to in the state’s Uniform Fire Code, in which storage of
explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are hereby established by City
Council from time to time.
(Ord. passed 4-4-1977)
§ 91.20 APPEALS.
   Whenever the Chief shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a
permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the Code do
not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the Code have been
misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision
of the Chief to the City Council within 30 days from the date of the decision
appealed.
(Ord. passed 4-4-1977)
§ 91.21 PERMITS; NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES OR OCCUPANCIES.
   The City Clerk, Zoning Administrator and the Chief shall act as a committee
to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be
heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies, which shall require
permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the Code. The Chief shall
publish a notice in the legal newspaper of the city prior to each meeting of
the committee and distribute copies thereof to interested persons.
(Ord. passed 4-4-1977)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §
91.01 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (C)   Any person violating any provision of §
91.02 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
sentenced to a fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with law.
   (D)   (1)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of §§
91.15 through
91.21 of this chapter hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall
violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in
violation of any detailed statement or specifications or plans submitted and
approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from
which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order
as affirmed or modified by the City Council or by a court of competent
jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every
such violation and non-compliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine as set by City Council from time to time and by
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days. The imposition of one penalty
for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and
all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy the violations or
defects within a reasonable time; and, when not otherwise specified, each day
that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent
the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
(Ord. passed 4-4-1977; Ord. passed 8-26-1996; Ord. passed 1-28-2008)
CHAPTER 92: CLEAN INDOOR AIR
Section
   
92.01   Title
   
92.02   Purpose and findings
   
92.03   Authority and jurisdiction
   
92.04   Definitions
   
92.05   Smoking prohibited
   
92.06   Exceptions
   
92.07   Proprietors and persons in charge; responsibilities; retaliation
   
92.08   State law compliance and complement
 
   
92.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Tobacco Regulations, see
Chapter 111
§ 92.01 TITLE.
   The title of this chapter shall be the “City of Rushford Clean Indoor Air
Ordinance”.
(Ord. passed 11-12-2019)
§ 92.02 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.
   (A)   Smoke from commercial tobacco is a leading cause of disease in
nonsmokers and a major source of indoor air pollution. There is no safe level
of exposure to commercial tobacco smoke. Secondhand smoke causes heart disease,
lung cancer, respiratory infections, decreased respiratory function, low birth-
weight or pre-term deliveries and other health problems. Neither the separation
of smokers and non-smokers, nor the introduction of new ventilation systems,
can eliminate the health hazards caused by secondhand smoke.
   (B)   Electronic delivery devices, more commonly referred to as electronic
cigarettes or e-cigarettes, closely resemble and purposefully mimic the act of
smoking as users inhale aerosolized liquid nicotine and other substances heated
by an electronic ignition system. Their use in workplaces and public places
where smoking is prohibited creates concern and confusion and leads to
difficulties in enforcing smoking prohibitions.
   (C)   Scientific research has shown negative health effects related to
secondhand exposure to e-cigarette aerosol. In 2014, the American Society for
Heating, Refrigeration and Air-Conditioning Engineering published a risk
assessment of electronic delivery devices and concluded that “e-cigarettes emit
harmful chemicals into the air and need to be regulated in the same manner as
tobacco smoking”. They can contain nicotine and detectable levels of known
carcinogens and toxic chemicals, like nitrosamines and diethylene glycol, a
toxic chemical used in antifreeze. In December 2016, the Surgeon General
released a comprehensive review of the public health impact of e-cigarettes on
U.S. youth and young adults, finding, in pail, that the nicotine contained in
e-cigarettes can cause addiction and can harm the developing adolescent brain.
In Minnesota, a 2017 Youth Tobacco Survey by the Minnesota Department of Health
revealed that 46.2% of non-smoking youth had been exposed to secondhand smoke
over the past seven days.
   (D)   Restricting smoking in places of work and public places can help to
reduce youth exposure to secondhand smoke and model smoke-free behavior.
   (E)   The only way to completely protect workers and the public from the
health threats of secondhand emissions from electronic cigarettes and other
tobacco products is to create 100% smoke-free workplaces and public places.
   (F)   Minnesota home rule and charter cities have the power to adopt
ordinances that are more stringent than the state’s Clean Indoor Air Act, being
M.S. §§ 144.411 to 144.417, as they may be amended from time to time, to
protect individuals from secondhand smoke under M.S. §§ 144.414, subd. 5(b),
and 144.417, subd. 4, as they may be amended from time to time.
   (G)   Accordingly, the City Council finds and declares that the purpose of
this chapter is to:
      (1)   Protect the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city
from the adverse effects of secondhand smoke and aerosol; and
      (2)   Affirm that the right to breathe clean air has priority over
allowing people to smoke or use electronic delivery devices.
(Ord. passed 11-12-2019)
§ 92.03 AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION.
   Pursuant to M.S. §§ 144.414, subd. 5(b), and 144.417, subd. 4, as they may
be amended from time to time, this chapter shall apply throughout the city.
(Ord. passed 11-12-2019)
§ 92.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   CITY FACILITIES. All enclosed areas, including buildings and vehicles,
owned, leased or operated by the city; all outdoor property adjacent to the
buildings and under the control of the city, including lawns, courtyards and
green space; and other areas open to the public for recreational purposes under
control of the city, such as fairgrounds athletic fields, beaches, gardens,
parks, plazas, skate parks, swimming pools, trails and outdoor picnic areas.
CITY FACILITIES do not include streets and sidewalks used only as pedestrian or
vehicular thoroughfares, unless otherwise prohibited by this section or other
law.
   ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE. Any product containing or delivering nicotine,
lobelia or any other substance intended for human consumption through the
inhalation of aerosol or vapor from the product. ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE
includes, but is not limited to, devices manufactured, marketed or sold as e-
cigarettes, e-cigars, e-pipes, vape pens, mods, tank systems or under any other
product name or descriptor. ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE includes any component
part of a product, whether or not marketed or sold separately.
   INDOOR AREA. All space between a floor and a ceiling that is bounded by
walls, doorways or windows, whether opened or closed, covering more that 50% of
the combined surface area of the vertical planes constituting the perimeter of
the area. A wall includes a retractable divider, garage door or other physical
barrier, whether temporary or permanent. A standard (0.011) gauge window screen
with an 18 by 16 mesh count is not considered a WALL.
   MINNESOTA CLEAN INDOOR AIR ACT. M.S. §§ 144.411 through 144.417, as they may
be amended from time to time.
   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT. Any indoor area where one or more individuals perform
any type of service for consideration of payment under any type of contractual
relationship, including, but not limited to, an employment relationship with or
for a private corporation, partnership, individual or government office. This
term includes any location where one or more individuals gratuitously perform
services for which individuals are ordinarily paid.
   PROPRIETOR or PERSON IN CHARGE. The person or entity that ultimately
controls, governs or directs the activities within the public place, place of
employment or city facility regardless of whether the person or entity is owner
or lessee of the public place, place of employment or city facility. The term
may apply to a corporation as well as an individual.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any indoor area used by the general public, including, but not
limited to, restaurants, bars, any other food or liquor establishment, retail
stores and other commercial establishments, schools and other educational
facilities, hospitals, nursing homes, auditoriums, arenas, meeting rooms and
common areas of rental apartment and condominium buildings.
   SMOKE or SMOKING. The inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying of any lighted
or heated cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other lighted or heated product,
whether natural or synthetic, containing, made, or derived from nicotine,
tobacco or other plant, that is intended for inhalation. SMOKING shall include
carrying or using an activated or turned on electronic delivery device.
(Ord. passed 11-12-2019)
§ 92.05 SMOKING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall smoke:
   (A)   In public places or places of employment;
   (B)   Within 25 feet of entrances, exits, windows and ventilation intakes of
public places and places of employment; or
   (C)   In or on all city facilities.
(Ord. passed 11-12-2019) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 92.06 EXCEPTIONS.
   Smoking of traditional, non-commercial tobacco by a Native American as part
of a traditional Native American spiritual or cultural ceremony is allowed. For
purposes of this section, a NATIVE AMERICAN is a person who is a member of an
Indian tribe, as defined in M.S. § 260.755, subd. 12, as it may be amended from
time to time.
(Ord. passed 11-12-2019)
§ 92.07 PROPRIETORS AND PERSONS IN CHARGE; RESPONSIBILITIES; RETALIATION.
   (A)   The proprietor or other person in charge that owns, leases, manages,
operates or otherwise controls the use of a public place, place of employment
or city facility shall make reasonable efforts to prevent smoking by:
      (1)   Posting appropriate signage on or immediately inside of all outside
entrances to the public place, place of employment and city facility. Signs
must be placed at an unobscured location, at a height that will be easily seen
by persons entering the establishment;
      (2)   Refusing to serve or service any person acting in violation of this
chapter;
      (3)   Ensuring that no ashtrays, lighters, matchbooks, smoking papers,
pipes (including hookahs) or similar smoking paraphernalia are provided in any
area where smoking is prohibited; and
      (4)   Asking any person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited
to refrain from smoking, and, if the person does not refrain from smoking after
being asked to do so, asking the person to leave. If the person refuses to
leave, the proprietor shall handle the situation consistent with lawful methods
for handling other persons acting in a disorderly manner or as a trespasser.
   (B)   No proprietor, or other person or entity in charge, of a public place,
place of employment or city facility may retaliate or take adverse action
against an employee or other person who, in good faith, reports a violation of
this chapter.
(Ord. passed 11-12-2019) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 92.08 STATE LAW COMPLIANCE AND COMPLEMENT.
   This chapter is intended to complement and go beyond the state’s Clean
Indoor Air Act. Nothing in this chapter authorizes smoking in any location
regulated by any other laws or applicable regulations.
(Ord. passed 11-12-2019)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A person of or over the age of 21 who violates any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor and subject to a fine as set by
City Council from time to time for the first offense. Each violation and every
day in which a violation occurs or continues, constitutes a separate offense. A
person of or over the age of 21 who violates any provision of this chapter
within one year of a previous violation may be subject to misdemeanor
prosecution. Persons under the age of 21 who violate any provision of this
chapter may only be subject to non-criminal, non-monetary civil penalties such
as tobacco-related education classes and diversion programs. The city will
consult with local public health, parents, children and other interested
parties to determine an appropriate penalty for persons under the age of 21 in
the city. The penalty may be established by ordinance and amended from time to
time.
   (B)   In addition to the penalties provided in division (A) above, the City
Attorney may bring a civil action against a proprietor or other person in
charge of a public place, place of employment or city facility to enjoin
repeated or continuing violations of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 11-12-2019)
CHAPTER 93: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
93.01   Northend Campground policy
§ 93.01 NORTHEND CAMPGROUND POLICY.
   (A)   All fees are to be paid in advance. Campers are required to register
at Pam’s Corner Convenience Store (507-864-7949) during normal work hours
Monday through Sunday.
   (B)   Campers will display a copy of their registration slip at their camp
site, on their vehicle or on their tent. Checkout time is 2:00 p.m.
   (C)   The city’s Police Department will periodically check the campground to
ensure campers are registered.
   (D)   In case of an emergency, campers should call 911. In case of non-
emergency problems, campers should contact City Hall (507-864-2444) Monday
through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. After normal work hours, campers may
call the Public Works Department cell phone (507-450-2924).
   (E)   Services available at campground include:
      (1)   Electrical, water and sewer hookups at sites 1 through 7;
      (2)   Water hydrant availability depends on weather; hydrants will be
turned off in cold weather;
      (3)   Waste water dump station at site; and
      (4)   Restroom with shower facility.
   (F)   Campers are responsible for proper disposal of trash and garbage.
Campfire rings must be used for recreational fires using wood materials; no
burning of trash or garbage is allowed.
   (G)   Campers are responsible for controlling noise that unreasonably annoys
or disturbs property owners in the area. This generally means noise must be
kept under control between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
   (H)   Tent Campers are allowed in designated sites only. Extra vehicles must
park on vacant areas in the westerly section of the park and not congregate on
the roadway or entrance. Each tent must pay a fee.
   (I)   Fees shall be as set by City Council from time to time.
   (J)   The campsite is laid out as follows.
CHAPTER 94: NOISE CONTROL
Section
   
94.01   General prohibition
   
94.02   Types of prohibited noise; participation
   
94.03   Enforcement
   
94.04   Noise impact statements
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 GENERAL PROHIBITION.
   No person shall intentionally make or cause to be made any distinctly and
loudly audible noise that unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers
the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety or welfare of any person or
precludes his, her or their enjoyment of property or affects his, her or their
property’s value. This general prohibition is not limited by the specific
restrictions of the following sections.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f96a454829628dad3923165be401283a1782260/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1322.png]
 
(Ord. passed 4-9-2001) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.02 TYPES OF PROHIBITED NOISE; PARTICIPATION.
   (A)   Horns, audible signaling devices and the like. No person shall sound
any audible signaling device on any vehicle, except as a warning of danger, as
required by M.S. § 169.68, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Radios, phonographs, paging systems and the like. No person shall use
or operate or permit the use or operation of any radio receiving set, musical
instrument, phonograph, paging system, machine or other device for the
production or reproduction of sound in a distinct and loudly audible manner as
to unreasonably disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of any person nearby.
Operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or other device
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly
audible at the property line of the structure or building in which it is
located, in the hallway or apartment adjacent, or at a distance of 50 feet if
the source is located outside a structure or building shall be prima facie
evidence of a violation of this section.
   (C)   Participation in noisy parties or gatherings. No person shall
participate in any party or other gathering of people giving rise to noise,
unreasonably disturbing the peace, quiet or repose of another person. When a
police officer determines that a gathering is creating such a noise
disturbance, the officer may order all persons present, other than the owner or
tenant of the premises where the disturbance is occurring, to disperse
immediately. No person shall refuse to leave after being ordered by a police
officer to do so. Every owner or tenant of such premises who has knowledge of
the disturbance shall make every reasonable effort to see that the disturbance
is stopped. Noise that is audible at the property line of the structure or
building in which it is located, in the hallway or apartment adjacent or at a
distance of 50 feet if the source is located outside a structure or building
shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
(Ord. passed 4-9-2001) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.03 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Police Department of the city shall enforce the provisions of this
chapter. The Police Department may inspect private premises other than private
residences and shall make all reasonable efforts to prevent violations of this
chapter.
   (B)   This chapter may be enforced by injunction, action for abatement or
other appropriate civil remedy.
(Ord. passed 4-9-2001)
§ 94.04 NOISE IMPACT STATEMENTS.
   The Council may require any person applying for a change in zoning
classification or a permit or license for any structure, operation, process,
installation or alteration, or project that may be considered a potential noise
source to submit a noise impact statement on a form prescribed by the Council.
It shall evaluate each such statement and take its evaluation into account in
approving or disapproving the license or permit applied for or the zoning
change requested.
(Ord. passed 4-9-2001)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of this chapter involving the operation of a motor vehicle is
a petty misdemeanor. Every person who violates any other provision of this
chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Each act of violation and each day a
violation occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 4-9-2001)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
111.   TOBACCO REGULATIONS
      
112.   AMUSEMENTS AND LEISURE
CHAPTER 110: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
110.01   Adoption of state law by reference
   
110.02   City may be more restrictive than state law
   
110.03   Definitions
   
110.04   Nudity on the premises of licensed establishments prohibited
   
110.05   Consumption in public places
   
110.06   Hours and days of sale
   
110.07   Minors on premises
   
110.08   Restrictions on purchase and consumption
Licensing; Conditions
   
110.20   Required licenses
   
110.21   Number of licenses which may be issued
   
110.22   Term and expiration of licenses
   
110.23   Kinds of liquor licenses
   
110.24   License fees; pro rata
   
110.25   Council discretion to grant or deny a license
   
110.26   Application for license
   
110.27   Description of premises
   
110.28   Applications for renewal
   
110.29   Transfer of license
   
110.30   Investigation
   
110.31   Hearing and issuance
   
110.32   Restrictions on issuance
   
110.33   Conditions of license
   
110.34   Suspension and revocation
Alcohol Compliance Checks
   
110.45   Purpose
   
110.46   Definitions and interpretations
   
110.47   Compliance checks
   
110.48   Violations
   
110.49   Exceptions and defenses
Keg Registration
   
110.60   Purpose
   
110.61   Definitions
   
110.62   Duties of seller
   
110.63   Duties of purchaser
   
110.64   Identification of containers; rules
 
   
110.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   The provisions of M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to
time, with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation,
restrictions on consumption, provisions relating to sales, hours of sale and
all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution and consumption
of intoxicating liquor and 3.2% malt liquor are hereby adopted by reference and
are made a part of this chapter as if set out in full.
   (B)   It is the intention of the City Council that all future amendments to
M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted
by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this
chapter is adopted.
(Ord. passed 3-26-2012)
§ 110.02 CITY MAY BE MORE RESTRICTIVE THAN STATE LAW.
   The Council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. § 340A.509, as it may be
amended from time to time, to impose and has imposed in this chapter,
additional restrictions on the sale and possession of alcoholic beverages
within its limits beyond those contained in M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be
amended from time to time.
(Ord. passed 3-26-2012)
§ 110.03 DEFINITIONS.
   In addition to the definitions contained in M.S. § 340A.101, as it may be
amended from time to time, and for the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly requires a different
meaning.
   LIQUOR. Without modification by the words intoxicating or 3.2% malt,
includes both intoxicating liquor and 3.2% malt liquor.
   RESTAURANT. An eating facility, other than a hotel, under the control of a
single proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the
premises, where full waitress/waiter table service is provided, where a
customer orders food from printed menus and where the main food course is
served and consumed while seated at a single location. To be a RESTAURANT, as
defined by this section, an establishment shall have a license from the state
as required by M.S. § 157.16, as it may be amended from time to time, and meet
the definition of either a small establishment, medium establishment or large
establishment, as defined in M.S. § 157.16, subd. 3d, as it may be amended from
time to time. An establishment which serves prepackaged food that receives heat
treatment and is served in the package or frozen pizza that is heated and
served shall not be considered to be a RESTAURANT for purposes of this chapter
unless it meets the definitions of small establishment, medium establishment or
large establishment.
(Ord. passed 3-26-2012)
§ 110.04 NUDITY ON THE PREMISES OF LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The City Council finds that it is in the best interests of the public
health, safety and general welfare of the people of the city that nudity is
prohibited as provided in this section on the premises of any establishment
licensed under this chapter. This is to protect and assist the owners,
operators and employees of the establishment, as well as patrons and the public
in general, from harm stemming from the physical immediacy and combination of
alcohol, nudity and sex. The Council especially intends to prevent any
subliminal endorsement of sexual harassment or activities likely to lead to the
possibility of various criminal conduct, including prostitution, sexual assault
and disorderly conduct. The Council also finds that the prohibition of nudity
on the premises of any establishment licensed under this chapter, as set forth
in this section, reflects the prevailing community standards of the city.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person or
persons on the licensed premises when the person does not have his or her
buttocks, anus, breasts and genitals covered with a non- transparent material.
It is unlawful for any person to be on the licensed premises when the person
does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts and genitals covered with a
non-transparent material.
   (C)   A violation of §
110.04 of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable as provided by law, and is
justification for revocation or suspension of any liquor, wine or 3.2% malt
liquor license or the imposition of a civil penalty under the provisions of §
110.99(B) of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 3-26-2012) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.05 CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   (A)   No person shall consume intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor in a
public park, on any public street, sidewalk, parking lot or alley, or in any
public place other than on the premises of an establishment licensed under this
chapter, in a municipal liquor dispensary if one exists in the city, or where
the consumption and display of liquor is lawfully permitted.
   (B)   The City Council wishes to permit the sale and/or consumption of
alcoholic beverages on city property for the public’s convenience and to
promote certain worthwhile activities. Permits for the sale and/or consumption
of alcoholic beverage on city property may be issued under the following
conditions:
      (1)   Upon signed, written request of the individual or organization who
will assume responsibility for the sale and/or consumption of the alcoholic
beverage, with a statement holding the city harmless for the actions of the
sponsoring party or parties, and including the date, time and location of the
desired permit;
      (2)   In the case of a permit for sale of alcoholic beverages, the party
or parities requesting the permit must include with their application a
certificate of insurance in the amount as set by City Council from time to time
with endorsement of the city as an additional insured and includes the required
fee as set from time to time by the City Council;
      (3)   In the case of a consumption only permit, the party or parties
requesting the permit must include with their application proof of general
liability insurance in the amount as set by City Council from time to time.
Consumption only permits do not require a fee; and
      (4)   Nothing binds the City Council to issue a permit for the sale and/
or consumption of alcoholic beverages to any person or organization and the
permits are issued solely at the Council’s discretion.
(Ord. passed 3-26-2012)
§ 110.06 HOURS AND DAYS OF SALE.
   (A)   The hours of operation and days of sale shall be those set by M.S. §
340A.504, as it may be amended from time to time; except that, the City Council
may, by resolution or ordinance, provide for more restrictive hours than state
law allows.
   (B)   No person shall consume nor shall any on-sale licensee permit any
consumption of intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor in an on-sale licensed
premise more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.
   (C)   Every licensee shall cause the premises to be vacated of all persons,
except the owner or manager within one hour after the licensed premises closes.
All intoxicating liquor shall be stored out of public view after the closing
hours and shall not be sold, given away or consumed on the licensed premises
until the succeeding day. No licensee shall provide intoxicating liquor or 3.2%
malt liquor to any employee while the employee is working on the premises. All
customers or persons not employed by a licensee shall vacate the premises
within one-half hour after the established closing time.
   (D)   No on-sale establishment shall display liquor to the public during
hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited.
   (E)   Any violation of any condition of this section may be grounds for
revocation or suspension of the license.
(Ord. passed 3-26-2012) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.07 MINORS ON PREMISES.
   (A)   No person under the age of 18 years shall be employed in any rooms
constituting the place in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2% malt liquor are
sold at retail on sale; except that, persons under the age of 18 may be
employed as musicians or to perform the duties of a bus person or dishwashing
services in places defined as a restaurant, hotel, motel or other multi-purpose
building serving food in rooms in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2% malt
liquor are sold at retail on sale.
   (B)   No person under the age of 21 years may enter a licensed
establishment, except to work, consume meals on premises that qualify as a
restaurant, or attend social functions that are held in a portion of the
premises where liquor is not sold.
(Ord. passed 3-26-2012) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.08 RESTRICTIONS ON PURCHASE AND CONSUMPTION.
   No person shall mix or prepare liquor for consumption in any public place of
business unless it has a license to sell on-sale, or a permit from the
Commissioner of Public Safety under the provisions of M.S. § 340A.414, as it
may be amended from time to time, which has been approved by the Council, and
no person shall consume liquor in any such place.
(Ord. passed 3-26-2012) Penalty, see §
110.99
LICENSING; CONDITIONS
§ 110.20 REQUIRED LICENSES.
   No person shall directly or indirectly, upon any pretense or by any device,
manufacture, import, sell, exchange, barter, dispose of or keep for sale any
intoxicating liquor without first having obtained a license therefor as
provided in this chapter.
(Ord. passed 3-26-2012) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.21 NUMBER OF LICENSES WHICH MAY BE ISSUED.
   State law establishes the number of liquor licenses that a city may issue.
However, the Council in its sound discretion may provide by ordinance that a
larger number of licenses may be issued up to the number of licenses authorized
by M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time. The Council is
not required to issue the full number of licenses that it has available.
(Ord. passed 3-26-2012)
§ 110.22 TERM AND EXPIRATION OF LICENSES.
   Each license shall be issued for a maximum period of one year. All licenses,
except temporary licenses, shall expire on December 31 of each year unless
another date is provided by ordinance. All licenses shall expire on the same
date. Temporary licenses expire according to their terms. Consumption and
display permits issued by the Commissioner of Public Safety, and the
accompanying city consent to the permit, shall expire on March 31 of each year.
(Ord. passed 3-26-2012)
§ 110.23 KINDS OF LIQUOR LICENSES.
   As the city does not have a municipal liquor store, it is authorized to
issue the following licenses and permits:
   (A)   3.2% malt liquor on-sale licenses, which may be issued only to golf
courses, restaurants, hotels, clubs, bowling centers and establishments used
exclusively for the sale of 3.2% malt liquor with the incidental sale of
tobacco and soft drinks;
   (B)   3.2% malt liquor off-sale license;
   (C)   Temporary 3.2% malt liquor licenses which may be issued only to a
club, charitable, religious or non-profit organization;
   (D)   (1)   Off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses are limited in number to
six, even if a larger number of licenses are authorized by law. An off-sale
intoxicating liquor license may be issued to an exclusive liquor store, or to a
drugstore as per M.S. § 340A.405, as it may be amended from time to time. The
fee for an off-sale intoxicating liquor license established by the Council
shall be the maximum which may be permitted by M.S. § 340A.408, subd. 3, as it
may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   Off-sale licensees shall sell alcoholic beverages by the container
or package for off-premises consumption only. They shall not permit the opening
of the containers and consumption of contents on the licenses premises. An off-
sale licensee shall not sell intoxicating liquor to any person for the purpose
of resale. No licensee shall possess a federal wholesale liquor dealer’s
special tax stamp or a federal gambling stamp.
      (3)   All off-sale licensees shall abide by the terms and conditions of
the city’s Keg Registration provisions.
   (E)   On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued to the
following establishments, as defined by M.S. § 340A.101, as it may be amended
from time to time, and this chapter: hotels; restaurants; bowling centers;
theaters; clubs or congressionally chartered veteran’s organizations; and
exclusive liquor stores. Club licenses may be issued only with the approval of
the Commissioner of Public Safety. The fee for club licenses established by the
Council shall not exceed the amounts provided for in M.S. § 340A.408, subd. 2b,
as it may be amended from time to time. The Council may, in its sound
discretion, authorize a retail on-sale licensee to dispense intoxicating liquor
off the licensed premises at a community festival held within the city under
the provisions of M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 4b, as it may be amended from time to
time. The Council may, in its sound discretion, authorize a retail on-sale
licensee to dispense intoxicating liquor off the licensed premises at any
convention, banquet, conference, meeting or social affair conducted on the
premises of a sports, convention or cultural facility owned by the city, under
the provisions of M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 4a, as it may be amended from time to
time; however, the licensee is prohibited from dispensing intoxicating liquor
to any person attending or participating in an amateur athletic event being
held on the premises;
   (F)   (1)   Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued only
to a restaurant, as defined in §
110.03 of this chapter, club, bowling center or hotel which has a seating
capacity of at least 30 persons, which holds an on-sale intoxicating liquor
license, and which serves liquor only in conjunction with the service of food
between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. on Sundays, if the licensee
complies with all requirements of the state’s Clean Indoor Air Act, being M.S.
§§ 144.411 to 144.417, as they may be amended from time to time. If the
licensee does not comply with the state’s Clean Air Act, the licensee is
authorized to sell intoxicating liquor for consumption on the premises together
with the sale of food between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 12:00 a.m. on Sunday.
      (2)   The maximum fee for this license, which shall be established by the
Council, shall not exceed an amount set by City Council from time to time, or
the maximum amount provided by M.S. § 340A.504, subd. 3c, as it may be amended
from time to time.
   (G)   Combination on-sale/off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses if the city
has a population less than 10,000;
   (H)   Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, with the approval of
the Commissioner of Public Safety, which may be issued only in connection with
a social event sponsored by a club, charitable, religious or other non-profit
corporation that has existed for at least three years. No license shall be for
longer than four consecutive days, and the city shall issue no more than ten
days worth of temporary licenses to any one organization in one calendar year;
   (I)   On-sale wine licenses, with the approval of the Commissioner of Public
Safety to: theaters; restaurants that have facilities for seating at least 25
guests at one time and meet the criteria of M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 5, as it may
be amended from time to time, and which meet the definition of restaurant in §
110.03 of this chapter; and to licensed bed and breakfast facilities which meet
the criteria in M.S. § 340A.401, subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to
time. The fee for an on-sale wine license established by the Council under the
provisions of §
110.34 of this chapter shall not exceed one-half of the license fee charged for
an on-sale intoxicating liquor license. The holder of an on-sale wine license
who also holds an on-sale 3.2% malt liquor license is authorized to sell malt
liquor with a content over 3.2% (strong beer) without an additional license;
   (J)   One-day consumption and display permits with the approval of the
Commissioner of Public Safety to a non-profit organization in conjunction with
a social activity in the city sponsored by the organization;
   (K)   Approval of the issuance of a consumption and display permit by the
Commissioner of Public Safety. The maximum amount of the additional fee which
may be imposed by the Council on a person who has been issued a consumption and
display permit shall not exceed an amount set by City Council from time to
time, or the maximum amount permitted by M.S. § 340A.14, subd. 6, as it may be
amended from time to time. Consumption and display permits shall expire on
March 31 of each year;
   (L)   Culinary class limited on-sale licenses may be issued to a business
establishment not otherwise eligible for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license
that, as part of its business, conducts culinary or cooking classes for which
payment is made by each participant or advance reservation required. The
license authorizes the licensee to furnish to each participant in each class,
at no additional cost to the participant, up to a maximum of six ounces of wine
or 12 ounces of intoxicating malt liquor, during and as part of the class, for
consumption on the licensed premises only;
   (M)   Temporary off-sale wine licenses, with the approval of the Commission
of Public Safety, may be issued for the off-sale of wine at an auction. A
license issued under this division (M) authorizes the sale of only vintage wine
of a brand and vintage that is not commonly being offered for sale by any
wholesaler in the state. The license may authorize the off-sale of wine for not
more than three consecutive days provided not more than 600 cases of wine are
sold at any auction. The licenses are subject to the terms, including license
fee, imposed by §
110.34 of this chapter;
   (N)   Brew pub on-sale intoxicating liquor or on-sale 3.2% malt liquor
licenses, with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety, may be issued
to brewers who operate a restaurant in their place of manufacture and who meet
the criteria established at M.S. § 340A.301, subd. 6(d) and 7(b), as it may be
amended from time to time. Sales under this license at on-sale may not exceed
3,500 barrels per year. If a brew pub licensed under this section possesses a
license for off-sale under division (O) below, the brew pubs total combined
retail sales at on-sale or off-sale may not exceed 3,500 barrels per year;
provided that, off-sales may not total more than 500 barrels;
   (O)   Brewer off-sale intoxicating liquor license, with the approval of the
Commissioner of Public Safety, may be issued to a brewer that is a licensee
under division (N) above or that produces fewer than 3,500 barrels of malt
liquor in a year and otherwise meets the criteria established as M.S. §
340A.301, subd. 6(d) and 7(b), as it may be amended from time to time. Off-sale
of malt liquor shall be limited to the legal hours for off-sale at exclusive
liquor stores in the city. Malt liquor sold off-sale must be removed from the
premises before the applicable off-sale closing time at exclusive liquor
stores. All malt liquor sold under this license shall be packaged in the manner
required by M.S. § 340A.301, subd. 7, as it may be amended from time to time.
Sales under this license may not exceed 500 barrels per year. If a brewer
licensed under this section possesses a license under division (N) above, the
brewer’s total retail sales at on-sale or off-sale may not exceed 3,500 barrels
per year; provided that, off-sales may not total more than 500 barrels; and
   (P)   Brewer temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued,
with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety, to brewers who
manufacture fewer than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a year for the on-sale
of intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event within the
municipality sponsored by the brewer.
(Ord. passed 3-26-2012)
§ 110.24 LICENSE FEES; PRO RATA.
   (A)   No license or other fee established by the city shall exceed any limit
established by M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, for a
liquor license.
   (B)   The Council may establish from time to time, in the Ordinance
Establishing Fees and Charges, the fee for any of the liquor licenses it is
authorized to issue. The license fee may not exceed the cost of issuing the
license and other costs directly related to the enforcement of the liquor laws
and this chapter. No liquor license fee shall be increased without providing
mailed notice of a hearing on the proposed increase to all affected licensees
at least 30 days before the hearing.
   (C)   The fee for all licenses, except temporary licenses, granted after the
commencement of the license year shall be prepaid and prorated on a quarterly
basis, but non-refundable.
   (D)   All license fees shall be paid in full at the time the application is
filed with the city. If the application is denied, the license fee will not be
returned to the applicant.
   (E)   No refunds shall be paid on the unexpired portion of any license
terminated pursuant to this chapter, whether termination is by reason of sale
or transfer of business or otherwise.
   (F)   Off-sale intoxicating liquor licensees may request a reduction in
their annual license fee (law now allows for a reduction) by the amount
specified in M.S. § 340A.408, as it may be amended from time to time, if at the
time of initial application or renewal they:
      (1)   Agree to have a private vendor approved by the city train all
employees within 60 days of hire and annually thereafter in laws pertaining to
the sale of alcohol, the rules for identification checks and the
responsibilities of establishments serving intoxicating liquors;
      (2)   Post a policy requiring identification checks for all persons
appearing to be 30 years old or less;
      (3)   Establish a written cash award and incentive program to award
employees who catch underage drinkers and a written penalty program to punish
employees in the event of a failed compliance check; and
      (4)   Failure to abide by the provisions of this division (F) may result
in suspension of the license until the conditions of the fee reduction are met
and may result in suspension and/or revocation of the license pursuant to §
110.34 of this chapter.
   (G)   On-sale liquor license fees shall be designated as “for-profit” or
“non-profit” depending on the status, under state and federal law, of the
business or organization making application. It shall be the burden of the
applicant to show non-profit status.
(Ord. passed 3-26-2012)
§ 110.25 COUNCIL DISCRETION TO GRANT OR DENY A LICENSE.
   The Council, in its sound discretion, may either grant or deny the
application for any license or for the transfer or renewal of any license. No
applicant has a right to a license under this chapter.
(Ord. passed 3-26-2012)
§ 110.26 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Form. Every application for a license issued under this chapter shall
be on a form provided by the city. Every application shall state the name of
the applicant, the applicant’s age, representations as to the applicant’s
character, with references as the Council may require, the type of license
applied for, the business in connection with which the proposed license will
operate and its location, a description of the premises, whether the applicant
is owner and operator of the business, how long the applicant has been in that
business at that place and other information as the Council may require from
time to time. An application for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license shall
be in the form prescribed by the Commissioner of Public Safety and shall also
contain the information required in this section. The form shall be verified
and filed with the city. No person shall make a false statement in an
application.
   (B)   Financial responsibility. Prior to the issuance of any license under
this chapter, the applicant shall demonstrate proof of financial
responsibility, as defined in M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time
to time, with regard to liability under M.S. § 340A.801, as it may be amended
from time to time. This proof will be filed with the city and the Commissioner
of Public Safety. Any liability insurance policy filed as proof of financial
responsibility under this section shall conform to M.S. § 340A.409, as it may
be amended from time to time. Operation of a business which is required to be
licensed by this chapter without having on file with the city at all times
effective proof of financial responsibility is a cause for revocation of the
license.
(Ord. passed 3-26-2012) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.27 DESCRIPTION OF PREMISES.
   The application shall specifically describe the compact and contiguous
premises within which liquor may be dispensed and consumed. The description may
not include any parking lot or sidewalk.
(Ord. passed 3-26-2012)
§ 110.28 APPLICATIONS FOR RENEWAL.
   At least 90 days before a license issued under this chapter is to be
renewed, an application for renewal shall be filed with the city. The decision
whether or not to renew a license rests within the sound discretion of the
Council. No licensee has a right to have the license renewed.
(Ord. passed 3-26-2012)
§ 110.29 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   No license issued under this chapter may be transferred without the approval
of the Council. Any transfer of stock or assets of a corporate licensee is
deemed to be a transfer of the license, and any such transfer without prior
Council approval is a ground for revocation of the license. An application to
transfer a license shall be treated the same as an application for a new
license and all of the provisions of this code applying to applications for a
license shall apply.
(Ord. passed 3-26-2012)
§ 110.30 INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Preliminary background and financial investigation. On an initial
application for a license, on an application for transfer of a license and, in
the sound discretion of the Council that it is in the public interest to do so,
on an application for renewal of a license, the city shall conduct a
preliminary background and financial investigation of the applicant or it may
contract with the Commissioner of Public Safety for the investigation. The
applicant shall pay with the application an investigation fee as set by City
Council from time to time, which shall be in addition to any license fee. If
the cost of the preliminary investigation is less than the amount set by City
Council from time to time, the unused balance shall be returned to the
applicant. The results of the preliminary investigation shall be sent to the
Commissioner of Public Safety if the application is for an on-sale intoxicating
liquor license or an on-sale wine license.
   (B)   Comprehensive background and financial investigation. If the results
of a preliminary investigation warrant, in the sound discretion of the Council,
a comprehensive background and financial investigation, the Council may either
conduct the investigation itself or contract with the Commissioner of Public
Safety for the investigation. The investigation fee for this comprehensive
background and financial investigation to be paid by the applicant shall be as
set by City Council from time to time, less any amount paid for the initial
investigation if the investigation is to be conducted within the state, and an
amount set by City Council from time to time, less any amount paid for the
initial investigation, if the investigation is required outside the state. The
unused balance of the fee shall be returned to the applicant whether or not the
application is denied. The fee shall be paid in advance of any investigation
and the amount actually expended on the investigation shall not be refundable
in the event the application is denied. The results of the comprehensive
investigation shall be sent to the Commissioner of Public Safety if the
application is for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license or an on-sale wine
license.
(Ord. passed 3-26-2012)
§ 110.31 HEARING AND ISSUANCE.
   The Council shall investigate all facts set out in the application and not
investigated in the preliminary or comprehensive background and financial
investigations. Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or
against the granting of the license. After the investigation and hearing, the
Council shall, in its sound discretion, grant or deny the application. No
license shall become effective until the proof of financial security has been
approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
(Ord. passed 3-26-2012)
§ 110.32 RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Each license shall be issued only to the applicant for the premises
described in the application.
   (B)   Not more than one license shall be directly or indirectly issued
within the city to any one person or corporate entity.
   (C)   No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any premises
on which taxes, assessments, utility charges, service charges or other
financial claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid.
   (D)   No license shall be issued for any place or any business ineligible
for a license under state law as per M.S. § 340A.402, as it may be amended from
time to time.
   (E)   No license shall be issued to any person under the age of 21. No
license shall be granted to a person who is not a citizen of the United States
of America or has documented permanent legal immigration status. No license
shall be issued to a person who is not a resident of the state. If the
applicant is a corporation, the majority of the shareholders shall be residents
of the state.
   (F)   No license shall be granted within 500 feet of any school. The
distance is to be measured from the closest side of the school to the closest
side of the structure on the premises within which liquor is to be sold.
(Ord. passed 3-26-2012)
§ 110.33 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   The failure of a licensee to meet any one of the conditions of the license
specified below shall result in a suspension of the license until the condition
is met.
   (A)   Within 90 days after employment, or upon the first available training
session, whichever is later, every person selling or serving liquor in an
establishment which has an on-sale license shall receive training regarding the
selling or serving of liquor to customers. The training shall be provided by an
organization approved by the Council. The Police Department will provide a
basic set of guidelines for licensee use. Proof of training shall be provided
by the licensee.
   (B)   Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of the place of business
and the conditions of sobriety and order in it. The act of any employee on the
licensed premises is deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the licensee
shall be liable to all penalties provided by this chapter and the law equally
with the employee.
   (C)   Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health officer, city
employee or any other person designated by the Council to conduct compliance
checks and to otherwise enter, inspect and search the premises of the licensee
during business hours and after business hours during the time when customers
remain on the premises without a warrant. The city’s Alcohol Compliance
Ordinance details the compliance check process and penalties for violations of
same.
   (D)   Compliance with financial responsibility, bond and insurance
requirements of state law and of this chapter is a continuing condition of any
license.
(Ord. passed 3-26-2012)
§ 110.34 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Council shall either suspend for a period not to exceed 60 days or
revoke any liquor license upon finding that the licensee has failed to comply
with any applicable statute, regulation or provision of this chapter relating
to liquor. Except in cases of lapse of proof of financial responsibility, no
suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been afforded
an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act. The
Council may act as the hearing body under that act, or it may contract with the
Office of Hearing Examiners for a hearing officer.
   (B)   The following are the minimum periods of suspension or revocation
which shah be imposed by the Council for violations of the provisions of this
chapter or M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, or any
rules promulgated under that chapter as they may be amended from time to time.
      (1)   For commission of a felony related to the licensed activity, sale
of alcoholic beverages while the license is under suspension, sale of
intoxicating liquor where the only license is for 3.2% malt liquor or violation
of §
110.04 of this chapter, the license shall be revoked.
      (2)   The license shall be suspended by the Council after a finding under
division (A)(1) above that the licensee has failed to comply with any
applicable statute, rule or provision of this chapter for at least the minimum
periods as follows:
         (a)   For the first violation within any three-year period, at least
one-day suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be
imposed;
         (b)   For a second violation within any three-year period, at least
three-consecutive-day suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties
which may be imposed;
         (c)   For the third violation within any three-year period, at least
seven-consecutive-day suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties
which may be imposed;
         (d)   For a fourth violation within any three-year period, the license
shall be revoked.
      (3)   The Council shall select the day or days during which the license
will be suspended.
   (C)   Lapse of required proof of financial responsibility shall affect an
immediate suspension of any license issued pursuant to this chapter or state
law without further action of the Council. Notice of cancellation or lapse of a
current liquor liability policy shall also constitute notice to the licensee of
the impending suspension of the license. The holder of a license who has
received notice of lapse of required insurance or of suspension or revocation
of a license may request a hearing thereon and, if a request is made in writing
to the Clerk, a hearing before the Council shall be granted within ten days.
Any suspension under this division (C) shall continue until the Council
determines that the financial responsibility requirements of state law and this
chapter have again been met.
(Ord. passed 3-26-2012)
ALCOHOL COMPLIANCE CHECKS
§ 110.45 PURPOSE.
   Because the city recognizes that many persons under the age of 21 years
purchase or otherwise obtain, possess and use alcoholic beverage, all of which
are in violation of state law; and because studies, which the city hereby
accepts and adopts, have shown that alcohol use is one of the leading causes of
death among teenagers and because of the city’s great concern relating to
underage drinking and driving, and the accidents associated with it, the city
hereby adopts the following section in order to help protect persons under the
age of 21 against the consequences associated with the illegal use, possession
and purchase of alcoholic beverages.
(Ord. passed 12-14-1998)
§ 110.46 DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning. The singular shall
include the plural and the plural shall include the singular. The masculine
shall include the feminine and neuter, and vice-verse. The term “shall” means
mandatory and the term “may” means permissive.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Any beverage containing more than 0.5% alcohol by
volume.
   COMPLIANCE CHECKS. The system the city uses to investigate and ensure that
those authorized to sell alcoholic beverages are following and complying with
the requirements of applicable State Statutes and regulations concerning the
sale of alcoholic beverages. (See M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from
time to time.)
   MINOR. A person who has not attained the age of 21.
   UNDERAGE PERSON. A person who has not attained the legal drinking age, but
is considered an “adult”; 18, 19 and 20 years of age.
(Ord. passed 12-14-1998)
§ 110.47 COMPLIANCE CHECKS.
   All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by the city police or
other personnel authorized by the city during regular business hours. From time
to time, the city shall conduct compliance checks by engaging persons under the
age of 21, but older than age 18 years, to enter the licensed premises to
attempt to purchase alcoholic beverages. No person used in a compliance check
shall use a fake identification misrepresenting the person’s age and shall
answer truthfully all questions about the person’s age asked by the licensee or
his or her employee and shall produce any identification for which he or she is
asked. Nothing in this section shall prohibit or restrict compliance checks
authorized by state or federal laws for education, research or training
purposes, or required for the enforcement of a particular state or federal law.
(Ord. passed 12-14-1998) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.48 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Notice. Upon discovery of a suspected violation of any state law
concerning the sale of alcoholic beverage to a minor, the alleged violator
shall be issued, either personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the
alleged violation and which shall inform the alleged violator of his or her
right to be heard on the accusation. A form of citation to be used is attached
to the ordinance codified herein.
   (B)   Hearings. A person accused of violating this subchapter shall attend a
hearing before a hearing officer the time and place of which shall be published
and served on the accused violator at least 14 days before the hearing. The
accused may appear at the scheduled hearing and present such evidence as it
determines relevant. They may be represented by counsel at such hearing.
   (C)   Hearing Officer. The City Council shall serve as the Hearing Officer.
   (D)   Decision. If the Hearing Officer determines by a preponderance of the
evidence that a violation of this subchapter did occur, that decision, along
with the Hearing Officer’s, and the penalty to be imposed under §
110.99 of this chapter, shall be set forth in writing, a copy of which shall be
provided to the accused violator. Likewise, if the Hearing Officer finds that
no violation occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any penalty, such
findings shall be set forth in writing and a copy provided to the accused and
kept in official city records.
   (E)   Appeals. Appeals of any decision made by the Hearing Officer shall be
filed in the District Court for the county in which the alleged violation
occurred.
   (F)   Continued violation. Each violation, and every day in which a
violation occurs or continues, shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 12-14-1998)
§ 110.49 EXCEPTIONS AND DEFENSES.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall prevent a parent or guardian from
furnishing alcoholic beverages to children under the age of 21 within his, her
or their home. It shall be an affirmative defense to the violation of this
subchapter for a person to have reasonably relied on proof of age as described
by state law.
(Ord. passed 12-14-1998)
KEG REGISTRATION
§ 110.60 PURPOSE.
   Because the city recognizes that beer kegs can be the main source of alcohol
at parties where underage drinking occurs, this subchapter shall be intended to
provide a system for beer keg registration to enable police to identify and
penalize adults who purchase kegs for parties and allow underage youth to
consume the alcohol.
(Ord. passed 12-14-1998)
§ 110.61 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning. The singular shall
include the plural and the plural shall include the singular. The masculine
shall include the feminine and neuter, and vice-versa. The term “shall” means
mandatory and the term “may” means permissive.
   3.2% MALT LIQUOR. Malt liquor containing not less than 0.5% alcohol by
volume nor more than 3.2% alcohol by weight.
   INTOXICATING LIQUOR. Ethyl alcohol, distilled, fermented, spirituous, vinous
and malt beverages containing more than 3.2% of alcohol by weight.
   KEGS. Containers designed for and capable of holding intoxicating or 3.2%
malt liquor to be dispensed from a tapper.
   MALT LIQUOR. Any beer, ale or other beverage made from malt by fermentation
and containing not less than 0.5% alcohol by volume.
   OFF-SALE. The sale of alcoholic beverages in original packages for
consumption off the licensed premises only.
(Ord. passed 12-14-1998)
§ 110.62 DUTIES OF SELLER.
   (A)   Licensees holding an off-sale intoxicating liquor license or 3.2% malt
liquor license may sell malt liquor in kegs or other containers capable of hold
four gallons or more of liquid. Licensees shall not sell more than 16 gallons
of malt liquor in kegs or other containers capable of holding four gallons or
more of liquid to any individual purchaser, not licensed under M.S. Chapter
340A, as it may be amended from time to time, within a 24-hour period.
   (B)   Any person who sells or offers for sale the contents of kegs or other
containers containing four gallons or more of malt liquor, or leases kegs or
other containers that will hold four gallons or more of malt liquor, to
consumers who are not licensed under M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended
from time to time, shall do the following for each sales transaction involving
the keg or other container:
      (1)   Require the purchaser of the malt liquor to sign a declaration and
receipt of the keg or other container in substantially the form provided for in
§
110.63 of this chapter;
      (2)   Require the purchaser to provide one piece of identification
pursuant to M.S. § 340A.503(6), as it may be amended from time to time;
      (3)   Require the purchaser to sign a statement on the declaration that:
         (a)   The purchaser is of legal age to purchase, possess or use malt
liquor.
         (b)   The purchaser will not allow any person under the age of 21
years to consume the beverage in violation of M.S. § 340A.503(2), as it may be
amended from time to time; and
         (c)   The purchaser will not remove, obliterate or allow to be removed
or obliterated, the identification required under this subchapter to be affixed
to the container.
      (4)   Require the purchaser to state the particular address where the
malt liquor will be consumed or the particular address where the keg or other
container will be physically located;
      (5)   Inform the purchaser of his or her duty to maintain a copy of the
declaration next to or adjacent to the keg or other container, in no event at a
distance greater than five feet, and visible without a physical barrier from
the keg, during the time that the keg or other container is in the purchaser’s
possession or control;
      (6)   Affix identification to the kegs in accordance with the rules
authorized under §
110.63 of this chapter;
      (7)   Retain copies of the receipt and declaration on the licensed site
for a period of six months following the transaction and shall make it
available to any law enforcement officer or member of the municipal licensing
authority upon request; and
      (8)   Collect from the purchaser a deposit of the amount specified in the
rules authorized under §
110.63 of this chapter, which shall be not less than as amount as set by City
Council from time to time. The licensee shall refund this deposit to the
purchaser upon return to the licensee, within six months of the purchase, of
the keg or other container with the identification required by the municipal
licensing authority intact and affixed to the keg or other container. The
licensee shall not refund the deposit to the purchaser if the identification
has been removed or obliterated at any time after the initial sales transaction
with the purchaser and before the return of the keg or other container to the
licensee. All deposits forfeited shall be remitted, less a reasonable handling
fee, to the municipal licensing authority with a copy of the receipt and
declaration made in the transactions involved.
(Ord. passed 12-14-1998)
§ 110.63 DUTIES OF PURCHASER.
   (A)   Any person who purchases the contents of kegs or other containers
containing four gallons or more of malt liquor or purchases or leases the
container shall:
      (1)   Provide one piece of identification pursuant to M.S. § 340A.503(6),
as it may be amended from time to time;
      (2)   Be of legal age to purchase, possess, or use malt liquor;
      (3)   Pay a deposit of the amount specified in the rules authorized under
§
110.62 of this chapter to the licensee, to be refunded upon the return of the
keg or other container, within six months of purchase, with the identification
required by the municipal licensing authority intact and affixed to the keg or
other container;
      (4)   Sign a receipt for the keg or other container or beverage in
substantially the form provided in this subchapter;
      (5)   Sign a declaration for the keg or other container or beverage in
substantially the form provided in this subchapter;
      (6)   Not allow any person under the age of 21 to consume the beverage,
except as provided by M.S. § 340A.503(2), as it may be amended from time to
time;
      (7)   Not remove, obliterate or allow to be removed or obliterated, the
identification required under rules adopted by the municipal licensing
authority;
      (8)   Not move, keep or store the keg or its contents, except for
transporting to and from the distributor, at any place other than that
particular address declared on the receipt and declaration; and
      (9)   Maintain a copy of the declaration next to or adjacent to the keg
or other container, in no event at a distance greater than five feet, and
visible without a physical barrier from the keg, during the time that the keg
or other container in the purchaser’s possession or control.
   (B)   Falsifying any information requested on the declaration or receipt
shall constitute a violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 12-14-1998) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.64 IDENTIFICATION OF CONTAINERS; RULES.
   (A)   The city shall adopt all rules necessary for the implementation of
this subchapter, including rules requiring retail licensees to affix
appropriate identification on all containers of four gallons or more of malt
liquor for the purpose of tracing the purchasers of such containers.
   (B)   The city shall develop and make available forms for the declaration
and receipt required by this subchapter. The city may charge for the costs of
providing the forms and that money collected for the form shall be deposited
into the Liquor Fund for use by the city, without further appropriation, to
continue to administer the cost of the keg registration program.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale kegs or other
containers containing four gallons or more of malt liquor to consumers who are
not licensed under M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time,
if the kegs or containers are not identified in compliance with rules adopted
by the municipal licensing authority.
(Ord. passed 12-14-1998)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or M.S.
Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, or any rules promulgated
under that chapter as they may be amended from time to time is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided by law.
      (2)   The Council shall impose a civil penalty of an amount as set by
City Council from time to time for each violation of M.S. Chapter 340A, as it
may be amended from time to time, and of this chapter. Conviction of a
violation in a court of law is not required in order for the Council to impose
the civil penalty. A hearing under the Administrative Procedures Act is not
required before the penalty is imposed, but the Council shall hold a hearing on
the proposed violation and the proposed penalty and hear any person who wishes
to speak. Non-payment of the penalty is grounds for suspension or revocation of
the license. The following is the minimum schedule of presumptive civil
penalties which must be imposed in addition to any suspension unless the
license is revoked: an amount as set by City Council from time to time.
      (3)   The term violation as used in this section includes any and all
violations of the provisions of this chapter, or of M.S. Chapter 340A, as it
may be amended from time to time or any rules promulgated under that chapter as
they may be amended from time to time. The number of violations shall be
determined on the basis of the history of violations for the preceding three-
year period. Revocation shall occur within 60 days following a violation for
which revocation is imposed.
   (B)   (1)   Licensees and employees. Any person found to have violated §§
110.45 through
110.49 of this chapter, or whose employee shall have violated §§
110.45 through
110.49 of this chapter, shall be charged an administrative fine in an amount
set by City Council from time to time. A violation of §§
110.45 through
110.49 of this chapter may be grounds for suspension of the license to sell
alcoholic beverages pursuant to M.S. § 340A.415, as it may be amended from time
to time.
      (2)   Misdemeanor prosecution. Nothing in this division (B) shall
prohibit the city from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any alleged
violation of §§
110.45 through
110.49 of this chapter. It shall be the city’s right in all instances to seek
misdemeanor prosecution or administrative penalties and/or both against any
person or person’s found in violation.
   (C)   The violation of any provisions of §§
110.60 through
110.64 of this chapter is punishable:
      (1)   For the first violation: as a petty misdemeanor; and
      (2)   For the second and subsequent violations: as a misdemeanor.
(Ord. passed 12-14-1998; Ord. passed 12-14-1998; Ord. passed 3-26-2012)
CHAPTER 111: TOBACCO REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
111.01   Purpose and intent
   
111.02   Definitions
   
111.03   Prohibited acts
   
111.04   Responsibility
   
111.05   Compliance checks and inspections
   
111.06   Exceptions and defenses
Licensing; Conditions
   
111.20   License required
   
111.21   Application
   
111.22   Action
   
111.23   Term
   
111.24   Revocation or suspension
   
111.25   Transfers
   
111.26   Moveable place of business
   
111.27   Display
   
111.28   Renewals
   
111.29   Issuance as privilege and not right
   
111.30   Minimum age of clerk
   
111.31   Maximum number of licenses
   
111.32   Restricted locations; proximity to youth-oriented facilities
   
111.33   Sampling prohibited
   
111.34   Instructional program
   
111.35   Fees
   
111.36   License denial
 
   
111.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   Because the city recognizes that the sale of commercial tobacco,
tobacco-related devices, electronic delivery devices and nicotine or lobelia
delivery products to persons under the age of 18 violates both state and
federal laws; and because studies, which the city accepts and adopts, have
shown that youth use of any commercial tobacco product has increased to 26.4%
in Minnesota; and because nearly 90% of people who smoke begin smoking before
they have reached the age of 18 years, and that almost no one starts smoking
after age 25; and because the CDC reports that as of 12-10-2019, there have
been 2,409 cases of e-cigarette, or vaping, product use associated lung injury
nationwide resulting in 52 deaths, three of those deaths occurring in
Minnesota; and because the Surgeon General and the FDA Commissioner has labeled
the recent uptick in youth use of electronic delivery devices as an “epidemic”
and because marketing analysis, public health research and commercial tobacco
industry documents reveal that tobacco companies have used menthol, mint,
fruit, candy and alcohol flavors as a way to target youth and young adults and
that the presence of the flavors can make it more difficult to quit; and
because studies show that youth and young adults are especially susceptible to
commercial tobacco product availability, advertising and price promotions at
tobacco retail environments; and because commercial tobacco use has been shown
to be the cause of many serious health problems which subsequently place a
financial burden on all levels of government, this chapter is intended to
regulate the sale of commercial tobacco, tobacco-related devices, electronic
delivery devices and nicotine or lobelia delivery products for the purpose of
enforcing and furthering existing laws, to protect youth and young adults
against the serious health effects associated with use and initiation, and to
further the official public policy of the state to prevent young people from
starting to smoke, as stated in M.S. § 144.391, as it may be amended from time
to time.
   (B)   In making these findings, the City Council accepts the conclusions and
recommendations of: the U.S. Surgeon General reports, E-cigarette Use Among
Youth and Young Adults (2016), The Health Consequences of Smoking - 50 Years of
Progress (2014) and Preventing Tobacco Use Among Youth and Young Adults (2012);
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in their studies, “Vital Signs:
Tobacco Product Use Among Middle and High School Students”
(Ord. 18.0, passed 12-16-2019)
§ 111.02 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms
are given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this chapter,
the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly requires a
different meaning.
   CHILD-RESISTANT PACKAGING. Packaging that meets the definition set forth in
16 C.F.R. § 1700.15(b), as in effect on 1-1-2015, and was tested in accordance
with the method described in 16 C.F.R. § 1700.20, as in effect on 1-1-2015.
   CIGAR. Any roll of tobacco that is wrapped in tobacco leaf or in any other
substance containing tobacco, with or without a tip or mouthpiece, which is not
a cigarette as defined in M.S. § 297F.01, subd. 3, as may be amended from time
to time.
   COMPLIANCE CHECKS. The system the city uses to investigate and ensure that
those authorized to sell licensed products are following and complying with the
requirements of this chapter. COMPLIANCE CHECKS involve the use of persons
under the age of 21 who purchase or attempt to purchase licensed products.
COMPLIANCE CHECKS may also be conducted by the city or other units of
government for educational, research and training purposes or for investigating
or enforcing federal, state or local laws and regulations relating to licensed
products.
   ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE. Any product containing or delivering nicotine,
lobelia or any other substance, whether natural or synthetic, intended for
human consumption through the inhalation of aerosol or vapor from the product.
ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE includes, but is not limited to, devices
manufactured, marketed or sold as e-cigarettes, e- cigars, e-pipes, vape pens,
mods, tank systems or under any other product name or descriptor. ELECTRONIC
DELIVERY DEVICE includes any component part of a product, whether or not
marketed or sold separately, ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE does not include any
product that has been approved or certified by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration for sale as a tobacco-cessation product, as a tobacco-dependence
product or for other medical purposes, and is marketed and sold for such an
approved purpose.
   FLAVORED PRODUCT. Any licensed product that contains a taste or smell, other
than the taste or smell of tobacco, that is distinguishable by an ordinary
consumer either prior to or during the consumption of the product, including,
but not limited to, any taste or smell relating to chocolate, cocoa,, vanilla,
honey, fruit or any candy, dessert, alcoholic beverage, herb or spice. A public
statement or claim, whether express or implied, made or disseminated by the
manufacturer of a licensed product, or by any person authorized or permitted by
the manufacturer to make or disseminate public statements concerning the
products, that a product has or produces a taste or smell other than a taste or
smell of tobacco, mint, menthol or wintergreen will constitute presumptive
evidence that the product is a FLAVORED PRODUCT.
   IMITATION TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any edible non-tobacco product designed to
resemble a tobacco product, or any non-edible tobacco product designed to
resemble a tobacco product and intended to be used by children as a toy.
IMITATION TOBACCO PRODUCT includes, but is not limited to, candy or chocolate
cigarettes, bubble gum cigars, shredded bubble gum resembling chewing tobacco
and shredded beef jerky in containers resembling tobacco snuff tins. IMITATION
TOBACCO PRODUCT does not include electronic delivery devices or nicotine or
lobelia delivery products.
   INDOOR AREA. All space between a floor and a ceiling that is bounded by
walls, doorways, or windows, whether open or closed, covering more than 50% of
the combined surface area of the vertical planes constituting the perimeter of
the area. A wall includes any retractable divider, garage door or other
physical barrier, whether temporary or permanent. A standard window screen
(0.011 gauge with an 18 by 16 mesh count) is not considered a WALL.
   LICENSED PRODUCTS. The term that collectively refers to any tobacco,
tobacco-related device, electronic delivery device or nicotine or lobelia
delivery product.
   LOOSIES. Any single or individually-packaged cigars or cigarettes offered
for sale, regardless of whether they have been removed from their original
retail packaging, and any other licensed product that has been removed from its
original retail packaging and offered for sale. LOOSIES does not include
individual cigars with a retail price, after any discounts are applied and
before any sales taxes are imposed, of at least $4 per cigar.
   MOVEABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any form of business that is operated out of a
kiosk, truck, van, automobile or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter
and not a fixed address store front or other permanent type of structure
authorized for sales transactions.
   NICOTINE OR LOBELIA DELIVERY PRODUCT. Any product containing or delivering
nicotine or lobelia intended for human consumption, or any part of such a
product, that is not a tobacco or an electronic delivery device as defined in
this section. NICOTINE OR LOBELIA DELIVERY PRODUCT does not include any product
that has been approved or otherwise certified for legal sale by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration as a tobacco-cessation product, a tobacco-dependence
product or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely
for that approved purpose.
   PHARMACY. A place of business at which prescription drugs are prepared,
compounded or dispensed by or under the supervision of a pharmacist and from
which related clinical pharmacy services are delivered.
   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Anyplace of business where licensed products are
available for sale to the general public. The phrase includes, but is not
limited to, grocery stores, tobacco products shops, convenience stores,
gasoline service stations, bars and restaurants.
   SALE. Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter or other consideration.
   SELF-SERVICE DISPLAY. The open display of licensed products in any manner
where any person has access to the licensed products without the assistance or
intervention of the licensee or the licensee’s employee.
   SMOKING. Inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted or heated
cigar, cigarette or pipe, or any other lighted or heated product containing,
made, or derived from nicotine, tobacco, marijuana, or other plant, whether
natural or synthetic, that is intended for inhalation. SMOKING also includes
carrying or using an activated electronic delivery device.
   TOBACCO. Any product containing, made or derived from tobacco that is
intended for human consumption, whether chewed, smoked, absorbed, dissolved,
inhaled, snorted, sniffed or ingested by any other means, or any component,
part or accessory of a tobacco product including, but not limited to:
cigarettes; cigars; cheroots; stogies; perique; granulated, plug cut, crimp
cut, ready rubbed and other smoking tobacco; snuff; snuff flour; cavendish;
plug and twist tobacco; fine cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts; refuse
scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms
of tobacco. TOBACCO does not include any product that has been approved by the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco-cessation product, as a
tobacco-dependence product or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed
and sold solely for such an approved purpose.
   TOBACCO-RELATED DEVICE. Any rolling papers, wraps, pipes or other device
intentionally designed or intended to be used with tobacco products. TOBACCO-
RELATED DEVICE includes components of tobacco-related devices or tobacco
products, which may be marketed or sold separately. TOBACCO-RELATED DEVICES may
or may not contain tobacco.
   VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electric or electronic, or other type of
device that dispenses licensed products upon the insertion of money, tokens or
other form of payment directly into the machine by the person seeking to
purchase the licensed product.
   YOUTH-ORIENTED FACILITY. Any facility with residents, customers, visitors or
inhabitants of which 25% or more are regularly under the age of 21 or that
primarily sells, rents or offers services or products that are consumed or used
primarily by persons under the age of 21. YOUTH-ORIENTED FACILITY includes, but
is not limited to, schools, playgrounds, recreation centers and parks.
(Ord. 18.0, passed 12-16-2019)
§ 111.03 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   (1)   In general. No person shall sell or offer to sell any licensed
product:
         (a)   By means of any type of vending machine;
         (b)   By means of loosies, as defined;
         (c)   Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna, strychnos,
cocaine, marijuana or other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic or controlled
substances except nicotine and other substances found naturally in tobacco or
added as part of an otherwise lawful manufacturing process. It is not the
intention of this provision to ban the sale of lawfully manufactured cigarettes
or other products subject to this chapter; and/or
         (d)   By any other means, to any other person, on in any other manner
or form prohibited by federal, state or other local law, ordinance provision or
other regulation.
      (2)   Legal age. No person shall sell any licensed product to any person
under the age of 21.
         (a)   Age verification. Licensees must verify by means of government-
issued photographic identification that the purchaser is at least 21 years of
age. Verification is not required for a person over the age of 30. That the
person appeared to be 30 years of age or older does not constitute a defense to
a violation of this division (A)(2).
         (b)   Signage. Notice of the legal sales age and age verification
requirement must be posted prominently and in plain view at all times at each
location where licensed products are offered for sale. The required signage,
which will be provided to the licensee by the city, must be posted in a manner
that is clearly visible to anyone who is or is considering making a purchase.
      (3)   Self-service sales. No person shall allow the sale of licensed
products by any self-service displays where the customer may have access to
those items without haying to request the item from the licensee or the
licensee’s employee and where there is not a physical exchange of the licensed
product from the licensee or the licensee’s employee to the customer. All
licensed products must be stored behind the sales counter, in another area not
freely accessible to customers. or in a case or other storage unit not left
open and accessible to the general public. Any retailer selling licensed
products at the time this chapter is adopted must comply with this section
within 90 days of the effective date of this chapter.
      (4)   Flavored products. No person shall sell or offer for sale any
flavored products.
      (5)   Imitation tobacco products. No person shall sell, offer to sell or
otherwise distribute any imitation tobacco products within the city.
      (6)   Liquid packaging. No person shall sell or offer to sell any liquid,
whether or not the liquid contains nicotine, which is intended for human
consumption and use in an electronic delivery device, in packaging that is not
child-resistant. Upon request by the city, a licensee must provide a copy of
the certificate of compliance or full laboratory testing report for the
packaging used.
   (B)   It is an administrative violation of this chapter for any person 21
years of age or older to purchase or otherwise obtain any licensed product on
behalf of a person under the age of 21. It is also a violation for any person
21 years of age and older to coerce or attempt to coerce a person under the age
of 21 to purchase or attempt to purchase any licensed product.
(Ord. 18.0, passed 12-16-2019) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.04 RESPONSIBILITY.
   All licensees are responsible for the actions of their employees in regard
to the sale, offer to sell and furnishing of licensed products on the licensed
premises. The sale, offer to sell or furnishing of any licensed product by an
employee shall be considered an act of the licensee. Nothing in this section
shall be construed as prohibiting the city from also subjecting the employee to
any civil penalties that the city deems to be appropriate under this chapter,
state or federal law or other applicable law or regulation.
(Ord. 18.0, passed 12-16-2019)
§ 111.05 COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS.
   All licensed premises must be open to inspection by law enforcement or other
authorized city officials during regular business hours. From time to time, but
at least twice per year, the city will conduct compliance checks. In accordance
with state law, the city will conduct at least one compliance check that
involves the participation of a person between the ages of 15 and 17 and at
least one compliance check that involves the participation of a person between
the ages of 18 and 20 to enter the licensed premises to attempt to purchase
licensed products. Prior written consent from a parent or guardian is required
for any person under the age of 18 to participate in a compliance check.
Persons used for the purpose of compliance checks will be supervised by law
enforcement or other designated personnel.
(Ord. 18.0, passed 12-16-2019)
§ 111.06 EXCEPTIONS AND DEFENSES.
   (A)   Religious, spiritual or cultural ceremonies or practices. Nothing in
this chapter prevents the provision of tobacco or tobacco-related devices to
any person as part of an indigenous practice or a lawfully recognized
religious, spiritual or cultural ceremony or practice.
   (B)   Reasonable reliance. It is an affirmative defense to a violation of
this chapter for a person to have reasonably relied on proof of age as
described by state law.
(Ord. 18.0, passed 12-16-2019)
LICENSING; CONDITIONS
§ 111.20 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall sell or offer to sell any licensed product without first
having obtained a license to do so from the city.
(Ord. 18.0, passed 12-16-2019) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.21 APPLICATION.
   An application for a license to sell licensed products must be made on a
form provided by the city. The application must contain the foil name of the
applicant, the applicant’s residential and business addresses and telephone
numbers, the name of the business for which the license is sought and any
additional information the city deems necessary. Upon receipt of a completed
application, the City Clerk will forward the application to the City Council
for action at its next regularly scheduled meeting. If the City Clerk
determines that an application is incomplete, it will be returned to the
applicant with notice of the information necessary to make the application
complete.
(Ord. 18.0, passed 12-16-2019)
§ 111.22 ACTION.
   (A)   The City Council may approve or deny the application for a license, or
it may delay action for a reasonable period of time to complete any
investigation of the application or the applicant deemed necessary.
   (B)   If the City Council approves the application, the City Clerk will
issue the license to the applicant.
   (C)   If the City Council denies the application, notice of the denial will
be given to the applicant along with notice of the applicant’s right to appeal
the decision.
(Ord. 18.0, passed 12-16-2019)
§ 111.23 TERM.
   All licenses issued are valid for one calendar year from the date of issue.
(Ord. 18.0, passed 12-16-2019)
§ 111.24 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   Any license issued may be suspended or revoked following the procedures set
forth in §
111.99 of this chapter.
(Ord. 18.0, passed 12-16-2019)
§ 111.25 TRANSFERS.
   All licenses issued are valid only on the premises for which the license was
issued and only for the person to whom the license was issued. The transfer of
any license to another location or person is prohibited.
(Ord. 18.0, passed 12-16-2019) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.26 MOVEABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS.
   No license will be issued to a moveable place of business. Only fixed-
location businesses are eligible to be licensed.
(Ord. 18.0, passed 12-16-2019)
§ 111.27 DISPLAY.
   All licenses must be posted and displayed at all times in plain view of the
general public on the licensed premises.
(Ord. 18.0, passed 12-16-2019) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.28 RENEWALS.
   The renewal of a license issued under this chapter will be handled in the
same manner as the original application. The request for a renewal must be made
at least 30 days, but no more than 60 days, before the expiration of the
current license.
(Ord. 18.0, passed 12-16-2019)
§ 111.29 ISSUANCE AS PRIVILEGE AND NOT RIGHT.
   The issuance of a license is a privilege and does not entitle the license
holder to an automatic renewal of the license.
(Ord. 18.0, passed 12-16-2019)
§ 111.30 MINIMUM AGE OF CLERK.
   Individuals employed by a licensed retail establishment under this chapter
must be at least 16 years of age to sell licensed products.
(Ord. 18.0, passed 12-16-2019)
§ 111.31 MAXIMUM NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   (A)   The maximum number of licenses issued by the city at any time is
limited to three.
   (B)   When the maximum number of licenses has been issued, the city may
place persons seeking licensure on a waiting list and allow them to apply on a
first-come, first-served basis, as licenses are not renewed or are revoked.
   (C)   A new applicant who has purchased a business location holding a valid
city license will be entitled to first priority; provided, the new applicant
meets all other application requirements in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 18.0, passed 12-16-2019)
§ 111.32 RESTRICTED LOCATIONS; PROXIMITY TO YOUTH-ORIENTED FACILITIES.
   (A)   Proximity to youth-oriented facilities.
      (1)   No license will be granted to any person for a retail establishment
location that is within 1,000 feet of a youth-oriented facility, as measured by
the shortest line from the property line of the space to be occupied by the
proposed licensee to the nearest property line of a youth-oriented facility.
      (2)   This restriction does not apply to an existing license holder who
has been licensed to sell licensed products in that same location for at least
one year before the date this division (A) was enacted into law.
   (B)   Pharmacies ineligible for licensure. No existing license will be
eligible for renewal to any pharmacy, including any retail establishment that
operates or contains an on-site pharmacy, and no pharmacy or any retail
establishment that operates an on-site pharmacy will be granted a new license.
(Ord. 18.0, passed 12-16-2019)
§ 111.33 SAMPLING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Smoking prohibited. Smoking, including smoking for the purpose of the
sampling of licensed products, is prohibited within the indoor area of any
retail establishment licensed under this chapter.
   (B)   Samples prohibited. No person shall distribute samples of any licensed
product free of charge or at a nominal cost.
(Ord. 18.0, passed 12-16-2019) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.34 INSTRUCTIONAL PROGRAM.
   (A)   Licensees must ensure that all employees complete a training program
on the legal requirements related to the sale of licensed products and the
possible consequences of license violations.
   (B)   Any training program must be pre-approved by the city.
   (C)   Licensees must maintain documentation demonstrating their compliance
and must provide this documentation to the city at the time of renewal, or
whenever requested to do so during the license term.
(Ord. 18.0, passed 12-16-2019)
§ 111.35 FEES.
   No license will be issued under this chapter until the appropriate license
fees are paid in full. The fees will be established by the city’s fee schedule
and may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 18.0, passed 12-16-2019)
§ 111.36 LICENSE DENIAL.
   (A)   Grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a license include, but
are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   The applicant is under 21 years of age;
      (2)   The applicant has been convicted within the past five years of any
violation of a federal, state or local law, ordinance provision or other
regulation relating to licensed products;
      (3)   The applicant has had a license to sell licensed products suspended
or revoked within the preceding 12 months of the date of application;
      (4)   The applicant fails to provide any of the information required on
the licensing application or provides false or misleading information; and/or
      (5)   The applicant is prohibited by federal, state or other local law,
ordinance or other regulation from holding a license.
   (B)   Except as may otherwise be provided by law, the existence of any
particular ground for denial does not compel the city to deny the license.
   (C)   If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it will be
revoked upon the discovery that the person was ineligible for the license under
this chapter. The city will provide the license holder with notice of the
revocation, along with information on the right to appeal.
(Ord. 18.0, passed 12-16-2019)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violations.
      (1)   Notice. A person violating this chapter may be issued, either
personally or by mail, a citation from the city that sets forth the alleged
violation and that informs the alleged violator of his, her or their right to a
hearing on the matter and how and where a hearing may be requested, including a
contact address and phone number.
      (2)   Hearings.
         (a)   Upon issuance of a citation, a person accused of violating this
chapter may request in writing a hearing on the matter. Hearing requests must
be made within ten business days of the issuance of the citation and delivered
to the City Clerk or other designated city officer. Failure to properly request
a hearing within ten business days of the issuance of the citation will
terminate the person’s right to a hearing.
         (b)   The City Clerk or other designated city officer will set the
time and place for the hearing. Written notice of the hearing time and place
will be mailed or delivered to the accused violator at least ten business days
prior to the hearing.
      (3)   Hearing Officer. The City Council will designate a Hearing Officer.
The Hearing Officer will be an impartial employee of the city or an impartial
person retained by the city to conduct the hearing.
      (4)   Decision. A decision will be issued by the Hearing Officer within
ten business days of the hearing. If the Hearing Officer determines that a
violation of this chapter did occur, that decision, along with the Hearing
Officer’s reasons for finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed, will
be recorded in writing, a copy of which will be provided to the city and the
accused violator by in-person delivery or mail as soon as practicable. If the
Hearing Officer finds that no violation occurred or finds grounds for not
imposing any penalty, those findings will be recorded and a copy will be
provided to the city and the acquitted accused violator by in-person delivery
or mail as soon as practicable. The decision of the Hearing Officer is final,
subject to an appeal as described in division (A)(6) below.
      (5)   Costs. If the citation is upheld by the Hearing Officer, the city’s
actual expenses in holding the hearing up to a maximum amount as set by City
Council from time to time must be paid by the person requesting the hearing.
      (6)   Appeals. Appeals of any decision made by the Hearing Officer must
be filed in the county’s District Court within ten business days of the date of
the decision.
      (7)   Continued violation. Each violation, and every day in which a
violation occurs or continues, shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Administrative penalties.
      (1)   Licensees. Any licensee cited and found to have violated this
chapter, or whose employee violated this chapter, will be required to complete
retailer education that the city determines to be appropriate for a first
violation and may be subject to an administrative fine as set by City Council
from time to time for failure to complete education; will be charged an amount
as set by City Council from time to time for a second offense at the same
licensed premises within a 24-month period; and an amount as set by City
Council from time to time for a third or subsequent offense at the same
location within a 24-month period. Upon the third violation, the license will
be suspended for a period of not less than 30 consecutive days. Upon a fourth
violation, the license will be revoked.
      (2)   Other individuals. Individuals, other than persons under the age of
21 regulated by division (B)(3) below, who are found to be in violation of this
chapter will be charged an administrative fine as set by City Council from time
to time.
      (3)   Persons under the age of 21. Persons under the age of 21 who
violate this chapter may only be subject to non-criminal, non-monetary civil
penalties such as tobacco-related education classes, diversion programs,
community services or another penalty that the city determines to be
appropriate. The City Council will consult with court personnel, educators,
parents, children and other interested parties to determine an appropriate
penalty for persons under the age of 21 in the city. The penalty may be
established by ordinance and amended from time to time.
      (4)   Statutory penalties. If the administrative penalty authorized to be
imposed by M.S. § 461.12, as it may be amended from time to time, differ from
that established in this section, then the higher penalty will prevail.
   (C)   Misdemeanor prosecution. Nothing in this section prohibits the city
from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any alleged violation of this
chapter by a person 21 years of age or older.
(Ord. 18.0, passed 12-16-2019)
CHAPTER 112: AMUSEMENTS AND LEISURE
Section
   
112.01   Bingo and other gambling
   
112.02   Public dances
 
   
112.99   Penalty
§ 112.01 BINGO AND OTHER GAMBLING.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate and control the
conduct of gambling and bingo.
   (B)   Provisions of state law adopted. The provisions of M.S. Chapter 349,
as it may be amended from time to time, relating to the definition of terms,
licensing and restrictions of gambling and bingo are adopted and made a part of
this section as if set out in full.
   (C)   Definitions.
      (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
         BINGO. A game where each player has a card or board for which a
consideration has been paid containing five horizontal rows of spaces, with
each row except, the center one containing five figures. The central row has
form figures with the word “free” marked in the center. A player wins a game by
completing any combination of five spaces in a row following the announcement
of the numbers to all the players.
         GAMBLING. Includes paddle wheels, tipboards, raffles, pull tab and any
other similar devise authorized by appropriate state law.
      (2)   Any expansion of the above definitions shall be as authorized or
explained by state statutes or applicable court decisions only.
   (D)   License requirement. No person shall directly or indirectly operate a
gambling device or bingo occasion without a license to do so as provided in
this section.
   (E)   Persons eligible for a license. A license shall be issued only to
fraternal, religious and veterans organizations, or any corporation, trust or
association organized for exclusively scientific, literary, charitable,
educational or artistic purposes, or any club which is organized and operated
exclusively for pleasure or recreation. The organization must be non-profit in
nature and have been in existence for at least three years and shall have at
least 30 active members.
   (F)   License fees.
      (1)   Fees. The annual fee for a paddle wheel, for a tipboard, for a
raffle, for a pull-tab and for bingo shall be as set by City Council from time
to time. If all five licenses are issued, the annual fee shall be as set by
City Council from time to time.
      (2)   Application procedure. Application for a license shall be made upon
a form prescribed by the Council. No person shall make a false representation
in an application. The Council shall act upon the application within 180 days
from the date of application, but shall not issue a license until at least 30
days after the date of application.
   (G)   Profits. Profits from the operation of gambling and bingo shall be
used for proper purposes only.
   (H)   Conduct of gambling and bingo.
      (1)   Manager. All operation of gambling devices and bingo shall be under
the supervision of a single manager to be designated by the organization. The
manager shall be responsible for gross receipts and profits from gambling and
bingo and for their operation. The manager shall be responsible for using
profits for a proper purpose.
      (2)   Bond. The manager shall provide a fidelity bond in the sum as set
by City Council from time to time in favor of the organization conditioned on
the faithful performance of his, her or their duties.
      (3)   Qualifications of manager. The manager shall be an active member of
the organization, be of legal age and shall qualify under state law. The
licensee shall state the name of the manager on the license application. The
manager must be present at all times when bingo or gambling, except for raffles
are being operated on the premises involved. If a licensee changes its manager
of gambling or bingo during its license period, it must notify the city in
writing immediately.
   (I)   Compensation. No compensation shall be paid to any person in
connection with the operation of gambling or bingo by a licensed organization.
No person who is not an active member of an organization, or the spouse or
surviving spouse of an active member, may participate in the organization’s
operation of gambling or bingo.
   (J)   Reporting requirements.
      (1)   Gross receipts. Each organization licensed to operate gambling or
bingo shall keep records of its gross receipts, expenses and profits for each
single gathering or occasion at which gambling or bingo is operated. All
deductions from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be
documented with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description
of the purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction and the
recipient. The distribution of profits shall be itemized as to payee, purpose,
amount and date of payment.
      (2)   Separation of funds. Gross receipts from the operation of gambling
or bingo shall be segregated from other revenues of the organization and placed
in a separate account. The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses and
profits from the operation of gambling or bingo shall not be the same person
who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
      (3)   Monthly reports. Each organization licensed to operate gambling or
bingo shall report monthly to its membership, and to the City Clerk, its gross
receipts, expenses and profits from gambling or bingo, and the distribution of
profits. The license shall preserve the records for at least three years.
   (K)   Eligible premises.
      (1)   Gambling or bingo shall be operated by a licensed organization only
upon premises which it owns or leases; except that, tickets for raffles may be
sold off the premises. Leases shall be in writing and shall be for a term of at
least 12 months. No lease shall provide that rental payments be based on a
percentage of receipts.
      (2)   A copy of the lease shall be filed with the City Clerk.
   (L)   Gambling prizes. Total prizes from the operation of paddle wheels,
tipboards and pull-tabs awarded in any single day in which they are operated
shall not exceed an amount as set by City Council from time to time. Total
prizes resulting from any single spin of a paddle wheel or from any single
tipboard or from a single pull-tab shall not exceed an amount as set by City
Council from time to time. Total prizes from the operation of a raffle shall
not exceed an amount as set by City Council from time to time. Total prizes
awarded in any calendar year by any organization shall not exceed an amount as
set by City Council from time to time.
   (M)   Bingo prizes. Prizes for a single bingo game shall not exceed an
amount as set by City Council from time to time, except for a “cover-all” game.
“Cover-all” prizes may not exceed an amount as set by City Council from time to
time; provided that, the total value of the prizes for a bingo occasion shall
not exceed an amount as set by City Council from time to time. The aggregate
value of prizes for a bingo occasion shall not exceed an amount as set by City
Council from time to time; except that, in the case of a bingo occasion during
which a “cover-all” game is played for a maximum prize of an amount as set by
City Council from time to time, the aggregate value of prizes for the bingo
occasion shall not exceed an amount as set by City Council from time to time.
(Ord. passed 5-5-1982) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.02 PUBLIC DANCES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly requires a different
meaning.
      ADMISSION FEE. A fee charged for admission to a public dance; a fee
charged for a ticket, bullion or other indication of payment that includes
among other things admission to a dance; a payment made to a club, corporation,
business or other entity that is made for the primary purpose of gaining entry
to the public dance.
      PERSON. Any individual, business, organization, association, club or any
other entity that conducts a public dance. In the event of an organization,
corporation, club or other entity, the person holding the dance shall be deemed
to be the officers, directors, trustees or agents of the organization that are
conducting the dance.
      PUBLIC DANCE. Any dance where the public may participate by paying an
admission fee.
   (B)   Permit required. No person shall give, hold or conduct a public dance
unless the person conducting the dance shall first have procured a permit to
conduct the public dance from the city.
   (C)   Law officer required. At each such dance, an officer of the law shall
be present at all times during the conducting of the dance. The officer in
attendance shall be designated by the Chief of Police of the city.
   (D)   Issuance of permit. The city will issue a permit to any person wishing
to hold a public dance upon the following terms and conditions.
      (1)   A separate permit must be obtained for each dance. The person
conducting the dance must pay the fee for the permit as the City Council
determines from time to time.
      (2)   The person requesting the permit must pay a fee to the city to
reimburse the city for the cost of employing police officer at the dance.
      (3)   The person conducting the dance shall comply with all requests by
the Chief of Police or the officer in attendance during the conducting of the
dance.
      (4)   The application for permit shall specify addresses of the persons
to whom the permit is to be issued, the date and hours during which the dance
is to be held and the specific location where the dance will be.
      (5)   The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place during the dance.
      (6)   The city reserves the right to refuse to issue a permit to any
person previously convicted of any crime related to the operation of any dance.
   (E)   Alcoholic beverages. At any dance where beer, wine or intoxicating
liquors are served and where people under the age of 21 are allowed to attend,
every person under the age of 21 shall be identified by the person to whom the
dance permit is issued or to an employee or agent designated by the permit
holder before any person under the age of 21 shall have his, her or their hand
stamped with a red mark showing the person going into the dance is under the
age of 21. The persons under the age of 21 shall not consume or attempt to
consume intoxicating or 3.2% malt liquors on the site.
   (F)   Private dances. Dances held by clubs or organizations for their
members or invited guests only are not considered public dances pursuant to
this section. Dances held at a school or church for the benefit of students or
members of the church only and their invited guests shall not be considered
public dances.
(Ord. passed 9-25-1989) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Criminal penalty. Violation of any provision of §
112.01 of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. A person convicted of violating
any provision of §
112.01 of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than an amount as
set by City Council from time to time or imprisonment for a term not to exceed
90 days or both, plus in either case the costs of prosecution.
      (2)   Suspension and revocation. Any license may be suspended or revoked
for any violation of §
112.01 of this chapter or appropriate state statutes. A license shall not be
suspended or revoked until the procedural requirements of division (B)(3) below
have been complied with; except that, when the Council has evidence that
probable cause exists as to an ordinance violation, the city may temporarily
suspend upon service of notice of the hearing provided for in division (B)(3)
below. The temporary suspension shall not extend for more than two weeks.
      (3)   Procedure. A license shall not be revoked under division (B)(2)
above until notice and an opportunity for a hearing have first been given to
the licensee. The notice shall be personally served and shall state the
ordinance provision or state statute reasonably believed to be violated. The
notice shall also state that the licensee may demand a hearing on the matter,
in which case the license will not be revoked until after the hearing is held.
A demand for a hearing by a licensee shall be in writing and delivered to the
City Clerk within ten days after the notice has been served on the licensee. If
the licensee requests a hearing, one shall be held on the matter by the Council
at least one, but not more than four, weeks after the date on which the request
is made. If, as a result of the hearing, the Council finds that an ordinance or
statute violation exists, then the Council may suspend or revoke the license.
   (C)   Any violations of §
112.02 of this chapter by any person, firm, corporation, organization, club or
entity shall be considered a misdemeanor.
(Ord. passed 5-5-1982; Ord. passed 9-25-1989)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   WEAPONS AND HUNTING
CHAPTER 130: WEAPONS AND HUNTING
Section
Firearms
   
130.01   Definition
   
130.02   Prohibited activity
   
130.03   Exceptions
Game Hunting
   
130.15   Prohibited activity
   
130.16   Exceptions
 
   
130.99   Penalty
FIREARMS
§ 130.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the term FIREARM shall mean any weapon
from which is propelled any dart, arrow, missile, projectile or bullet by means
of explosive or gas, or by energy stored in a string or spring, notwithstanding
the fact that the dart, arrow, missile or projectile remains attached to the
weapon by wire.
(Ord. passed 9-22-2014)
§ 130.02 PROHIBITED ACTIVITY.
   No person shall fire, discharge or transport any firearm within the city
limits. A person may transport a firearm if it is in a closed case and not
ready for immediate firing or discharge.
(Ord. passed 9-22-2014) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 EXCEPTIONS.
   This subchapter does not apply to:
   (A)   Law enforcement or military personnel acting within the performance of
their duty;
   (B)   Any person lawfully defending a person or property;
   (C)   The transportation by a person who has obtained a permit to possess or
transport a pistol under the provision of M.S. § 624.714, as it may be amended
from time to time;
   (D)   A person discharging a firearm in an outdoor shooting or archery range
which has been approved for that purpose by the Chief of Police;
   (E)   Except a person lawfully hunting on public or private lands within the
city that have been approved for use of firearms by the Chief of Police;
   (F)   A person whose firearm is using blank ammunition in conjunction with a
sporting event or upon a ceremonial occasion; and/or
   (G)   A person firing or discharging a firearm which propels a single
projectile which is a spherical steel shot of 0.177 caliber or less, commonly
referred to as a “BB gun”.
(Ord. passed 9-22-2014)
GAME HUNTING
§ 130.15 PROHIBITED ACTIVITY.
   No person may use a firearm, bow or other dangerous weapon in hunting game
within the city, except as permitted herein.
(Ord. passed 9-22-2014) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.16 EXCEPTIONS.
   A person may hunt deer using a bow and pointed-tip arrow under all of the
following circumstances:
   (A)   The shooting occurs on property the person owns or on another person’s
property if the shooter has in his or her possession written permission of the
property owner to engage in the activity;
   (B)   The arrow does not travel beyond the boundaries of that property;
   (C)   Unless otherwise specified by written permission of the property
owner, any shooting must occur at least 100 feet from any building and from any
land not owned by that landowner;
   (D)   The shooting does not endanger anyone else;
   (E)   The person has in his or her possession a valid state deer archery
license;
   (F)   The person has completed a bow hunter educational program and an
archery proficiency test, and is able to show proof of this proficiency as
granted and administered by a certified archery instructor;
   (G)   A person archery hunting for deer must make use of a tree stand at
least five feet from ground level unless a person engaged in hunting is
physically unable; and
   (H)   Compliance with all requirements of the deer hunting policy for the
city then in effect.
(Ord. passed 9-22-2014)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Notwithstanding anything in city ordinances to the contrary, a person
who violates any provisions of §§
130.01 through
130.03 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable according to
misdemeanor limits, as established from time to time by the state.
   (C)   Notwithstanding anything in city ordinances to the contrary, a person
who violates any provisions of §§
130.15 and
130.16 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable according to
misdemeanor limits as established from time to time by the state. The minimum
penalty for a person’s first offense under §
130.15 of this chapter is a fine as set by City Council from time to time.
(Ord. 3961, passed 3-15-2010; Ord. passed 9-22-2014)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
      
152.   TREES
      
153.   AIRPORT ZONING
      
154.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
   
150.01   Life Safety Code adopted
 
   
150.99   Penalty
§ 150.01 LIFE SAFETY CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   Adoption of Code. The Life Safety Code, copyright 1985, as prepared by
the National Fire Protection Association, Inc., is hereby adopted by reference
as an official code of the city. All provisions of this Code shall apply to the
buildings in the city that are now in existence or are constructed hereafter.
   (B)   Exceptions to the Code.
      (1)   The City Council may grant temporary exceptions to the requirements
of the Life Safety Code under certain conditions. In order to obtain an
exception to the provisions of this Code, the building owner or occupant must
make a written request to the city for the exception itemizing the relief
requested.
      (2)   Upon receipt of the request, the city shall cause the responsible
city official to investigate the building and exception requested and make a
written report to the City Council. The report shall outline the code
provisions that are involved describing in detail what is required by the Code,
what the existing condition is, what the cost of complying is estimated to be
and the official’s estimate of what consequences there may be for the safety to
occupants or neighbors of the building if the relief or some part thereof is
granted. The person preparing the report may also make a recommendation to the
City Council regarding the request.
      (3)   Before granting any variance to the provisions of the Life Safety
Code, the City Council shall make the following findings:
         (a)   The relief granted will not endanger the life of any person;
         (b)   The variance requested will not violate any law, statute,
ordinance or regulation not contained in the Life Safety Code;
         (c)   The benefits received from the required change are too expensive
to be justified in the building involved at the time requested; or
         (d)   The installation of the required changes will be economically
feasible if done over a period of time.
   (C)   Enforcement and disclosure.
      (1)   The City Fire Marshal or the City Zoning Administrator shall
enforce this section through the proper legal channels. The owner or occupant
of any building shall grant access to the inspector at reasonable times upon
showing of proper identification for the purpose of making inspections
necessary to enforce this section.
      (2)   The inspector shall note any defects on the premises being
inspected in a written report. One copy of the report shall be kept as the city
record and a complete copy of the report shall be given or mailed to the
building owner. Any defects noted shall be cured within a reasonable time or
such time as is determined by the inspector for purposes of this section. For
purposes of this section, a REASONABLE TIME shall not exceed 30 days.
      (3)   The city inspection records shall be public information and any
person may have access to the records during normal business hours.
      (4)   If defects noted are not cured as required by this section, the
city may record a copy of the inspection report in the County Recorder’s
office.
      (5)   Any defects noted on the inspection report shall be disclosed in
writing to any tenant or prospective purchaser of the premises involved. This
disclosure is required only if the defects noted are not cured within the
required time allowed.
   (D)   Public use. A copy of the Life Safety Code of 1985 shall be kept at
the City Clerk’s office at all times and shall be made available for public use
in the City Clerk’s office only.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   (B)   (1)   Any person, corporation, partnership or other organization who
violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of §
150.01 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
      (2)   Each day that the violation is permitted to exist shall constitute
a separate offense.
(Ord. passed - -)
CHAPTER 151: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
Section
   
151.01   Public sidewalks
 
   
151.99   Penalty
§ 151.01 PUBLIC SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   All sidewalks on the sides of streets in the city shall be kept and
maintained in a safe and good condition for use by the public and in a good
state of repair by and at the expense of the owners of the premises abutting on
that side of the street where the sidewalk is located and in front of which
premises the sidewalk is constructed. The owner of the premises shall be
responsible to check the sidewalk to make certain that the sidewalk complies
with this section.
   (B)   (1)   Because they may endanger life, limb and property, the following
conditions in sidewalks are hereby declared to be nuisances:
         (a)   Any crack, fissure, raise, hump, unevenness or condition therein
of the width, height, depth or form (height or depth of three-fourths inch or
more) that pedestrians lawfully using the walk might catch their shoes, feet,
canes, crutches or other proper implements thereon or therein or which might
cause pedestrians using the walk to trip, stumble or fall or which endangers
the use of the walks for travel with wheelchairs, preambulators or similar
conveyances;
         (b)   Sags or depressions therein which can catch or hold water, dirt
or other debris;
         (c)   Accumulations of earth, sod, vegetation or other materials on or
along the edges of the sidewalks which prevent the free drainage of water over
the edges, from the surface of the walk; and
         (d)   All snow accumulations over one inch deep and ice not removed
from public sidewalks within 12 hours after the ice and snow have ceased to be
deposited thereon.
      (2)   Whenever the nuisance exists in the city, the city shall:
         (a)   Whenever the nuisance is brought to the attention of the city,
the City Clerk shall order the owner of the premises along which the sidewalk
is constructed to correct the condition causing the nuisance and to put the
walk in proper and safe condition for use by the public, at his or her own
expense, within the time specified in the order, but not to exceed 30 days;
         (b)   The order shall be in writing and shall briefly describe and
designate the nuisance and shall state that unless the nuisance is abated, the
cause thereof corrected and removed, and the sidewalk put in a safe and proper
condition within the specified time, that the city will cause the same to be
done at the expense of the owner of the premises and will cause the expense
thereof to be assessed against the premises. If the nuisance consists of an
accumulation of snow or ice, the corrective action shall be taken by the city
immediately after the specified time has elapse and the cost of the same shall
be added to the real estate tax rolls as set forth in division (B)(3) below
without any hearing being required prior to removing the snow and ice and
assessing the cost thereof; and
         (c)   The order to repair shall be personally served upon the owner
and if the premises are occupied, then the order shall also be personally
served on the occupant or occupants thereof in the same manner as a summons.
      (3)   In the event the owner or occupant of the premises does not repair
the premises as required in division (B)(2) above, the following procedure
shall be followed.
         (a)   The City Clerk shall notify the City Council who shall then set
a date, time and place to have a hearing concerning the repairs to be made.
         (b)   Prior to the hearing, notice of the same shall be published in
the city newspaper and shall be served upon the occupant or owner of the
premises at least ten days prior to the hearing. The notice shall describe the
defects to be cured, the estimated amount of the costs and expenses and the
date, time and location of the hearing.
         (c)   At the hearing and after hearing all interested parties, the
Council may make the order as is appropriate. In order to find that the repairs
described shall be made, the Council must make the following findings:
            1.   A defect in the sidewalk as described in division (B)(1) above
exists;
            2.   The notice required to be given in division (B)(2) above has,
in fact, been served on the owner or occupant of the premises;
            3.   The owner or occupant of the premises has not made the
required repairs at the time of this hearing; and
            4.   The estimated cost of repairing the same is reasonable and
proper for the repairs to be made.
      (4)   If, after completing the findings above, the Council determines
that the repairs indicated are necessary, it shall order the City Clerk to
cause the same to be completed and to add 10% of the cost of making the
improvements to the bill to reimburse the city for the expenses of clerical,
advertising, service and hearing expenses and shall further order the City
Clerk to certify the cost of the same to the County Auditor. The Auditor shall
extend the same on the tax roles of the county against the premises involved
and the costs and expenses shall be collected and paid to the city by the
Auditor as and for the reimbursement to the city for the costs and expenses
incurred in this matter.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to block or place obstacles on any
public sidewalk, as herein defined, or to order the same, except as may be
necessary to warn of an unsafe condition, to allow for repairs or as authorized
by the City Council or state law.
   (D)   Motorized vehicles, bicycles, skateboards and other wheeled vehicles,
except wheelchairs or similar devices when used for the transportation of
handicapped or ill persons, are prohibited from use of public sidewalks, except
where specifically marked for their use.
(Ord. passed 7-25-1988) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violations of §
151.01(B)(1)(d) and (C) and (D) of this chapter shall be a petty misdemeanor.
(Ord. passed 7-25-1988)
CHAPTER 152: TREES
Section
Trees, Trails and Parks
   
152.01   Authority and purpose
   
152.02   Definitions
   
152.03   Tree Board; city responsibilities
   
152.04   Planting, maintenance and removal
   
152.05   Private hazard trees
   
152.06   Private property owner’s responsibilities
   
152.07   Tree protection
   
152.08   Violations, claims and appeals
Electrical Line Tree Trimming
   
152.20   Guidelines generally
   
152.21   Primary high voltage lines
   
152.22   Secondary low voltage lines
   
152.23   Damage to property
   
152.24   Routine tree maintenance
   
152.25   Qualified technicians
   
152.26   Tree varieties for planting near overhead power lines
Dutch Elm Disease
   
152.40   Policy declaration
   
152.41   Forester; duties
   
152.42   Program
   
152.43   Nuisances declared; abatement
   
152.44   Inspection and investigation
   
152.45   Infected trees and wood; removal
   
152.46   Spraying elm trees
   
152.47   Transporting prohibited
   
152.48   Interference prohibited
 
   
152.99   Penalty
TREES, TRAILS AND PARKS
§ 152.01 AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   This subchapter is enacted under the authority of Chapter I of the
Rushford City Charter and M.S. §§ 412.111 and 412.221, subd. 8, as they may be
amended from time to time.
   (B)   The purpose of this subchapter is twofold: to enhance and protect the
city’s greenscape; and to promote and protect public health, safety and general
welfare. It outlines the role and responsibilities of the city and of private
landowners by providing for the regulation of the planting, maintenance and
removal of trees on public and private property within the city.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2008; Ord. passed 5-13-2013)
§ 152.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   BOULEVARD. Area between curb and the private property line that is publicly
owned.
   CITY. The City of Rushford, Minnesota.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any area or building owned by the city, including, but not
limited to: boulevards; parks; playgrounds; dikes; parkways; streets; sidewalks
and alleys; and public parking lots.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Portion of properly reserved for public use and
accepted for the use by the city to provide circulation and travel to abutting
properties, including, but not limited to: streets; boulevards; alleys;
sidewalks; provisions for public utilities; and cut and fill slopes.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. Any public or private facility or system for producing,
transmitting or distributing communications, electricity, gas, oil products,
water, waste or storm water, which directly or indirectly serves the public or
any part thereof within the corporate limits of the city.
   RUSHFORD FORESTRY STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS. Standards and specifications
needed to carry out work on the bluffs within the city.
   TREE. Any tree, shrub, hedge or woody vegetation.
      (1)   HAZARD TREE. Any public or private tree or part thereof which:
         (a)   Has an infectious or destructive disease, insect problem or
other pestilence which endangers the growth, health, life or well being of
trees in the city, or which threatens to or is capable of causing a spread of a
disease, pestilence or insect infestation;
         (b)   Is dead, dying, broken or decayed;
         (c)   Obstructs street lights, traffic signs or the view of any street
intersection;
         (d)   Obstructs the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles;
         (e)   Is causing the surface of a public street, curb or sidewalk to
be up-heaved or otherwise disturbed;
         (f)   Injures or poses an imminent threat of injury to the sewer
system, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other public
improvement; or
         (g)   Constitutes an imminent danger to the health, safety or well-
being of the general public.
      (2)   LANDMARK TREE. Any tree which meets one or more of the following
criteria: species rarity, old age, historical significance, abnormality or
scenic or aesthetic significance as determined by the Tree Board.
      (3)   LARGE TREE. Any plant material that will normally grow to a height
of over 50 feet.
      (4)   MEDIUM TREE. Any plant material that will normally grow to a height
of more than 30 feet, but not over a height of 50 feet.
      (5)   PRIVATE TREE. All trees growing on private property within the city
limits.
      (6)   PUBLIC TREE. All trees growing on any public property or public
right-of-way owned by the city.
      (7)   SMALL TREE. Any plant material that will normally grow to a height
of 30 feet or less.
   TOPPING. The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches
in diameter within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal
canopy and disfigure the tree. Sometimes referred to as TOP. This is an
undesirable practice, causing shock to the tree, leaving it susceptible to
disease and affecting the overall health by disturbing the crown to root ratio.
No public trees shall be TOPPED.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2008; Ord. passed 5-13-2013)
§ 152.03 TREE BOARD; CITY RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The city will designate, annually, its Administrator or other
qualified city employee to serve as City Forester.
   (B)   The city will allocate resources for the planting and care of public
trees and other vegetation. This includes assigning and managing city staff to
complete necessary tasks. If needed, the city shall appoint or contract with a
licensed arborist to perform the duties imposed by this subchapter. The
arborist will provide proof of liability insurance and workers compensation
insurance.
   (C)   (1)   Board established. There is hereby created and established a
City Tree Board. The Tree Board shall serve in an advisory capacity to the City
Council concerning issues related to the well-being of the urban forest
resources within the municipal boundaries of the city.
      (2)   Board composition. The Mayor shall appoint five persons to serve as
Commissioners of the Tree Board on approval by the City Council. One member
shall be also serving on the City Council. The City Forester will be an ex
officio member of the Tree Board. The remaining Commissioners shall be selected
at large from within the City Commissioners shall serve without compensation.
      (3)   Board officers. The Board shall choose its own officers and keep
minutes of its proceedings. Commissioners from the City Council shall not hold
any office of the Board. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of any business.
      (4)   Term of office. The term of the Tree Board shall be three years. In
the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his or her
successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term. Board
members may not serve more than two consecutive terms.
      (5)   Board responsibilities. The affairs of the Board shall include, but
not limited to, promoting well-managed growth and development of the urban
forest within the city. Duties shall be to:
         (a)   Serve as an advocate of the city’s urban forest in its work with
the City Forester to achieve the purposes set forth herein. It will meet
monthly, or otherwise as needed;
         (b)   Recommend the adoption and alteration of all rules, regulations
and ordinances which it shall deem in the public interest to enhance and
beautify the urban forest as well as to carry out the purposes of this
subchapter. For example:
            1.   Establish and enforce standards and specifications needed to
carry out tree care work in the city;
            2.   Develop and maintain a list of both desirable and unsuitable
trees for planting along streets in three size classes: small; medium; and
large; and
            3.   Maintain a list of licensed arborists for any person wanting
to cut, trim, prune, remove, spray or otherwise treat any public tree.
         (c)   Encourage improvement of the urban forest through:
            1.   Policy development, such as:
               a.   The review and approval of capital projects where trees or
other vegetation will be planted or removed on public property; and
               b.   To identify, publicize and preserve landmark trees on both
public and private property.
            2.   Planning through an annual work plan and budget for Council
review and approval. The work plan will:
               a.   Encourage landscaping, planting and maintenance of trees
and vegetation on private property by providing information on the value of
landscaping and on the proper planting and care of trees and other vegetation;
               b.   Promote appreciation of trees and the urban forest for
example, through annual Arbor Day observances and other activities in
conjunction with the school district and community organizations; and
               c.   Assist City departments to enhance the urban forest in the
city and recommend obtaining professional assistance when needed.
         (d)   Hear appeals and act as a review board for matters pertaining to
this subchapter; and
         (e)   The Board shall develop and review plans and advise the Council
on both immediate and long-range planning on the acquisition and development of
parks and recreational facilities which may include advising the Council on
natural resource, wildlife management and natural preservation issues. The
Board shall also make and furnish studies, reports and recommendations as the
Council may request.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2008; Ord. passed 5-13-2013)
§ 152.04 PLANTING, MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL.
   (A)   Permits required.
      (1)   No person may plant, remove, alter, destroy, cut or disturb any
public tree within the city without permission of the City Forester. In the
case of a requested planting, a permit application shall be submitted and the
City Forester shall consider whether it is an appropriate species for the
proposed location, taking into account appearance, care and maintenance
requirements, spacing, nearby utilities and distance from curbs, sidewalks,
corners, fire hydrants or driveways.
      (2)   Permits shall not be required for work performed by city employees.
   (B)   Tree planting specifications.
      (1)   Tree species. The species should be selected from the list of
“Recommended Trees for SE Minnesota”, as prepared by the University of
Minnesota Extension Service Office.
      (2)   Spacing. The spacing of public trees will be in accordance with the
size classes listed in this subchapter. No tree may be planted closer together
than the following: small trees, 15 feet; medium trees, 30 feet; and large
trees, 40 feet.
      (3)   Utilities. No public trees, other than those species listed herein
as small trees, may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead
transmission or primary utility wire, or over or within five lateral feet of
any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility.
      (4)   Distance from curb and sidewalk. The distance trees may be planted
from curbs or curb lines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the tree
species, size and classes listed herein. No trees may be planted closer to any
curb or sidewalk than three feet.
      (5)   Distance from corners, fire hydrants and driveways. No public tree
shall be planted closer than 30 feet to any street corner, measured from the
point of the nearest intersecting curbs or curb lines. No public tree shall be
planted closer than ten feet to any fire hydrant, nor five feet from any
driveway or walkway.
   (C)   Tree maintenance. The city shall have the right, but not the
obligation to plant, prune, maintain and remove public trees as may be
necessary to ensure the public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry
and beauty of the public property.
   (D)   Prevention of visual obstructions. Every public or private tree
overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall be trimmed so that
the branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the
view of any street intersection or street sign and so that there shall be a
clear space of at least 12 feet above the street or eight feet above the
sidewalk.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2008; Ord. passed 5-13-2013)
§ 152.05 PRIVATE HAZARD TREES.
   (A)   Control of private hazard trees. The city maintains the right to take
action on private trees that meet the definition of “hazard trees” to protect
the public. Every effort would be made to cooperate with the citizen before
action was taken.
   (B)   Required process for orders relating to hazard trees.
      (1)   All orders to remove, treat or trim trees or to eradicate or
otherwise control the hazardous condition given pursuant to this section shall
be in writing and authorized by the City Forester. Orders shall be served in
person or by first class mail upon the owner of the property where the trees
are located or, in the case of a public tree, the owner of the property
adjacent to the public right-of-way where the tree is located. The orders shall
afford the owner of the property not less than 20 days from the date of the
mailing of the notice to comply with the order. The order shall also specify
the proper share of the property owner’s financial responsibility for the cost
of eliminating the hazardous condition.
      (2)   If the required action is not taken by the property owner within
the specified time, the City Forester may cause the tree concerned to be
trimmed, removed or treated or the hazardous condition to be eradicated or
otherwise controlled. The costs of the actions shall be apportioned as provided
in §
152.06 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2008; Ord. passed 5-13-2013)
§ 152.06 PRIVATE PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Protection and maintenance of public trees in boulevard. Any owner of
private property abutting a boulevard shall have the following responsibilities
for public trees located in the boulevard adjacent to the owner’s property:
      (1)   Periodic watering and fertilization of trees, located in the
boulevard, when necessary to maintain good health and vigor; and
      (2)   Protection of trees against damage caused by lawn mowers, weed
trimmers, snow blowers and similar equipment.
   (B)   Apportionment of costs relating to hazard trees.
      (1)   Public trees. In the event that the City Forester determines that a
tree located on the boulevard, as defined in §
152.02 of this chapter, is a hazard, the tree treatment, trimming or removal
will be paid for with the city paying 100% of the cost of the treatment,
trimming or removal. In the event the City Forester determines that a public
tree not located on a “boulevard”, as defined herein, is a hazard, the city
will pay 100% of the cost of treatment, trimming or removal to eliminate the
hazardous condition. The cost involved will include stump removal if determined
necessary by the city.
      (2)   Private trees.
         (a)   In the event the City Forester determines that a private tree is
a hazard to city-owned utilities, the city will assume responsibility for the
cost of removal, treatment, trimming or otherwise eradicating or controlling
the hazardous condition.
         (b)   In the event the City Forester or an approved contractor working
on behalf of the Electric Commission, determines that a private tree is a
hazard to city-owned electric utilities, the disposition of the tree(s) will be
referred to the Electric Utility Commission’s Policy and Guideline for Tree
Trimming/Removal to determine proper procedures for maintaining minimum contact
clearance as well as to determine the property owner’s responsibility, if any.
         (c)   In cases not involving any city owned utility, where the City
Forester has determined that a private tree is a hazard, the owner will be 100%
responsible for removal, treatment, trimming or otherwise eradicating or
controlling the hazardous private tree.
      (3)   Special assessments. If a private hazard tree is not removed or
treated as ordered by the owner of the tree, or if the owner does not
voluntarily pay to the city the cost of removal or treatment by the city, all
costs incurred by the city for trimming, tree removal, treatment or eradicating
or controlling the hazardous condition may be recovered by the city by special
assessment upon the property owner.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2008; Ord. passed 5-13-2013)
§ 152.07 TREE PROTECTION.
   (A)   Abuse or mutilation of public trees. No person shall damage,
transplant, top, remove or mutilate any public tree. Damage may include but is
not limited to the following: posting signs with nails, staples, screws or
other devices; hanging wires of any kind; vehicle damage; weed whip; lawn mower
damage; and poison or toxin applications.
   (B)   Protection of public trees near construction activities. Any public
tree in the immediate vicinity of any excavation, demolition or construction
site of any building, structure, street or utilities work which has potential
for injury, shall be protected from injury by the person responsible for
carrying out the construction activities.
   (C)   Topping. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or city department
to top any public tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or
certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning
practices are impractical may be exempted from this subchapter at the
determination of the City Forester.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2008; Ord. passed 5-13-2013) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.08 VIOLATIONS, CLAIMS AND APPEALS.
   (A)   Violations. Any person who violates any provision of this subchapter
or who fails to comply with any notice issued pursuant to provisions of this
subchapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. If, as the result of the violation
of any provision of this subchapter, the injury, mutilation or death of a
public tree is caused, the cost of repair or replacement of the tree may be
ordered to be borne by the party in violation. The replacement value of trees
shall be determined in accordance with the latest revision of the International
Society of Arboriculture/Council of Landscape Appraiser’s system.
   (B)   Assessment of claim. In the event that a hazardous condition is not
removed by the date specified in the notice, the City Forester is authorized to
cause the removal of the hazardous condition. The reasonable cost of the
removal shall be filed as a lien against the property on which the hazardous
tree was located.
   (C)   Appeals. Any person who disagrees with any decision of the Forester
may appeal the decision to the Tree Board. The procedure to be followed shall
be as follows.
      (1)   A written notice stating the act of the Forester that is objected
to shall be filed with the Tree Board. The specific section of this subchapter,
if any, that is in question shall be specified. If other standards or
regulations are objected to, such shall be specified in the notice.
      (2)   The Tree Board shall set a date, not later than 30 days after
receipt of the objection to hold a hearing on the objection. Notice of the
hearing shall be sent by first class mail to the objector and published once in
the official city paper.
      (3)   At the hearing, the objector shall set forth their reasons for
objecting and the Forester shall respond. Each of the objector and the Forester
may present the evidence and witnesses as they deem relevant to the issues
involved.
      (4)   The Chair of the Tree Board shall conduct the hearing. A written
decision of the Board containing findings of fact and grounds for the decision
shall be sent to the objector and the Forester within 15 days after the hearing
is completed.
      (5)   If either the objector or the Forester is not satisfied with the
decision of the Tree Board, they may appeal to the City Council who shall
review the matter at the next regular Council meeting after receiving the
notice of appeal. An appeal of the Tree Board decision must be made in writing
within 15 days after the decision has been sent to the parties. A copy of the
appeal must be served on or mailed to the other parties to this appeal. The
Council shall make a decision containing findings of fact and grounds for the
decision within 30 days after the hearing on the appeal has been completed. A
copy of the Council decision shall be mailed to or served on the parties as
soon as it has been made.
      (6)   The decision of the City Council may be appealed to the District
Court of the county. A notice of the appeal must be served on the parties to
this matter within 30 days after the date of the City Council decision has been
mailed to or served on the parties.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2008; Ord. passed 5-13-2013)
ELECTRICAL LINE TREE TRIMMING
§ 152.20 GUIDELINES GENERALLY.
   (A)   In accordance with the mission of the city’s Electrical Utility
Commission to maintain a high quality, safe and reliable electrical
distribution system, the following policy guidelines are established for proper
tree trimming and electrical line maintenance.
   (B)   Any tree that has grown into power lines demands immediate attention.
The city will, arrange for a qualified technician to prune or remove the tree,
eliminating any electrical hazard.
   (C)   Under no circumstances should home owners attempt to prune trees close
to power lines. Trees should never be sheared or topped. Acceptable tree
trimming techniques include the “V-shaped” and “side-trim” methods. The “V-
shaped” method is used on trees growing directly beneath power lines. Entire
branches are removed from the center of the tree while side branches are
allowed to grow up and away from the power lines.
   (D)   Side-trim technique is used where trees are growing alongside power
lines. Only these branches interfering with the lines are removed. Tipping,
removing the ends of side branches, will cause excessive sprouting and may make
it necessary for tree trimming crews to revisit the offending tree frequently.
   (E)   Branches are properly removed at their point of origin or back to a
side branch of sufficient size to assume dominance.
   (F)   Badly deformed trees should be removed. Trees that are very old,
structurally weak or require frequent trimming should be removed.
   (G)   (1)   Dead trees that are a hazard to the primary high voltage lines
will be removed by a qualified technician.
      (2)   Dead or dangerous vegetation that threatens the primary line will
be removed. All vines will be cut and treated on poles and guide wires.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.21 PRIMARY HIGH VOLTAGE LINES.
   (A)   Primary high voltage lines will have a minimum clear-cut area under
the line of eight feet (four feet on either side).
   (B)   The exception being where an established privacy or boundary hedge is
present. This will only be allowed when it is not a threat to reliability. If
it becomes a threat, the city has the right to trim or cut what is needed to
restore our reliability. Shrubs shall be permitted outside the eight-foot
boundary. Small trees under 15 feet may be planted 15 feet from the clear cut
zone. Medium trees up to 40 feet may be planted 35 feet from the clear cut zone
and large trees over 40 feet may be planted 45 feet from the clear cut zone.
   (C)   Trees which encroach into the contact clearance area will be trimmed
so that there is at least 12 feet of clearance on either side of the closest
energized phase wire.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f96a454829628dad3923165be401283a1782260/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1310.jpg]
 
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.22 SECONDARY LOW VOLTAGE LINES.
   Where possible, a minimum of five-foot clearance on open secondaries and
three-foot clearance on triplex will be observed on all sides of the suspended
secondary low voltage line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f96a454829628dad3923165be401283a1782260/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1312.jpg]
 
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.23 DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.
   If the property owner opposes the trimming clearance of the city’s electric
utility system and the tree(s) in question are not trimmed to the minimum
contact clearance specifications, the property owner will be responsible for
any and all damage to his or her property as well as to any damage, to the
city’s electric utility system.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.24 ROUTINE TREE MAINTENANCE.
   Routine tree maintenance will be conducted on a five-year recurring cycle,
or on a case-by-case basis as necessary. The routine, recurring maintenance
will include at least, one of the city’s utility circuits per year. The
decision as to which circuit is scheduled for routine maintenance will be at
the discretion of the city’s Electric Utility Commission and as approved by the
City Council. The city will pay the entire cost associated with the maintenance
of the primary high voltage lines.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.25 QUALIFIED TECHNICIANS.
   Insured contractor with the appropriate experience and training to trim
around or remove trees from power lines. The contractor must register
references, qualifications and insurance certificate at City Hall.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.26 TREE VARIETIES FOR PLANTING NEAR OVERHEAD POWER LINES.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f96a454829628dad3923165be401283a1782260/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1316.png]
 
(Ord. passed - -)
DUTCH ELM DISEASE
§ 152.40 POLICY DECLARATION.
   The City Council has determined that the health of the elm trees within the
city limits is threatened by a fatal disease known as “Dutch elm disease”. It
has further determined that the loss of elm trees growing upon public and
private property would substantially depreciate the value of property within
the city and impair the safety, good order, general welfare and convenience of
the public. It is declared to be the intention of the Council to attempt to
control and prevent the spread of this disease and this subchapter is enacted
for that purpose.
(Ord. passed 6-17-1974)
§ 152.41 FORESTER; DUTIES.
   (A)   Position created. The position of Forester hereby is created to
accomplish the aims of this subchapter and such other jobs as may from time to
time be ordered by the Council.
   (B)   Duties of Forester. It is the duty of the Forester to coordinate,
under the direction and control of the Council, all activities of the
municipality relating to the control and prevention of Dutch elm disease. The
Forester shall recommend to the Council the details of a program for the
control of Dutch elm disease and perform the duties incident to such a program
adopted by the Council.
(Ord. passed 6-17-1974)
§ 152.42 PROGRAM.
   It is the intention of the Council to conduct a program of plant pest
control pursuant to the authority granted by state law, as it may be amended
from time to time. This program is directed specifically at the control and
elimination of Dutch elm disease fungus and elm bark beetles and is undertaken
at the recommendation of the Commissioner of Agriculture. The City Forester
shall act as coordinator between the Commissioner of Agriculture and the
Council in the conduct of this program.
(Ord. passed 6-17-1974)
§ 152.43 NUISANCES DECLARED; ABATEMENT.
   (A)   (1)   The following things are public nuisances whenever they may be
found within the city:
         (a)   Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected to any
degree with the Dutch elm disease fungus, Ceratocystis Ulmi (Buisman) Moreau or
which harbors any of the elm bark beetles Scolytus Multistriatus (Eichh.) or
Hylungopinus Rufipes (Marsh); and
         (b)   Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including legs, branches,
stumps, firewood or other elm material from which the bark has not been removed
and burned or sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle insecticide.
      (2)   It is unlawful of any person to permit any public nuisance, as
defined in division (A) above, to remain on any premises owned or controlled by
him or her within the city. The nuisances may be abated in the manner
prescribed by this subchapter.
   (B)   In abating the nuisances defined in division (A) above, the Forester
shall cause the infected tree or wood to be sprayed, removed, destroyed or
otherwise effectively treated so as to destroy and prevent as fully as possible
the spread of Dutch elm disease fungus and elm bark beetles. The abatement
procedures shall be carried out in accordance with current technical and expert
opinions and plans as may be designated by the Commissioner of Agriculture.
(Ord. passed 6-17-1974) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.44 INSPECTION AND INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Annual inspection. The forester shall inspect all premises and places
within the city as often as practicable to determine whether any condition
described in §
152.43(A) of this chapter exists thereon. The Forester shall investigate all
reported incidents infestation by Dutch elm fungus or elm bark beetles.
   (B)   Entry on private premises. The Forester or the Forester’s duly
authorized agents, may enter upon private premises at any reasonable time for
the purpose of carrying out any of the duties assigned him or her under this
subchapter.
   (C)   Diagnosis.
      (1)   The Forester shall, upon finding conditions indicating Dutch elm
infestation, immediately send appropriate specimens or samples to the
Commissioner of Agriculture for analysis or take such other steps for diagnosis
as may be recommended by the Commissioner.
      (2)   Except as provided in §
152.45 of this chapter, no action to remove infected trees or wood shall be
taken until positive diagnosis of the disease has been made.
      (3)   After the determination has been made, a landowner may remove his
or her own trees under the supervision of the Forester.
(Ord. passed 6-17-1974)
§ 152.45 INFECTED TREES AND WOOD; REMOVAL.
   (A)   Whenever the Forester finds with reasonable certainty that the
infestation, defined in §
152.43 of this chapter, exists in any tree or wood in any public or private
place in the city, the Forester shall proceed as follows:
      (1)   Notify the landowner if the tree should be located upon private
land, the notice to be in writing;
      (2)   (a)   If the Forester finds that the danger of infestation of other
elm trees is not imminent because of elm dormancy, he or she shall make a
written report of his or her finding to the Council and the Council shall
proceed by:
            1.   Abating the nuisance as a public improvement under M.S.
Chapter 429, as it may be amended from time to time; or
            2.   Proceed as provided in division (B) below.
         (b)   These steps are to be taken only if the landowner does not agree
to remove the tree at his or her own expense.
      (3)   If the Forester finds that danger of infestation of other elm trees
is imminent, the Forester shall notify the abutting property owner by certified
mail that the nuisance will be abated within a specified time, not less than
five days from the date of mailing of the notice. The Forester shall
immediately report the action to the Council, and after the expiration of the
time limited by the notice the Forester may abate the nuisance forthwith.
   (B)   Upon receipt of the Forester’s report required by division (A)(2)
above, the Council shall by resolution order a hearing on the nuisance. Before
any action is taken, the Council shall publish notice of its intention to have
a hearing considering taking action to abate the nuisance. This notice shall be
mailed to affected property owners and published once no less than seven days
prior to the meeting. The notice shall state the time and place of the meeting,
the streets affected, action proposed, the estimated cost of the abatement and
the proposed bases of assessment, if any, of costs. At the hearing or
adjournment thereof, the Council shall hear property owners with reference to
the scope and desirability of the proposed project. The Council shall
thereafter adopt a resolution either ordering the nuisance abated, setting
forth the method of paying for the abating, the method of removing the nuisance
and such other matters as the Council deems advisable or adopt a resolution
declaring the danger noted by the Forester to not be a nuisance.
   (C)   The Forester shall keep a record of the costs of abatements done under
this section and shall report monthly to the City Clerk all work done for which
assessments are to be made stating and certifying the description of the land,
lots or parcels involved and the amount chargeable to each.
   (D)   On or before September 1 of each year, the Clerk shall list the total
unpaid charges for each abatement against each separate lot or parcel to which
they are attributable under this subchapter. The Council may then spread the
charges or any portion thereof against the property involved as a special
assessment under M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, and
other pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor and collection
the following year along with current taxes.
(Ord. passed 6-17-1974)
§ 152.46 SPRAYING ELM TREES.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever the Forester determines that any elm tree or elm wood
within the city is infected with Dutch elm fungus, he or she may spray all
nearby high value elm trees, with an effective elm bark beetle destroying
concentrate.
      (2)   Spraying activities authorized by this section shall be conducted
in accordance with technical and expert opinions and plans of the Commissioner
of Agriculture and under the supervision of the Commissioner and his or her
agents whenever possible.
   (B)   The notice provisions of §
152.45 of this chapter apply to spraying operations conducted under this
section.
(Ord. passed 6-17-1974)
§ 152.47 TRANSPORTING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to transport within the city any bark-
bearing elm wood without having obtained the permission of the Forester.
   (B)   The Forester shall grant the permission only when the purposes of this
subchapter will be served thereby and the Forester shall supervise the
transportation.
(Ord. passed 6-17-1974) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.48 INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
forester or his or her agents while they are engaged in the performance of
duties imposed by this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 6-17-1974) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates §§
152.47 and/or
152.48 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine
as set by City Council from time to time or imprisonment for 90 days.
(Ord. passed 6-17-1974)
CHAPTER 153: AIRPORT ZONING
Section
   
153.01   Purpose and authority
   
153.02   Short title
   
153.03   Definitions
   
153.04   Airspace obstruction zoning
   
153.05   Land use safety zoning
   
153.06   Non-conforming uses
   
153.07   Permits
   
153.08   Variances
   
153.09   Hazard marking and lighting
   
153.10   Administration; appeals
   
153.11   Conflicts
   
153.12   Affected territory
 
   
153.99   Penalty
§ 153.01 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.
   The Rushford Fillmore County Joint Airport Zoning Board, created and
established by joint action of the Common Council of the City of Rushford and
the Board of County Commissioners of Fillmore County, pursuant to the
provisions and authority of M.S. § 360.063, as it may be amended from time to
time, hereby finds and declares that:
   (A)   An airport hazard endangers the lives and property of users of the
Rushford Municipal Airport, and property or occupants of land in its vicinity,
and also if of the obstructive type, in effect reduces the size of the area
available for the landing, takeoff and maneuvering if aircraft, thus tending to
destroy or impair the utility of the Rushford Municipal Airport and the public
investment therein;
   (B)   The creation or establishment of an airport hazard may be a public
nuisance or an injury to the region served by the Rushford Municipal Airport;
   (C)   For the protection of the public health, safety, order, convenience
prosperity and general welfare, and for the promotion of the most appropriate
use of land, it is necessary to prevent the creation or establishment of
airport hazards;
   (D)   The prevention of these airport hazards should be accomplished, to the
extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police power without
compensation; and
   (E)   The prevention of the creation or establishment of airport hazards and
the elimination, removal, alteration, mitigation or marking and lighting of
existing airport hazards are public purposes for which political subdivisions
may raise and expend public funds.
(Ord. passed 10-20-1976)
§ 153.02 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as “Rushford Airport Zoning Ordinance”. Those
sections of land affected by this chapter are indicated in §
153.12 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 10-20-1976)
§ 153.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   AIRPORT. The Rushford Municipal Airport located at Rural Route, Rushford,
Minnesota.
   AIRPORT HAZARD. Any structure or tree or use of land which obstructs the
airspace required for, or is otherwise hazardous to, the flight of aircraft in
landing or taking off at the airport; and any use of land which is hazardous to
persons or property because of its proximity to the airport.
   DWELLING. Any building or portion thereof designed or used as a residence or
sleeping place of one or more persons.
   HEIGHT. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set
forth in this chapter and shown on the Zoning Map, the datum shall be mean sea
level elevation unless otherwise specified.
   LANDING AREA. The area of the airport used for the landing, taking off or
taxiing of aircraft.
   NON-CONFORMING USE. Any pre-existing structure, tree, natural growth or use
of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or an
amendment hereto.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association,
joint stock association, or body politic, and includes a trustee, receiver,
assignee, administrator, executor, guardian or other representative.
   PLANNED. As used in this chapter refers only to those proposed future
airport developments that are so indicated on a planning document having the
approval of the Federal Aviation Administration, the Department of Aeronautics
and the city.
   PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY. A runway having an existing or planned
straight-in instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities
with only horizontal guidance, and for which no precision approach facilities
are planned or indicated on an approved planning document.
   RUNWAY. Any existing or planned paved surface or turf covered area of the
airport which is specifically designated and used or planned to be used for the
landing and/or taking off of aircraft.
   SLOPE. An incline from the horizontal expressed in an arithmetic ratio of
horizontal magnitude to vertical magnitude.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f96a454829628dad3923165be401283a1782260/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1318.png]
 
   STRUCTURE. An object constructed or installed by humans, including, but with
limitations, buildings, towers, smokestacks and overhead transmission lines.
   TREE. Any object of natural growth.
   WATER SURFACES. The same meaning as land for the establishment of protected
zones.
   VISUAL RUNWAY. A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using
visual approach procedures, with no straight-in instrument approach procedure
and no instrument designation indicated on an approved planning document.
(Ord. passed 10-20-1976)
§ 153.04 AIRSPACE OBSTRUCTION ZONING.
   (A)   Airspace zones. In order to carry out the purpose of this chapter, as
set forth above, the following airspace zones are hereby established: Primary
Zone; Horizontal Zone; Conical Zone; Approach Zone; Precision Instrument
Approach Zone; and Transitional Zone; and whose locations and dimensions are as
follows:
      (1)   Primary Zone. All that land which lies directly under an imaginary
primary surface longitudinally centered on a runway and extending 200 feet
beyond each end of the runway. The elevation of any point on the primary
surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway
centerline. The width of the primary surface is 500 feet;
      (2)   Horizontal Zone. All that land which lies directly under an
imaginary horizontal surface 100 feet above the established airport elevation,
or a height of 1,312.3 feet above mean sea level, the perimeter of which is
constructed by swinging arcs of specified radii from the center of each end of
the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines
tangent to those arcs. The radius of each arc is 6,000 feet;
      (3)   Conical Zone. All that land which lies directly under an imaginary
conical surface extending upward and outward from the periphery of the
horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to one (20:1) for a horizontal distance of
4,000 feet as measured radially outward from the periphery of the horizontal
surface;
      (4)   Approach Zone. All that land which lies directly under an imaginary
approach surface longitudinally centered on the extended centerline at each end
of a runway. The inner edge of the approach surface is at the same width and
elevation as, and coincides with, the end of the primary surface. The approach
surface inclines upward and outward at a slope of 40 to one (40:1) for all
existing or planned visual runways having specifically prepared hard surface pr
planned hard surfaces. The approach surface expands uniformly to a distance of
2,500 feet for all visual runways that have a specially prepared hard surface
or planned hard surface to a distance of 10,000 feet; and
      (5)   Transitional Zone. All that land which lies directly under an
imaginary surface extending upward and outward at right angles to the runway,
centerline and centerline extended at a slope of 7 to 1 (7:1) from the sides of
the primary surfaces and from the sides of the approach surfaces until they
intersect the horizontal surface or the conical surface. Transitional surfaces
for those portions of the precision instrument approach surface which project
through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of
5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the precision instrument
approach surface and at right angles to the extended precision instrument
runway centerline.
   (B)   Height restrictions.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, and except as
necessary and incidental to airport operations, no structure or tree shall be
constructed, altered, maintained or allowed to grow in any airspace zone
created in division (A) above so as to project above any of the imaginary
airspace surfaces described in division (A) above.
      (2)   When an area is covered by more than one height limitation, the
more restrictive limitations shall prevail.
(Ord. passed 10-20-1976)
§ 153.05 LAND USE SAFETY ZONING.
   (A)   Safety zone boundaries. In order to carry out the purpose of this
chapter, there are hereby created and established the following safety zone
boundaries, which are shown on Page 3 of the Zoning Map:
      (1)   Safety Zone A. All that land in the approach zones of a runway
which is located within a horizontal distance of 3,000 feet from each end of
the primary zone;
      (2)   Safety Zone B. All that land in the approach zones of a runway
which is located within a horizontal distance of 4,500 feet from each end of
the primary zone and is not included in Zone A; and
      (3)   Safety Zone C. All that land which is enclosed within the perimeter
of the horizontal zone and which is not included in Zone A or Zone B.
   (B)   Use restrictions.
      (1)   General. Subject at all times to the height restrictions set forth
in §
153.04(B) of this chapter, no use shall be made of any land in any of the
safety zones defined in division (A) above, which creates and causes
interference with the operations of radio or electronic facilities on the
airport or with radio or electronic communications between the airport and
aircraft, makes it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights
and other lights, results in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport,
impairs visibility in the vicinity of the airport, or otherwise endangers the
landing, taking off or maneuvering of aircraft.
      (2)   Zone A.
         (a)   Subject at all times to the height restrictions set forth in §
153.04(B) of this chapter and to the general restrictions contained in division
(B)(1) above, areas designated as Zone A shall contain no buildings, overhead
transmission lines or temporary structures and shall be restricted to those
uses which will not create, attract or bring together an assembly of persons
thereon.
         (b)   Permitted uses may include, but are not limited to, such uses as
agriculture (seasonal crops), horticulture, animal husbandry, raising of
livestock, wildlife habitat, light outdoor recreation (non-spectator),
cemeteries and auto parking.
      (3)   Zone B. Subject at all times to the height restrictions set forth
in §
153.04(B) of this chapter, and to the general restrictions contained in
division (B)(1) above areas designated as Zone B shall be used for the
following purposes only:
         (a)   For agricultural and residential purposes; provided, there shall
not be more than one single-family dwelling per five acre tract of land;
         (b)   Any commercial or industrial use which meets the following
minimum standards.
            1.   Each single commercial or industrial use shall not create,
attract or bring together a site population that would exceed 15 times that of
the site acreage.
            2.   Each single commercial or industrial site shall be of a size
not less than ten acres.
            3.   Each single commercial or industrial site shall contain no
dwellings and shall contain no more than one building per three acre tract of
land.
            4.   The maximum ground area to be covered by a single commercial
or industrial building shall not exceed the following minimum ratios with
respect to the building site area:
 
 
                                Ratio of Site  First Floor    Maximum Site
At Least (Acres) But Less Than  Area to First  Building Area  Population (15
                 (Acres)        Floor Building (sq. ft.)      Persons/A)
                                Areas
10                              6:1            72,500         150
20                              6:1
20 and up                       4:1            218,000        . 300
 
         (c)   The following uses are specifically prohibited in Zone B:
churches; hospitals; schools; theaters; stadiums; hotels and motels; trailer
courts; campgrounds; and other places of public or semi- public assembly.
      (4)   Zone C. Zone C is subject only to the height restrictions set forth
in §
153.04(B) of this chapter and to the general restrictions contained in division
(B)(1) above.
(Ord. passed 10-20-1976)
§ 153.06 NON-CONFORMING USES.
   (A)   The regulations prescribed by this chapter shall not be construed to
require the removal, lowering or other changes or alterations of any structure
or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of this
chapter, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any non-conforming use.
   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the construction,
alteration or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of
which was begun prior to the effective date of this chapter, and is diligently
prosecuted and completed within two years thereof.
(Ord. passed 10-20-1976)
§ 153.07 PERMITS.
   (A)   Future uses. Except as specifically provided in divisions (A)(1) and
(A)(2) below, no material change shall be made in the use of land and no
structure or tree shall be erected, altered, planted or otherwise established
in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for
and granted by the Zoning Administrator, hereinafter provided for. Each
application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is
desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to conform to the
regulations herein prescribed. If the determination is in the affirmative, the
permit shall be granted.
      (1)   However, a permit for a tree or structure of less than 75 feet of
vertical height above the ground shall not be required in the horizontal and
conical zones or in any approach and transitional zones beyond a horizontal
distance of 4,200 feet from each end of the runway except when the tree or
structure, because of terrain, land contour or topographic features, would
extend above the height limit prescribed for the respective zone.
      (2)   Nothing contained in this foregoing exception shall be construed as
permitted or intending to permit any construction, alteration or growth of any
structure or tree in excess of any of the height limitations established by
this chapter as set forth in §
153.03 of this chapter.
   (B)   Existing uses. Before any existing use or structure may be replaced,
substantially altered or repaired or rebuilt within any zone established herein
a permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an
airport hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of this
chapter or any amendments thereto, or than it is when the application for a
permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for such a permit shall
be granted.
   (C)   Non-conforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the Zoning
Administrator determines that a non-conforming structure or tree has been
abandoned or more than 80% torn down, physically deteriorated or decayed, no
permit shall be granted that would allow the structure or tree to exceed the
applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations.
Whether application made by a permit under this division (C) or not, the Zoning
Administrator may order the owner of the abandoned or partially destroyed non-
conforming structure, at his or her own, expense, to lower, remove, reconstruct
or equip the same in the manner necessary to conform to the provisions of this
chapter. In the event the owner of the non-conforming structure shall neglect
or refuse to comply with the order for ten days after receipt of written notice
of the order, the Zoning Administrator may, by appropriate legal action,
proceed to have the abandoned or partially destroyed non-conforming structure
lowered, removed, reconstructed or equipped and assess the cost and expense
thereof against the land on which the structure is or was located. Unless such
an assessment is paid within 90 days from the service of notice thereof on the
owner of the land, the sum shall bear intent at the rate of 8% per annum from
the date the cost and expense is incurred until paid, and shall be collected in
the same manner as are general taxes.
(Ord. passed 10-20-1976)
§ 153.08 VARIANCES.
   Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or
permit the growth of any tree, or use his or her property, not in accordance
with the regulations prescribed in this chapter, may apply to the Board of
Adjustment, hereinafter provided for, for a variance from the regulations. The
variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or
endorsement of the regulations would result in practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship and relief granted would not be contrary to the public
interest, but do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit of
this chapter; provided, any variance so allowed may be subject to any
reasonable conditions that the Board of Adjustment may deem necessary to
effectuate the purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 10-20-1976)
§ 153.09 HAZARD MARKING AND LIGHTING.
   (A)   Non-conforming uses. The owner of any non-conforming structure or tree
is hereby required to permit the installation, operation and maintenance
thereon of the markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the Zoning
Administrator to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the
airport the presence of the airport hazards. The markers and lights shall be
installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the Rushford Municipal
Airport.
   (B)   Permits and variances. Any permit or variance granted by the Zoning
Administrator or Board of Adjustment as the case may be, may, if the action is
deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and be reasonable in
the circumstances, so condition the permit or variance as to require to the
owner of the structure or tree in question at his or her own expense, to
install, operate and maintain thereon the markers and lights as may be
necessary to indicate to pilots the presence of an airport hazard.
(Ord. passed 10-20-1976)
§ 153.10 ADMINISTRATION; APPEALS.
   (A)   Airport Zoning Administrator. It shall be the duty of the County
Zoning Administrator to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed
herein. Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the
Administrator upon a form furnished by him or her. Permit applications shall be
promptly considered and granted or denied by him or her. Variance applications
shall be forthwith transmitted by the Administrator for action by the Board of
Adjustment hereinafter provided for.
   (B)   Board of Adjustment.
      (1)   Establishment. The County Board of Adjustment shall serve as the
Board of Adjustment for this chapter.
      (2)   Powers. The Board of Adjustment shall have and exercise the
following powers:
         (a)   To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision
or determination made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement of this
chapter;
         (b)   To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this
chapter upon which the Board of Adjustment under the regulations may be
required to pass; and
         (c)   To hear and decide specific variances.
      (3)   Procedures.
         (a)   The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and
procedure in harmony with the provisions of this chapter. Meetings of the Board
of Adjustment shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such other
times as the Board of Adjustment may determine. The Chairperson or, in his or
her absence, the Acting Chairperson may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the Board of Adjustment shall be
public. The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing
the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote
indicating the fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other
official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office of the
Zoning Administrator and shall be a public record.
         (b)   The Board of Adjustment shall make written findings of fact and
conclusions of law giving the facts upon which it acted and its legal
conclusions from such facts in reversing, affirming or modifying any order,
requirement, decision or determination which comes before it under the
provisions of this chapter.
         (c)   The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board of
Adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirements, decision or
determination of the Zoning Administrator or to decide in favor of the
applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter or
to effect any variation in this chapter.
   (C)   Appeals.
      (1)   Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected by any decision of
the Zoning Administrator made in his or her administration of this chapter may
appeal to the Board of Adjustment. The appeals may also be made by any
governing body of a municipality, county or airport zoning board, which is of
the opinion that a decision of the zoning administrator is an improper
application of the ordinance as it concerns the governing body or board.
      (2)   All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time as
provided by the rules of the Board of Adjustment, by filing with the Zoning
Administrator a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning
Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustment all the
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
      (3)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board of
Adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason
of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or her opinion,
cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not
be stayed, except by order of the Board of Adjustment on notice to the Zoning
Administrator and on due cause shown.
      (4)   The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing
appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest and
decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may
appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
      (5)   The Board of Adjustment may, in conformity with the provision of
this chapter, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order,
requirement; decision or determination appealed from and may make the order,
requirement, decision or determination, as may be appropriate under the
circumstances and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the Zoning
Administrator.
   (D)   Judicial review. Any person aggrieved or any taxpayer affected by any
decision of the Board of Adjustment, or any governing body of a municipality,
county or airport zoning board, which is of the opinion that a decision of the
Board of Adjustment is illegal may present to the District Court of the county
a verified petition setting forth that the decision or action is illegal, in
whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of the illegality. The petition
shall be presented to the Court within 30 days after the decision is filed in
the office of the Board of Adjustment. The petitioner must exhaust the remedies
provided in this chapter before availing himself or herself of the right to
petition a court as provided by this section.
(Ord. passed 10-20-1976)
§ 153.11 CONFLICTS.
   Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations
prescribed in this chapter and any other regulations applicable to the same
area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or
trees, the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or
regulation shall govern and prevail.
(Ord. passed 10-20-1976)
§ 153.12 AFFECTED TERRITORY.
   This chapter affects all or a portion of the following sections of land:
 
                   Type of Airport Zoning
Name and Number of Airspace Obstruction Zoning Land Use Safety Zoning
Township           §                          §
                   153.04, Page 3 of Zoning    153.05, Page 4 of Zoning
                   Map                         Map
Rushford Village   Sections: 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, Sections: 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
TN104R8W           16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 28, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21
                   29, 30
Arendahl Township  Sections 1, 12, 13, 24      Sections: 12, 13
T104NR9W
 
(Ord. passed 10-20-1976)
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   Every person who shall construct, establish, substantially change, alter or
repair any existing structure or use, or permit the growth of any tree without
having complied with the provision of this chapter, or who having been granted
a permit or variance under the provisions of this chapter, shall construct,
establish substantially change or substantially alter or repair any existing
growth or structure or permit the growth of a tree, except as permitted by the
permit or variance, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished or
fined or both as permitted by law. Each day a violation continues to exist
shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 10-20-1976)
CHAPTER 154: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
154.001   Authority
   
154.002   Citation
   
154.003   Purpose
   
154.004   Interpretation of standards
   
154.005   Severability
   
154.006   Definitions
Administration and Enforcement
   
154.020   Compliance
   
154.021   Zoning Administrator
   
154.022   Violations
   
154.023   Zoning permits; fees
   
154.024   Certificates of zoning compliance
   
154.025   Board of Appeals and Adjustments
   
154.026   Schedule of fees
   
154.027   Amendments and changes
District Establishments
   
154.040   Districts established
   
154.041   Zoning map
   
154.042   Interpretation of district boundaries
   
154.043   Annexed territory
A - Agricultural District
   
154.055   Intent
   
154.056   Permitted uses
   
154.057   Conditional/interim uses
   
154.058   Bulk regulations
   
154.059   Off-street parking and loading requirements
   
154.060   Development and performance standards
R-1 - Single-Family Residential District
   
154.075   Intent
   
154.076   Permitted uses
   
154.077   Conditional/interim uses
   
154.078   Bulk regulations
   
154.079   Off-street parking and loading requirements
R-2 - Single-Family Residential District
   
154.090   Intent
   
154.091   Permitted uses
   
154.092   Conditional/interim uses
   
154.093   Bulk regulations
   
154.094   Off-street parking and loading requirements
R-3 - Multi-Family Residential District
   
154.105   Intent
   
154.106   Permitted use
   
154.107   Conditional/interim use
   
154.108   Bulk regulations
   
154.109   Off-street parking and loading requirements
R-MH - Manufactured Home District
   
154.120   Establishment
   
154.121   Permitted uses
   
154.122   Gross development area density
   
154.123   Standards and requirements
   
154.124   Lot area
   
154.125   Setbacks and separation
   
154.126   Soil and ground cover
   
154.127   Signs
   
154.128   Conditional/interim uses
C-A - Arterial Commercial District
   
154.140   Intent
   
154.141   Permitted uses
   
154.142   Conditional/interim uses
   
154.143   Bulk regulations
   
154.144   Off-street parking and loading requirements
C-CBD - Central Business District - Commercial District
   
154.155   Intent
   
154.156   Permitted uses
   
154.157   Conditional/interim uses
   
154.158   Bulk regulations
   
154.159   Off-street parking and loading requirements
I-1 - Light Industrial District
   
154.170   Intent
   
154.171   Permitted uses
   
154.172   Conditional/interim uses
   
154.173   Prohibited uses
   
154.174   Bulk regulations
   
154.175   Off-street parking and loading requirements
   
154.176   Development and performance standards
I-2 - Heavy Industrial District
   
154.190   Intent
   
154.191   Permitted uses
   
154.192   Conditional/interim uses
   
154.193   Prohibited uses
   
154.194   Bulk regulations
   
154.195   Off-street parking and loading requirements
   
154.196   Development and performance standards
PUD - Planned Unit Development District
   
154.210   Purpose
   
154.211   Permitted uses
   
154.212   Bulk regulations
   
154.213   General provisions
   
154.214   Approval procedures
BP - Bluff Protection Overlay District
   
154.225   Purpose
   
154.226   District application
   
154.227   Boundaries
   
154.228   Development regulations
   
154.229   General regulations
Supplementary Regulations and Conditions
   
154.240   Conformance required
   
154.241   Number of buildings per lot
   
154.242   Accessory buildings and/or structures
   
154.243   Driveway setback
   
154.244   Required area or space cannot be reduced
   
154.245   Zoning district dividing property
   
154.246   Bulk regulations for residential districts
   
154.247   Development plans
   
154.248   Dike setback
   
154.249   Height exceptions
   
154.250   Fences and walls
   
154.251   Visibility at intersections
   
154.252   Private swimming pools
   
154.253   Hedges, landscaping and plantings
   
154.254   Boulevards
Non-Conforming Buildings and Uses
   
154.265   Intent
   
154.266   Non-conforming lots of record
   
154.267   Non-conforming structures
   
154.268   Non-conforming uses of land
   
154.269   Non-conforming uses of structures and premises in combination
   
154.270   Required repairs
   
154.271   Unauthorized non-conformities
Floodplain Management
   
154.285   Statutory authorization and findings of fact
   
154.286   Purpose
   
154.287   Lands to which subchapter applies
   
154.288   Incorporation of maps by reference
   
154.289   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
154.290   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
154.291   Severability
   
154.292   Definitions
   
154.293   Annexations
   
154.294   Floodplain districts; establishment
   
154.295   Floodway District (FW)
   
154.296   Flood Fringe District (FF)
   
154.297   General Floodplain District (GF)
   
154.298   Subdivision standards
   
154.299   Utilities, railroads, roads and bridges
   
154.300   Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles
   
154.301   Zoning Administrator; duties
   
154.302   Permits; applications
   
154.303   Variances
   
154.304   Conditional uses
   
154.305   Non-conformities
   
154.306   Amendments
Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
   
154.320   Intent
   
154.321   Exceptions
   
154.322   Off-street parking required
   
154.323   Off-street parking; spatial requirements
   
154.324   Off-street loading berths; spatial requirements
   
154.325   Handicapped parking
Sign Regulations
   
154.340   Application
   
154.341   Purpose
   
154.342   Definitions
   
154.343   Intent
   
154.344   General regulations
   
154.345   On-premises signs
   
154.346   Off-premises signs
   
154.347   Directional signs permitted on public right-of-way
   
154.348   Prohibited signs
   
154.349   Unlawful signs
   
154.350   Non-conforming signs
   
154.351   Appeals
   
154.352   Enforcement
Erosion and Land-Disturbance Controls
   
154.365   Applicability
   
154.366   Definitions
   
154.367   Design criteria, standards and specifications for control measures
   
154.368   Maintenance of control measures
   
154.369   Control of erosion and pollutants during land-disturbance activities
   
154.370   Permits and control plans
   
154.371   Inspection
   
154.372   Fees
 
   
154.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by M.S. Chapter
462, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 1.10; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.002 CITATION.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Rushford Zoning
Ordinance”.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 1.20; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.003 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter: to regulate the use of all structures,
lands and waters; to regulate lot coverage, population distribution and
density, and the size and location of all structures in accordance with the
city’s Comprehensive Plan so as to lessen the congestion in streets; to secure
safety from fire, flood, panic and other dangers; to promote health and general
welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to preserve the appearance,
character and unique features of the community; to prevent the overcrowding of
land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate
provision of transportation, water, sewer services, schools, parks and other
public requirements; to preserve and improve the character of the area or
neighborhood; to conserve the value of buildings and to encourage the most
appropriate use of land throughout the city.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 1.30; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.004 INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, shall be construed in favor of the
city and shall not be deemed as a limitation or repeal of any power granted by
state statutes. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than is
imposed or required by other provisions of law or by other rules, regulations
or ordinances, the provision of this chapter shall control.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 1.40; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.005 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the judgment
shall not affect the remainder of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 1.50; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.006 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Interpretation. For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and
words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the
future, the singular number shall include the plural and the plural number
includes the singular; the word “shall” is mandatory, the word “may” is
permissive; the word “person” includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual; the words
“used” or “occupied” include the words “intended, designed or arranged to be
used or occupied”.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 2.10; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 5- -2000; Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed
8- -2010)
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly requires a different
meaning.
      ACCESSORY APARTMENT. A separate unit of housing located within the
confines of another dwelling unit or commercial building. The ACCESSORY
APARTMENT may or may not include kitchen facilities or be connected internally
with the balance of the building. If the ACCESSORY APARTMENT is not connected
internally with the balance of the building, then there shall be bathroom
facilities included in the unit.
      ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. A subordinate building use or structure, the
use of which is subordinate to that of the main building.
      ADULT. As used in this chapter refers to the persons who have attained
the age of 18 years. Also refers to a business or establishment that is limited
to persons 18 years or older, such as adult video/bookstore, theater or
cabaret.
      ADULT VIDEO/BOOKSTORE. An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes, movies, books,
magazines and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by
their emphasis on matter depicting or describing or relating to specified
sexual activities or specific anatomical areas or an establishment with a
segment or section devoted to the sale or display of the material, or such an
establishment which excludes minors by reason of age.
      ADULT CABARET. A café or restaurant where patrons are entertained by
performers featuring go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers or similar
entertainers which excludes minors by reason of age.
      ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An enclosed building with a capacity
for less than 50 persons used for presenting motion pictures, slides or
photographic reproductions which:
         (a)   Is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, for observance by patrons therein; or
         (b)   Excludes minors by reason of age.
      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An enclosed building with a capacity of 50
or more persons used predominantly for presenting motion pictures, slides or
photographic reproductions which:
         (a)   Is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, for observation by patrons therein; or
         (b)   Excludes minors by reason of age.
      AGRICULTURE. The production, keeping or maintenance, for sale, lease or
personal use, of plants and animals including, but not limited to, farming,
dairying, pasturage, apiculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture and
animal and poultry husbandry and the necessary accessory uses for packing,
treating or storing the produce.
      ALLEY. A service way, other than a street, which affords only a secondary
means of public access to abutting property, and is not intended for general
traffic circulation.
      APARTMENT. A room or suite of rooms which is designed for, intended for
or occupied by one family and equipped with cooking facilities.
      APARTMENT HOUSE. A building or portion thereof designed for or occupied
by three or more families.
      APPROVED PLAN. A plan which has been granted final approval by the
appropriate approving authority.
      AUTOMOBILE SALES. The sale or rental of new and used automobiles and
other motor vehicles in operating condition and the repair and servicing of the
vehicles.
      AWNING SIGN. A sign on or attached to a temporary retractable or fixed
shelter composed of non-rigid material, except for the supporting framework and
braced entirely from the exterior wall of the building.
      BASEMENT. A story having one-half or more of its floor-to-ceiling height
above the average level of the adjoining ground and with a floor-to-ceiling
height of not less than six and one-half feet. A BASEMENT shall be counted as a
story if used or intended to be used for dwelling or business purposes. (See
CELLAR for difference.)
      BED AND BREAKFAST LODGING. A facility other than a hotel or motel where,
for compensation, lodging and meals may be offered for temporary occupancy.
      BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets or a combination of streets and
public land, cemeteries, railroad right-of-way, waterways or any other barrier
to the continuity to development within the political jurisdictional limits of
the city.
      BLUFF. The area between the United States Geological Survey contour
interval of 740 and 1,140 feet with a topographic feature such as a hill, cliff
or embankment with an average slope of 25% or greater with a vertical rise or
drop of 25 feet or greater.
      BLUFF IMPACT ZONE. All land located between the toe and the top of the
bluff and the land located within 20 feet measured horizontally beyond the
lowest point of the toe of the bluff.
      BLUFF, TOE OF. The point on a bluff where there is, as visually observed,
a clearly identifiable break in the slope, from gentler to steeper slope above.
If no break in the slope is apparent or if there is disagreement in the
breaking point, the TOE OF THE BLUFF shall be the lowest end of a 50-foot
segment, measured on the ground, with an average slope of 20% or greater.
      BLUFF, TOP OF. The point on a bluff where there is, as visually observed,
a clearly identifiable break in the slope, from steeper to gentler slope above.
If no break in the slope is apparent or if there is disagreement in the
breaking point, the TOP OF THE BLUFF shall be the highest end of a 50-foot
segment, measured on the ground, with an average slope of 20% or greater.
      BLUFF SLOPE. The average slope between the United States Geological
Survey contour intervals of 740 and 1,140 mean sea level.
      BOARD. The Rushford Board of Appeals and Adjustments, as described in §
154.025 of this chapter.
      BOARDING HOUSE. A building other than a hotel where, for compensation,
lodging and meals are provided for long-term residents.
      BOULEVARD. The portion of street right-of-way between the curb line and
lot line.
      BUILDING. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and
intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal,
process, equipment, goods or materials of any kind or nature. When a structure
is divided into separate parts, each part may be deemed a separate BUILDING.
      BUILDING, HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance measured from the curb level
to the highest point of the roof surface if a flat roof, to the deck line of
mansard roofs and the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip
and gambrel roofs. For a building on a sloped or uneven site, the vertical
distance of a building shall be measured from the average of the finished grade
of the four outer corners of the building to the highest point of the roof.
      BUILDING LINE. An imaginary line parallel to the front lot line over
which no portion of any building may extend and which is a distance from the
front lot line equal to the depth of the front yard required for the district
in which the lot is located.
      BUILDING, MAIN. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the
lot upon which it is situated.
      BULK. The magnitude or volume of a building.
      CARPORT. A roofed structure providing space for the parking of motor
vehicles and enclosed on not more than two sides. For the purpose of this
chapter, a CARPORT shall be considered as a garage.
      CELLAR. A story having more than one-half of its height below the curb
level or below the highest level of the adjoining ground or with a floor-to-
ceiling height of less than six and one-half feet. A CELLAR shall not be
counted as a story for purposes of height measurement.
      CLINIC. An establishment occupied by one or more members of a healing
profession and used for practice of the profession. A CLINIC shall not include
any in-patient care other than incidental.
      COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the City of Rushford, Minnesota.
      COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. A document or series of documents adopted by the City
Council setting forth policies for the future of the city.
      CONDITIONAL/INTERIM USE. A temporary use permitted in a particular zoning
district only upon showing that the use in a specified location will comply
with all the conditions and standards for the location or operation of the use
and such additional temporary conditions as required by the Planning
Commission.
      CORNER SIDE YARD. A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard
between the principal building and the side lot line measured perpendicular
from the side lot line to the closest point of the principal building on a
comer lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more streets at their
intersection, or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior angle of
less than 135 degrees.
      COUNCIL. The City Council of Rushford, Minnesota.
      CURB LEVEL. The level of the established curb in front of the building
measured at the center of the front. Where no curb has been established, the
City Engineer shall establish the CURB LEVEL or its equivalent for the purposes
of this chapter.
      DECK. A wooden or metal structure attached to the primary building, not
fully enclosed or heated.
      DECKLINE. The intersection of two roof surfaces of a mansard roof forming
the highest horizontal line of the steeper roof slope.
      DEVELOPMENT. The act of building structures and installing site
improvements.
      DIKE. A human-made raised earthen embankment constructed for flood
protection, designed to control the flow of water. Also commonly referred to as
a LEVEE.
      DIKE EASEMENT. A grant of a property right by the property owner to
another party for dike purposes, including maintenance and repair.
      DISTRICT. A part, zone or geographic area within the municipality within
which certain zoning or development regulations apply.
      DRIVEWAY. A private roadway providing access for vehicles to a parking
space, garage, dwelling or other structure.
      DWELLING. A permanent building or portion thereof used exclusively for
human residence occupancy, including one-family, two-family and multiple
dwellings, but not including hotels of lodging or boarding houses, bed and
breakfast lodging.
      DWELLING, ATTACHED. A one-family dwelling attached to two or more one-
family dwellings at one or more sides by a common vertical wall or walls.
      DWELLING, DETACHED. A dwelling which is not attached to any other
dwelling by any means on the same lot.
      DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building or portion thereof designed for or
occupied by three or more dwelling units.
      DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached building designed for or occupied
exclusively by one family.
      DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building designed for or occupied exclusively by
two families living independently of each other. Sometimes called a DUPLEX.
      DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms in a residential building or residential
portion of a building which are arranged, designed, used or intended for use by
one family, and which includes cooking space, sleeping area and lawful sanitary
facilities reserved for the occupants thereof.
      EASEMENT. A grant of a property right by the property owner to another
party.
      ERECTED. Attached, altered, built, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged
or moved, and shall include the painting of wall signs, but does not include
copy changes on any sign.
      FACTORY-BUILT HOUSING. A factory-built structure designed for long-term
residential use. For the purposes of these regulations, FACTORY-BUILT HOUSING
consists of three types: modular homes; mobile homes; and manufactured homes.
      FACTORY-BUILT STRUCTURE. Any structure which is, wholly or in substantial
part, made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for
installation or assembly and installation on a building site.
      FAMILY. One or more persons occupying premises and living as a single
housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, a
lodging house, nursing home, rest home, club or hotel, as herein defined.
      FARM. An area comprised of ten or more acres which is used for the
growing of and storing of the usual agricultural products such as vegetables,
fruits and grains, and their storage on the area, as well as for the raising
thereon of livestock including, but not limited to, poultry and farm animals
such as horses, cattle, sheep and swine.
      FENCE. An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination
of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.
      FLOOR AREA. When prescribed as the basis of measurement for off-street
parking spaces and loading berths for any use, shall mean the sum of the gross
horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, or portion thereof,
devoted to the use, including accessory storage areas located within selling or
working space such as counters, racks or closets, and any basement or cellar
floor area devoted to retailing activities, to the production or processing of
goods or to business or professional offices. It shall not include: floor area
devoted primarily to storage purposes (except as otherwise noted herein); floor
area devoted to off-street parking or loading facilities, including aisles,
ramps and maneuvering space; or basement or cellar floor area other than area
devoted to retailing activities, to the production or processing of goods or to
business or professional offices.
      FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR). The floor area ratio is the floor area of the
building or buildings on a lot divided by the land area. For the purpose of
determining the FLOOR AREA RATIO, the “floor area” of a building is the sum of
the gross horizontal areas of all floors of the building measured from the
exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the center line of walls
separating two buildings. The floor area of a building shall include basement
floor area, elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor penthouse, attic space
having headroom of seven feet (2.1 m) or more, interior balconies and
mezzanines, enclosed porches and floor area devoted to accessory uses. Space
devoted to mechanical equipment, parking or loading shall not be included in
the floor area. The floor area for enclosed space having a floor to ceiling
height in excess of 20 feet (6 m) shall be computed on the basis that each 15
feet (4.6 m) of height shall be equal to one floor for the purpose of
computation. Space intended for recreational use in apartment buildings may be
excluded from these calculations if the Planning Commission finds that the
recreational uses are suitable for the size and use of the proposed structure.
      FRONTAGE. All the property on one side of a street or place between two
intersecting streets or places (crossing or terminating) measured along the
line of the street or place, or if the street or place be dead ended, then all
of the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street or place at
the dead end of the street or place.
      GARAGE. An accessory building primarily for storage or repair of self-
propelled vehicles.
      HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the curb level to the highest
point of the roof surface if a flat roof, to the deck line of mansard roofs,
and the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel
roofs. For a building on a sloped or uneven site, the vertical distance of a
building shall be measured from the average of the finished grade of the four
outer corners of the building to the highest point of the roof.
      HOME OCCUPATION. Any gainful occupation or profession engaged in by the
legal resident of a dwelling, at or from the dwelling or from an accessory
building.
      HORIZONTAL PLANE. A plane tangent to a level surface.
      HOTEL. A building occupied by individuals as the temporary lodging place
for compensation.
      INDUSTRY. Those fields of economic activity including forestry, fishing,
hunting and trapping, mining, construction, manufacturing, transportation,
communication, electric, gas and sanitary services and wholesale trade.
      INSTITUTION. An organization established for study, research, public
benefit or social welfare.
      JUNK YARD. An establishment or place of business for storing, handling,
keeping, buying or selling of old or scrap, rope, rags, batteries, paper,
plastic, trash, rubber or outside storage of two or more unlicensed motor
vehicles or other vehicles or machinery other than the storage of materials
which is incidental or accessory to any primary use on the same lot.
      LOADING or LOADING BERTH. An off-street space provided for the loading or
unloading of cargo from a motor vehicle.
      LOT. A parcel of land at least sufficient in size to meet minimum zoning
requirements for use and area and to provide the yards and other open spaces as
are herein required. A LOT shall have frontage on a public street and may
consist of:
         (a)   A single lot of record;
         (b)   A portion of a lot of record;
         (c)   A combination of complete lots of record, or complete lots of
record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record; and
         (d)   A parcel of land described by metes and bounds; provided that,
in no case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be
created which does not meet the requirements of this chapter.
      LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the junction of two or more intersecting
streets.
      LOT, DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front and the rear
lot lines.
      LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. An interior lot having frontage on two parallel or
approximately parallel streets or places.
      LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.
      LOT, KEY. The first lot to the rear of a comer lot, the front line of
which is a continuation of the side line of the comer lot, exclusive of the
width of any alley and fronting on the street which intersects or intercepts
the street on which the comer lot fronts.
      LOT LINE. A line of record bounding a lot which divides one lot from
another lot or from a public street or other public space.
      LOT LINE, FRONT. The line separating the lot from a street.
      LOT LINE, REAR. The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot
line.
      LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A SIDE
LOT LINE separating a lot from a street is called a SIDE STREET LOT LINE. A
SIDE LOT LINE separating a lot from another lot or lots is called an INTERIOR
SIDE LOT LINE.
      LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the map of which
has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
      LOT, ZONING. A single tract of land located within a single block which
(at the time of filing for a zoning permit) is designated by its owner or
developer as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit, under
single ownership or control. Therefore, a ZONING LOT OR LOTS may or may not
coincide with a lot of record.
      MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body
feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and
which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
systems contained therein; except that, the term includes any structure which
meets all the requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer
voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of State and
complies with the standards established under this chapter.
      MASSAGE. Any method of treating the external parts of a human body by
rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping or vibrating with the hand or any
instrument for any form of consideration or gratuity.
      MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT.
         (a)   Any establishment having a fixed place of business, which
excludes minors by reason of age, where massages are administered for any form
of consideration or gratuity, including, but not limited to, massage parlors,
health clubs, sauna baths and steam baths. This definition shall not be
construed to include:
            1.   Persons licensed by the state under the provisions of M.S.
Chapters 148, 148B, 150A, 152, 153, 157 or 158, and M.S. §§ 604.20 to 604.205,
as they may be amended from time to time, when performing massage therapy or
massage services as a part of the profession or trade for which licensed;
            2.   Persons performing massage therapy or massage services under
the direction of a person licensed as described in division (a)1. above;
            3.   Persons performing massage therapy or massage services upon a
person pursuant to the written instruction or order of a licensed physician;
            4.   Nurses aides, technicians and attendants at any hospital or
health care facility licensed pursuant to M.S. Chapter 145A, as it may be
amended from time to time, in the course of their employment and under the
supervision of the administrator thereof or of a person licensed as described
in division (a)1. above; and/or
            5.   An athletic coach or trainer in any accredited public or
private secondary school, junior college or university or employed by a
professional or semi-professional athletic team or organization, in the course
of his or her employment as the coach or trainer.
         (b)   This definition shall not be construed to include: a non-profit
organization operating a community center, swimming pool, tennis court or other
educational, cultural, recreational and athletic facilities for the welfare of
the residents of the area.
      MOBILE HOME. Any vehicle without motive power used or so manufactured or
constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public streets
and highways and so designed, constructed or reconstructed as will permit the
vehicle to be used as a place for human habitation by one or more persons; but
shall also include any such vehicle with motive power not registered as a motor
vehicle in Minnesota. A MOBILE HOME is factory-built housing, built on a
chassis. A MOBILE HOME shall not be construed to be a travel trailer or other
form of recreational vehicle. A MOBILE HOME shall be construed to remain a
mobile home, subject to all regulations applying thereto, whether or not
wheels, axles, hitch or other appurtenances of mobility are removed and
regardless of the nature of the foundation provided. However, certain MOBILE
HOMES may be classified as “manufactured homes”. Nothing in this chapter shall
be construed as permitting a mobile home in other than an approved mobile home
park unless the MOBILE HOME is classified as a “manufactured home”. A MOBILE
HOME shall be a minimum of ten feet in width and 32 feet in length.
      MOBILE HOME PARK. A parcel of land licensed by the state under single
ownership which has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes
for non-transient use containing not less than three lots.
      MOBILE HOME STAND. A part of an individual mobile home lot which has been
reserved for placement of a mobile home and any appurtenances thereto.
      MODULAR HOME. Factory-built housing certified as meeting the State
Building Code as applicable to modular housing. Once certified by the state,
MODULAR HOMES shall be subject to the same standards as site-built homes.
      MOTEL. A permanent building or group of buildings so arranged or designed
primarily for temporary occupancy, so laid out as to provide space for parking
vehicles used by the traveling public.
      NATURAL SLOPES. That slope established by USGS topographic map and
existing prior to grading of any kind.
      NON-CONFORMING USE. A use lawfully in existence on the effective date of
this chapter and not conforming to the regulations for the district in which it
is situated; except that, the use is not non-conforming if it would be
authorized under special use permit where located.
      NURSING HOME. A building other than a hotel or hospital where, for
compensation, meals and lodging and physical care are provided for three or
more persons. This definition shall include rest homes and similar
establishments.
      OFFICE. A room or building where administrative or clerical work or
business is conducted (e.g., engineer, doctor, dentist, attorney, real estate
broker, insurance broker, architect, accounting, editorial or other similar
work is conducted).
      OPEN SPACE. Space on a lot not covered by buildings adjacent to a lot
which provides a necessary and desirable function in relation to the adjoining
residential use.
      OPEN SPACE RATIO (OS) METHOD OF COMPUTATION. The open space area is the
lot area less the total ground area covered by buildings and parking and
driveway areas, plus one-half of all exterior space which is open on its sides
to weather, but not open to the sky (carports, exterior balconies), plus all
roof areas which have been suitably improved for use by occupants, calculated
in a direct ratio to the lot area.
      ORDINANCE. A municipally adopted law or regulation.
      OVERHANG. The part of a roof or wall which extends beyond the facade of a
lower wall.
      PARKING BAY. A bay shall include an aisle and the parking spaces adjacent
to the aisle.
      PERMITTED USE. A use which by right is specifically authorized in a
particular zoning district.
      PLACE. An open unoccupied space other than a street or alley permanently
reserved as the principal means of access to abutting property.
      PORCH, OPEN. A roofed projection which has no more than 50% of each
outside wall area enclosed by a building or siding material other than meshed
screens.
      PRESCHOOL or DAY CARE CENTER. The facilities of any dwelling institution
or organization which, for profit or non-profit, are used in the temporary care
of six children or more at any one time.
      PRINCIPAL BUILDING. A non-accessory building in which the principal use
of the lot on which it is located is conducted.
      PRIVATE CLUB OR LODGE. An association of persons who are bona fide
members paying annual dues, which owns, hires or leases a building or portion
thereof, except a fraternity or sorority, the use of the premises being
restricted to members and their guests. It is permissible to serve food and
meals to members and their guests on the premises, provided adequate dining
room space and kitchen facilities are available and are operated in compliance
with state and local municipal laws.
      PRIVATE STREET. Privately owned street, driveway or access road which
serves more than one residence.
      PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. A public strip of land acquired by reservation,
dedication, forced dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be
occupied or is occupied by a road, crosswalk, electric transmission lines, oil
or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary sewer or storm sewer and other similar
uses.
      RETAINING WALL. A structure constructed to hold back or support an
earthen bank.
      RIDGELINE. The uppermost boundary of the conservancy district which is
represented by the contour line of 1,140 feet as shown on a United State
Geological Survey Topographic Map.
      SELECTIVE CUTTING. The removal of single scattered trees; provided, a
continuous tree cover is maintained.
      SERVIENT ESTATE. Land burdened by an easement, other than the dominant
estate. A dominant estate is one that has rights such as an easement in another
piece of land.
      SETBACK. The minimum required horizontal distance between every
structure, including the building overhang or furthest projecting portion of
the structure and lot line of the lot on which it is located.
      SEXUAL ACTIVITY ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment which excludes minors by
reason of age, used for the display of live presentations distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing or involving
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. The provisions of
this definition shall not apply to a theater, concert hall, art center, museum
or similar establishment which is primarily devoted to presentations
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      SHOPPING CENTER/STRIP MALL. A planned retail and service area under
single ownership, management or control, characterized by a concentrated
grouping of stores and compatible uses with various facilities to be used in
common, such as ingress and egress roads, parking accommodations and the like.
      SIGN. Any identification, description, illustration or device which is
visible from any public place or is located on private property and exposed to
the public and which directs attention to a product, service, place, activity,
person, institution, business or solicitation, including any permanently
installed or situated merchandise; or any emblem, painting, banner, pennant,
placard or temporary sign designed to advertise, identify or convey information
with the exception of window displays and national flags. For the purpose of
this chapter, SIGNS shall also include all sign structures.
      SIGN, ABANDONED. A sign which no longer correctly directs or exhorts any
person or advertises a business, lessor, owner, product or activity which is no
longer available.
      SIGN AREA. The area enclosed by one continuous line, connecting the
extreme points or edges of a sign. The area shall be determined using the
largest area or silhouette visible at any one time from any one point. This
area does not include the main supporting sign structure.
      SIGN, BANNER. A temporary sign composed of lightweight material not
enclosed in a rigid frame, secured or mounted so as to allow movement of the
sign caused by movement of the wind.
      SIGN, GROUND. Any sign which is supported by one or more structures,
uprights, poles or braces in or upon the ground and independent of support from
any building.
      SIGN, OFF-PREMISES. Any sign that advertises goods, products, services or
facilities or directs persons to a different location from where the sign is
located.
      SIGN, ON-PREMISES. A sign which carries only advertisements strictly
incidental to a lawful use of the premises on which it is located, including
signs indicating the business transacted, services rendered, goods sold or
produced on the premises, name of the business, name of the person or firm or
corporation occupying the premises.
      SIGN, PORTABLE. Any sign not permanently attached to a building,
structure or the ground, capable of being moved at periodic intervals.
      SIGN, PROJECTING. A sign, other than a wall sign, which projects from and
is supported by a wall of a building or structure.
      SIGN, PUBLIC SERVICE. Any sign intended primarily to promote items of
general interest to the community such as time, temperature and data,
atmospheric conditions, news or traffic control and the like.
      SIGN, ROOF. A sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet of a building
or structure.
      SIGN, SWINGING. A sign installed on an arm or spar that is not, in
addition, permanently fastened to an adjacent wall or upright pole.
      SIGN, WALL. Any sign attached to, painted upon, or erected against the
wall of a building or structure, with the exposed face of the sign in a plane
parallel to the plane of the wall.
      SOLAR ACCESS EASEMENT. An easement, the purpose of which is to provide
continued access to incident sunlight necessary to operate a solar collector.
      SOLAR COLLECTOR. A device or structural feature of a building that
collects solar energy and that is part of a system for the collection, storage
and distribution of solar energy. For purposes of this chapter, a greenhouse is
a SOLAR COLLECTOR.
      SPECIAL USE. A use of land, water or building which is allowable only
after the issuance of a permit by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals.
      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
         (a)   Less than completely and opaquely covered:
            1.   Human genitals, pubic region;
            2.   Buttocks; and
            3.   Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
         (b)   Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state even if
completely and opaquely covered.
      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
         (a)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
         (b)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and
         (c)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks or female breasts.
      STEEP SLOPES. Land where agricultural activity or development is either
not recommended or poorly suited due to slope steepness and the site’s soil
characteristics, as mapped and described in available soil surveys or other
technical reports, unless appropriate design and construction techniques and
farming practices are used. Where specific information is not available, STEEP
SLOPES are lands having average slopes over 12%, as measured over a horizontal
distance of 50 feet, that are not bluffs.
      STORY. The portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between
the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if
there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling
next above it.
      STORY, HALF. A story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates
of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than two feet
above the floor of the story.
      STREET. A public or private thoroughfare which affords the primary means
of access to abutting property.
      STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in the supporting members of a building
such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders or any substantial change in
the dimension or configurations of the roof or in the exterior walls.
      STRUCTURE. Any thing constructed or erected, the use of which requires
more or less permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a
permanent location on the ground.
      SURFACE WATER. Water on the earth’s surface exposed to the atmosphere as
rivers, lakes and streams.
      USE. The primary purpose or activity for which land or a building or
structure thereon is designed, arranged or intended or for which it is or may
be occupied or maintained.
      UTILITY BUILDING. An accessory building not to exceed 144 square feet in
floor area normally used in a residential zone.
      VARIANCE. A relaxation of the terms of the zoning code where the variance
will not be contrary to a public interest and where, owing to conditions
peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a
literal enforcement of the zoning code would result in unnecessary and undue
hardship.
      WATER RUN OFF. The portion of the rainfall, melted snow or irrigation
water that flows across ground surfaces and eventually is returned to surface
water.
      YARD.
         (a)   An open space on the same lot with a building occupied, which is
unobstructed by any portion of a structure from 24 inches above the ground
upward, except as otherwise provided herein.
         (b)   The measurement of a YARD shall be construed as the minimum
horizontal distance between the lot line and the building or structure.
      YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the full width of the lot measured
between the front line of the lot and the nearest point of a building.
      YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the full width of the lot and
measured between the rear line of the lot and the nearest point of the
principal building.
      YARD, SIDE. A yard between the nearest point of the building and the side
line of the lot and extending from the front yard to the rear yard.
      ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The local official responsible for administration
and implementation of the zoning regulations of the city or his or her
authorized representative.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 2.20; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 5-22-2000; Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed
8- -2010)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 154.020 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure, land or water shall hereafter be used and no structure or part
thereof shall hereafter be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended,
enlarged, converted or structurally altered without a zoning permit and/or
certificate of zoning compliance and without full compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and all other applicable local, county and state
regulations.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 20.10; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010) Penalty, see
§
154.999
§ 154.021 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Administrator of the Zoning Ordinance shall enforce the provisions of
this chapter and shall have the following powers and duties in connection
therewith:
   (A)   To issue all permits and certificates required by this chapter;
   (B)   To cause any building, structure, land or any thing located on or
attached hereto to be inspected and examined and to order in writing the
remedying of any condition found to exist therein in violation of any provision
of this chapter; and
   (C)   To act as advisor to the Board of Adjustment and to carry out and
enforce any decisions or determinations of the Board.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 20.20; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.022 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to construct any structure or building in
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   In case of any violation, the City Council, the Zoning Administrator,
the Board of Appeals and Adjustment, the City Planning Commission or any
property owner who would specifically be damaged by the violation may institute
appropriate action or proceedings to enjoin a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 20.30; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010) Penalty, see
§
154.999
§ 154.023 ZONING PERMITS; FEES.
   (A)   No structure shall hereafter be erected, reconstructed, structurally
altered, enlarged, added to or removed, nor shall an excavation for any such
structure be commenced until and unless a zoning permit therefor shall have
been issued by the Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   An application for a zoning permit shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator and shall be accompanied by a drawing or plat, in duplicate,
drawn to scale and showing the legal description of the lot and the proposed
building and their dimensions; the exact location of the proposed building on
the lot and the use for which the building and any existing building is
designed or intended; location, dimension and present use of any existing
building on the same lot; street location, other public or private drives and
generalized parking areas; existing topography and illustration of existing
drainage considerations (proposed grades not necessary at this point); existing
tree masses and other geologic or environmentally important characteristics;
proposed private and public ownership boundaries including proposed private
lots, and such other information as the Zoning Administrator shall require for
the proper enforcement of this chapter. All zoning permits issued under this
chapter shall expire and be null and void on the date which shall be 12 months
after issuance, unless work shall have been commenced under the permit prior to
the date. No zoning permit shall be issued to anyone who is in violation of any
part of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 20.50; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.024 CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   No land shall be occupied or used, and no building hereafter erected
or structurally altered shall be occupied or used in whole or in part for any
purpose whatsoever, until a certificate is issued by the Zoning Administrator
stating that the building and use comply with the provisions of this chapter.
No change of use shall be made in any building or part thereof, now or
hereafter erected or structurally altered, without a permit being issued
therefor by the Zoning Administrator. No permit shall be issued to make a
change unless the changes are in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   Nothing in this part shall prevent the continuance of a non-conforming
use as hereinbefore authorized unless a discontinuance is necessary for the
safety of life or property.
   (C)   Certificates of occupancy and compliance shall be applied for
coincidentally with the application for a zoning permit and shall be issued
within 30 days after the lawful erection or alteration of the building is
completed. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of
the Zoning Administrator, and copies shall be furnished on request to any
persons having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected.
   (D)   No permits for excavation for, or the erection or alteration of any
building shall be issued before the application has been made for certificate
of compliance; and no building or premises shall be occupied until that
certificate and permit is issued.
   (E)   A temporary certificate of zoning compliance may be issued by the
administrative official for a period not exceeding six months during
alterations or partial occupancy of a building pending its completion or
completion of site improvements; provided that, the temporary certificate may
require such conditions and safeguards as will protect the safety of the
occupants and the public.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 20.60; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.025 BOARD OF APPEALS AND ADJUSTMENTS.
   (A)   Board created. There is hereby created a Board of Appeals and
Adjustments consisting of one member of the Planning Commission and four
citizens, all appointed by the Council. The term of the member of the Planning
Commission shall be coterminous with his or her term on the commission. Each
other member shall serve for a term of four years; except that, terms of the
initial members shall be so arranged that the term of one member expires each
year. Each member shall serve until his or her successor is appointed. Members
shall serve without compensation. Staff services for the Board shall be
furnished by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator and Fire Chief
will serve as ex officio members of the Board of Appeals and Adjustments.
   (B)   Procedure. Three members of the Board constitute a quorum and a
majority of all members is necessary for an decision of the Board. The Board
shall elect one of its members as Chairperson and appoint a Secretary who may,
but need not be one of its members. Subject to the provisions of this chapter,
the Board may adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs. The
Chairperson or, in his or her absence, the Acting Chairman may administer oaths
to witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep
minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question,
or if absent or failing to vote, indicating the fact. The Board shall keep
records of its examinations and other official actions.
   (C)   Powers and duties of Board. The Board shall have the power and duty of
hearing and deciding, subject to appeal to the City Council as herein provided,
appeals or requests in the following cases:
      (1)   Appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative officer in the
enforcement of this chapter; and
      (2)   Requests for variances from the literal provisions of this chapter
in instances where their strict enforcement would cause undue hardship because
of circumstances unique to the individual property under consideration.
   (D)   Appeal.
      (1)   An appeal for administrative review as specified in division (C)
above may be taken to the Board by any person, firm or corporation or any city
officer, department or agency affected by a decision of the Zoning
Administrator. Such an appeal shall be taken by filing a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds thereof with the Zoning Administrator, and the Board
within 30 days after the decision. If the appeal is not taken by the owner of
the property which is the subject matter of the decision appealed from, the
notice shall not be so filed until after it has been served upon the owner
either in person or by mail.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board all
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
An appeal for an administrative review or a variance stays all proceedings,
including criminal proceedings, in furtherance of the action appealed from
unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board that by reason of facts
state in the certificate a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent
peril to life or property. In that case, the proceedings shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order granted by a court of competent
jurisdiction. An application for a variance may be filed by the owner of the
affected property at any time.
   (E)   Variances.
      (1)   No variance shall be granted to allow a use not permissible under
the terms of this chapter in the district involved, except the temporary use of
a one-family dwelling as a two-family dwelling for not to exceed one year.
      (2)   In granting a variance, the Board or the Council on appeal, may
prescribe appropriate conditions in conformity with this chapter.
      (3)   When the conditions are made part of the terms under which the
variance is granted, violation of the conditions is a violation of this
chapter.
      (4)   A variance shall not be granted by the Board or by the Council on
appeal, unless it conforms to the following standards:
         (a)   Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to
the land, structure or building involved and do not result from the actions of
the petitioner;
         (b)   Literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would
deprive the petitioner of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the
same district under the terms of this chapter;
         (c)   Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant
any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other lands, structures
or buildings in the same district; and
         (d)   The proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of
light and air to adjacent property or unreasonably diminish or impair
established property values within the surrounding area, or in any other
respect impair the public health, safety or welfare of the residents of the
city.
   (F)   Decision by the Board.
      (1)   Upon filing with the Board, a request for variance or an appeal
from an administrative order or determination, the Board shall set a date for
public hearing thereon, which shall be no later than 60 days from the date of
filing and shall hear the persons as wish to be heard, either in person or by
agent or attorney.
      (2)   Notice of any such hearing shall be mailed not less than ten days
before the date of hearing to the person who filed the appeal or request, and
in the case of a request for a variance, to each owner of property situated
wholly or partly within 350 feet of the property to which the variance relates,
insofar as the names and addresses of the owners can be determined by the Clerk
from records available to the public.
      (3)   Within a reasonable time after the hearing, the Board shall make
its order deciding the matter and serve a copy of the order upon the appellant
or the petitioner by mail, but the Board shall not make its order until the
planning agency has had a reasonable time, not to exceed 60 days, to review and
report to the Board upon the appeal or petition.
      (4)   The appellant or petitioner may within 45 days from the date of the
order file with the City Clerk an appeal to the Council from the decision of
the Board.
   (G)   Hearing and decision by the Council.
      (1)   The Council shall, at its next regular meeting after the filing of
an appeal to it from a decision of the Board set a date for hearing thereon,
which shall be not later than 60 days after the meeting.
      (2)   After hearing the oral or written views of all interested persons,
the Council shall make its decision at the same meeting or at a specified
future meeting thereof.
   (H)   Form of action taken and record thereof. The Board, and the Council on
appeal, shall provide for a record of its proceedings, which shall include the
minutes of its meeting, its findings and the action taken on each matter heard
by it, including its final order. The City Clerk shall maintain a permanent
record of the disposition of all appeals to the Council from decisions of the
Board.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 20.70; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.026 SCHEDULE OF FEES.
   (A)   No permit or certificate shall be issued unless or until the zoning
permit fees have been paid in full.
   (B)   The schedule of fees, as adopted by the City Council, is attached to
the ordinance codified herein as “Exhibit A”.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 20.80; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.027 AMENDMENTS AND CHANGES.
   (A)   Procedure.
      (1)   It is the intent of this chapter that all questions of
interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the administrative
official, and that the questions shall be presented to the Board of Appeals and
Adjustment only on appeal from the decision of the Zoning Administrator, and
that recourse from the decisions of the Board of Appeals and Adjustment shall
be in the courts as provided by law and particularly by statute.
      (2)   The procedure to be followed shall be as follows.
         (a)   Whenever a person desires that any amendment or change, be made
in this chapter, including the text and/or map, as to any property in the city,
there shall be presented to the Board of Appeals and Adjustments a petition
requesting the change or amendment and clearly describing the property and its
boundaries as to which the change or amendment is desired, duly signed by the
owner or owners of all real estate included within the boundaries of the tract
as described in the petition. It shall be the duty of the Board of Appeals and
Adjustments to vote upon the petition within 60 days after the filing of the
petition.
         (b)   A public hearing shall be held by the Board of Appeals and
Adjustments. Notice of time and place of the hearing shall be published not
less than four, nor more than 20, days preceding the hearing and at least once
in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, but the hearing shall not
take place less than seven days after date of publication. The Zoning
Administrator shall notify all adjacent or opposite property owners separated
by public right-of-way, as listed by the applicant in the original application,
of the time, date and subject matter of the hearing.
         (c)   In cases where a proposed amendment, supplement or change is
disapproved by the Board of Appeals and Adjustments, or a protest be presented
duly signed by the owners of 20% or more of the area of the lots included in
the proposed change or by the property owners of 20% or more of the property
which is located within 200 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property for
which the change or amendment was requested, the change or amendment shall not
become effective, except by the favorable vote of at least three-fourths of all
the members of the Council. It shall be the duty of the City Council to vote
upon the petition within 60 days after the receipt of the Board of Appeals and
Adjustments recommendation. Whenever any petition for an amendment, supplement
or change of the zoning or regulations herein contained or subsequently
established shall have been denied by the City Council, then no new petition
covering the same property or the same property and additional property shall
be filed or considered by the City Council until one year shall have elapsed
from the date of the filing of the first petition.
      (3)   Every petition requesting an amendment shall be accompanied by a
fee of an amount as set by City Council from time to time, plus an amount as
set by City Council from time to time per acre or fraction thereof contained in
the property subject to the petition, to cover publication and processing
costs; except that, a petition for rezoning to a Planned Unit Development
District shall instead be subject to fees as stipulated in §§
154.210 through
154.214 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 21.10; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
   (B)   Conditional/interim uses.
      (1)   Any landowner or his or her designated agent may file an
application to use the land for one or more of the conditional/interim uses
provided for in this chapter in the zoning district in which the land is
located.
      (2)   Any application shall be subject to the following requirements.
         (a)   An application for a conditional/interim use shall be filed with
the Zoning Administrator on a form prescribed by the Zoning Administrator. The
application shall be accompanied by the plans and/or data prescribed by the
Board of Appeals and Adjustments, a fee of an amount as set by City Council
from time to time to cover publication and processing costs and shall include a
statement in writing by the applicant and adequate evidence showing that the
proposed conditional/interim use will conform to the standards set forth in the
following divisions (B)(2)(b) through (B)(2)(e) below.
         (b)   Upon receipt in proper form of the application fee and
statement, the Board of Appeals and Adjustments shall hold at least one public
hearing on the proposed conditional/interim use. Notice of the hearing will be
published as set forth in division (A)(2) above. Supplemental or additional
notices may be published or distributed as the Board of Appeals and Adjustments
may, by rule, prescribe from time to time.
         (c)   For each application for conditional/interim use, the Board of
Appeals and Adjustments shall determine its findings and render a decision upon
the issuance of a conditional/interim use permit, including the stipulations of
additional conditions and guarantees that the conditions will be complied with
when they are deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest.
Whenever an application is denied, it cannot be renewed for one year
thereafter.
         (d)   No conditional/interim use shall be recommended by the Board of
Appeals and Adjustments unless the Board shall find:
            1.   The establishment, maintenance or operation of the
conditional/interim use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public
health, safety, morals, convenience, comfort or general welfare;
            2.   The conditional/interim use will not be injurious to the use
and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes
already permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property values within
the neighborhood;
            3.   The establishment of the use will not impede the normal
orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses
permitted in the district;
            4.   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or necessary
facilities have been or are being provided;
            5.   Measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and
egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets; and
         (e)   Prior to the granting of any conditional/interim use, the Board
of Appeals and Adjustments shall stipulate the conditions and restrictions upon
the establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of the
conditional/interim use as is deemed necessary for the protection of the public
interest and to secure compliance with the standards and requirements specified
in division (B)(2)(d) above. In all cases in which conditional/interim uses are
granted, the Board of Appeals and Adjustments shall require the evidence and
guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated in
connection therewith are being and will be complied with.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 21.20; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
DISTRICT ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 154.040 DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
   To carry out the purpose of this chapter, the city is hereby divided into
different zoning district classifications as follows:
A     Agriculture District
BF    Bluff Protection Overlay District
C-A   Arterial Commercial District
C-CBD Central Business District Commercial District
FP    Floodplain Management District
I-1   Light Industrial District
I-2   Heavy Industrial District
PUD   Planned Unit Development District
R-1   Single-Family Residential District
R-2   Single-Family Residential District
R-3   Multi-Family Residential District
R-MH  Manufactured Home District
 
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 3.10; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.041 ZONING MAP.
   (A)   (1)   The boundaries of these districts are indicated upon the
Official Zoning Map of the city, which map is made a part of this chapter by
reference hereto.
      (2)   The official zoning map and all the notations, references and other
matters shown thereon shall be as much a part of this chapter as if the
notations, references and other matters set forth by the map were all fully
described herein.
      (3)   The Official Zoning Map shall be on file in the office of the City
Clerk and shall bear the signature of the Mayor, attested to by the City Clerk.
   (B)   If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are
made in the district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the official
zoning map, the ordinance number and date of change shall be recorded by the
City Clerk on the official zoning map.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f96a454829628dad3923165be401283a1782260/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1320.png]
 
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 3.20; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.042 INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the
official zoning map on file in the office of the City Clerk, the following
rules shall apply.
   (A)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow the center lines.
   (B)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines
shall be construed as following the lot lines.
   (C)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be
construed as following the city limits.
   (D)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streams, rivers, canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to
following the center lines.
   (E)   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features
indicated in divisions (A) through (D) above shall be so construed. Distances
not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by
the scale of the map.
   (F)   Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map or in other circumstances
not covered by divisions (A) through (E) above, the Zoning Administrator shall
interpret the district boundaries.
   (G)   The district boundaries are either streets or alleys unless otherwise
shown, and where the districts designated on the map made a part of this
chapter are bounded approximately by street or alley lines, the street or alley
shall be construed to be the boundary of the district.
   (H)   Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated and where
the property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and lots, the
district boundaries shall be construed to be the lot lines, and where the
districts designated on the map made a part of this chapter are bounded
approximately by lot lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the boundary
of the districts unless the boundaries are otherwise indicated on the map.
   (I)   In subdivided property, the district boundary lines on the map made a
part of this chapter shall be determined by use of the scale contained on the
map.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 3.30; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.043 ANNEXED TERRITORY.
   All property which is annexed to the city subsequent to the effective date
hereof shall be placed in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District unless the
annexation ordinance temporarily places the land in another district. Within
one year following annexation, the Planning Commission shall evaluate and
recommend a permanent district classification to the City Council.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 3.40; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
A - AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
§ 154.055 INTENT.
   This district is intended to provide areas in which agriculture and related
uses are encouraged and prime agricultural land will be preserved. Usual urban
residential densities are not allowed until streets, utilities and other
services and facilities can properly and economically be extended to serve the
areas, to promote the orderly development and fiscal integrity of the city.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 5.10; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.056 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses are permitted in the A - Agriculture District:
   (A)   Single-family detached dwellings;
   (B)   Agriculture;
   (C)   Golf courses;
   (D)   Open spaces;
   (E)   Parks; and
   (F)   Accessory uses incidental to and on the same zoning lot as the
principal use as follows:
      (1)   Agriculture buildings and structures;
      (2)   Club houses and other structures on the grounds of golf course;
      (3)   Garages and carports;
      (4)   Private greenhouses; and
      (5)   Private guest houses.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 5.20; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.057 CONDITIONAL/INTERIM USES.
   The following uses may be permitted in the A - Agriculture District on a
conditional/interim use basis, following approval in the manner described in §
154.027(A) of this chapter:
   (A)   Airports and commercial heliports, including aircraft landing fields,
runways, flight strips and flying schools, together with hangars, terminal
buildings and other auxiliary facilities;
   (B)   Bed and breakfast lodging;
   (C)   Campgrounds and recreational trailer parks;
   (D)   Cemeteries;
   (E)   Commercial greenhouses and nurseries;
   (F)   Commercial stables;
   (G)   Dog kennels, excluding animal hospitals, veterinary clinics and pet
stores;
   (H)   Filtration plants;
   (I)   Mining and extraction of minerals or raw materials;
   (J)   Plants processing agricultural products produced on the premises;
   (K)   Public or private educational facilities;
   (L)   Public utility and services uses, including, but not limited to,
electric substations, gas regulator stations, radio and television transmitting
towers;
   (M)   Railroad rights-of-way, but not including railroad yards and shops;
   (N)   Religious institutions including churches and synagogues;
   (O)   Sewage treatment plants, publicly operated; and
   (P)   All other uses of a similar character as may be determined by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 5.30; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.058 BULK REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Height. The maximum height of buildings shall not exceed 35 feet or
two and one-half stories, excluding farm buildings.
   (B)   Yard setbacks.
      (1)   Front yard. A front yard not less than 50 feet shall be provided.
      (2)   Side yard. A side yard of not less than 25 feet shall be provided
for interior and corner lots.
      (3)   Rear yard. A rear yard of not less than 35 feet shall be provided.
      (4)   Corner side yard. There shall be provided a side yard of not less
than 50 feet in every instance where the side lot line is adjacent to a public
street.
   (C)   Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall be ten acres.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 5.40; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.059 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
   Spaces for off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance
with the provisions of §§
154.320 through
154.325 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 5.50; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.060 DEVELOPMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Emissions of noise, vibration, dust, smoke or other particulate
matter, toxic materials, odor or glare shall not exceed the standards set by
the state’s Pollution Control Agency.
   (B)   Storage or sale of gas, fuel or oil shall comply with and be approved
by the Chief of the Fire Department.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 5.60; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
R-1 - SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 154.075 INTENT.
   The R-1 Single-Family Residential District is intended to provide space for
medium sized lots for single-family detached dwellings in areas planned as
neighborhoods that are or soon will be served by a full range of public
services.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 6.10; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.076 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses are permitted in the R-1 Single-Family Residential
District: any use permitted in the R-2 District.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 6.20; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.077 CONDITIONAL/INTERIM USES.
   The following uses may be permitted in the R-1 Single-Family Residential
District on a conditional basis, following approval in the manner described in
§
154.027(A) of this chapter: any use listed as a conditional/interim use in the
R-2 District.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 6.30; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.078 BULK REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Height. The maximum height of buildings shall not exceed 35 feet or
two and one-half stories.
   (B)   Yard setbacks.
      (1)   Front yard. A front yard of not less than 25 feet shall be
provided.
      (2)   Side yard. A side yard of not less than ten feet shall be provided.
      (3)   Rear yard. A rear yard of not less than 30 feet shall be provided.
      (4)   Corner side yard. There shall be provided a side yard of not less
than 25 feet in every instance where the side lot line is adjacent to a public
street.
   (C)   Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 8,000 square feet.
   (D)   Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 70 feet at setback
lines.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 6.40; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.079 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
   Spaces for off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance
with the provisions of §§
154.320 through
154.325 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 6.50; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
R-2 - SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 154.090 INTENT.
   The R-2 Single-Family Residential District is intended to provide space for
relatively large lots for single-family detached dwellings in areas planned as
neighborhoods that are or soon will be served by a full range of public
services.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 7.10; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.091 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses are permitted in the R-2 Single-Family Residential
District:
   (A)   Public parks and recreational open spaces;
   (B)   Single-family detached dwellings; and
   (C)   Accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the same zoning lot as
the principal use such as the following:
      (1)   Private garage or carport;
      (2)   Private greenhouses, guest houses, boat houses and utility
buildings;
      (3)   Private recreational facilities; and
      (4)   Storage of building materials and equipment and temporary buildings
for construction purposes, which storage and buildings shall be removed upon
the completion or abandonment of the construction work.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 7.20; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.092 CONDITIONAL/INTERIM USES.
   The following uses may be permitted in the R-2 Single-Family Residential
District on a conditional basis, following approval in the manner described in
§
154.027(A) of this chapter:
   (A)   Cemeteries;
   (B)   Bed and breakfast lodging;
   (C)   Museums, libraries and other public or private educational
institutions;
   (D)   Public buildings erected or used by a department of the city, county,
state or federal government;
   (E)   Garage or carport, additional, incidental to a permitted use;
   (F)   Public or private schools;
   (G)   Public utility and service uses, including, but not limited to,
electric substations, gas regulator stations or telephone transmission
buildings;
   (H)   Recreational facilities, public or private;
   (I)   Religious institutions including churches and synagogues;
   (J)   Accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the same zoning lot as
the principal use;
   (K)   Home occupation of the home office of a physician, dentist, artist,
landscape architect, architect, engineer, attorney, teacher or other member of
a recognized profession, in his or her bonafide and primary residence; provided
that, no more than one assistant shall be regularly employed therein and no
colleagues or associates shall use the office; not more than one-half of the
area of one floor shall be used for the office. The following elements will be
considered in determining whether a home business exists:
      (1)   Meetings with customers occur on the premises;
      (2)   Mail or packages or materials for the business are delivered to the
premises;
      (3)   The business lists its mailing address as being on the premises;
and
      (4)   Goods or services are sold to customers on the premises.
   (L)   Accessory apartments; and
   (M)   Two-family dwellings.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 7.30; Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord.
passed 2- -2000; Ord. passed 5-22-2000; Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -
2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.093 BULK REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Height. The maximum height of buildings shall not exceed 35 feet or
two and one-half stories.
   (B)   Yard setbacks.
      (1)   Front yard. A front yard of not less than 35 feet shall be
provided.
      (2)   Side yard. A side yard of not less than ten feet shall be provided.
      (3)   Rear yard. A rear yard of not less than 35 feet shall be provided.
      (4)   Corner side yard. There shall be provided a side yard of not less
than 35 feet in every instance where the side lot line is adjacent to a public
street.
   (C)   Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 15,000 square feet for
all permitted and conditional/interim uses.
   (D)   Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 90 feet.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 7.40; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.094 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
   Spaces for off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance
with the provisions of §§
154.320 through
154.325 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 7.50; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
R-3 - MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 154.105 INTENT.
   The R-3 Multi-Family Residential District is intended to provide space for
development of relatively high density residential uses, predominantly
apartment or single-family attached dwelling units. Developments in this
district are characterized by shared parking, open space and other facilities,
located near major arterial streets and shopping facilities in neighborhoods
that are or soon will be served by a full range of public facilities.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 8.10; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.106 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses are permitted in R-3 Multi-Family Residential District:
   (A)   Any use permitted in the R-1 District;
   (B)   Multiple-family dwellings; and
   (C)   Single-family attached dwellings
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 8.20; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.107 CONDITIONAL/INTERIM USES.
   The following uses may be permitted in the R-3 Multi-Family Residential
District on a conditional basis, following approval in the manner described in
§
154.027(B) of this chapter:
   (A)   Any use listed as conditional/interim use in the R-2 District;
   (B)   Health and medical institutions, including convalescent, nursing and
rest homes, hospitals and sanitariums (but not including medical and dental
clinics);
   (C)   Lodging or boarding houses, including dormitories, fraternities or
sororities; and
   (D)   Private clubs and lodges, except those whose chief activity is a
service customarily carried on as a business.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 8.30; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.108 BULK REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Height. The maximum height of buildings shall not exceed 45 feet or
three stories.
   (B)   Yard setbacks.
      (1)   Front yard. A front yard of not less than 25 feet shall be
provided.
      (2)   Side yard. A side yard of not less than six feet shall be provided
for structures two and one-half stories or less in height; over two and one-
half stories, a side yard of not less than ten feet shall be provided.
      (3)   Rear yard. A rear yard of not less than 25 feet shall be provided.
      (4)   Corner side yard. There shall be provided a side yard of not less
than 25 feet in every instance whether the side lot line is adjacent to a
public street.
   (C)   Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 6,000 square feet.
   (D)   Minimum lot area per family. There shall be provided at least 1,800
square feet of lot area per dwelling unit for multiple-family dwellings, 3,000
square feet of lot area per family for two-family dwellings, 6,000 square feet
of lot area per family for single-family dwellings and all other permitted or
conditional/interim uses.
   (E)   Minimum lot width. The average minimum lot width shall be not less
than 50 feet.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 8.40; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.109 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
   Spaces for off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance
with the provisions of §§
154.320 through
154.325 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 8.50; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
R-MH - MANUFACTURED HOME DISTRICT
§ 154.120 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   There is hereby created and established within the city a district to
be known as the R-MH Manufactured Home District. The R-MH Manufactured Home
District shall provide for mobile home parks in areas of the community where
the use is compatible with existing and indicated future development.
   (B)   This district shall be served by streets to provide adequate access to
each lot. Before any petition for the establishment of a Manufactured Home
District is submitted to the Planning Commission, it shall be accompanied by a
plan for development that conforms to the requirements of this chapter and
state law and regulations.
   (C)   The developer shall show the Planning Commission evidence that the
proposed plan meets all requirements of the state before the plan may be
approved.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 9.10; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.121 PERMITTED USES.
   The uses of land permitted in the R-MH Manufactured Home District are mobile
home parks and complementary uses such as administration buildings, storm
shelters and services offered for the use of the residents of the mobile home
parks.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 9.20; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.122 GROSS DEVELOPMENT AREA DENSITY.
   (A)   The area proposed for a mobile home park shall have at least five
acres of gross development area.
   (B)   The area may be developed in two or more stages; provided that, each
stage conforms in all respects with the overall mobile home park development
plan.
   (C)   (1)   The maximum gross development area shall be limited to 20 acres.
      (2)   The maximum density allowed for the gross development areas shall
be six mobile home units per acre.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 9.30; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.123 STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A mobile home shall not be occupied for dwelling purposes unless it is
properly connected to municipal water, sewer and electrical utilities.
   (B)   No mobile home shall be connected to water, sewer or electrical
services after the date of this chapter unless the mobile home compiles with
the standards and requirements prescribed by the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development if manufactured after 6-14-1976 or standards
required by American National Standards Institute (ANSI Al 19.1) or the
provisions of the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA 501B) if
manufactured before 6-14-1976.
   (C)   A certificate, if issued by the manufacturer of the mobile home, shall
be permanently affixed on a readily visible location on the exterior of the
mobile home as prima facie evidence of compliance.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 9.40; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.124 LOT AREA.
   Every lot upon which a mobile home unit is located shall have adequate
access to a public street and shall conform to the following minimum lot area
and spacing requirements; for residential use, the lot area shall be a minimum
of 5,000 square feet with a minimum lot width of 50 feet.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 9.50; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.125 SETBACKS AND SEPARATION.
   Every lot shall have a front setback of not less than 25 feet in depth,
measured from the edge of the surface private street or 20 feet from the public
street right-of-way. There must be at least a ten-foot side yard setback and a
minimum of 20 feet rear yard setback. Decks attached to a mobile home may
intrude up to five feet into a setback area. Storage buildings may intrude into
the rear yard, but shall be located at least three feet from the side and rear
lot lines. No storage building shall be located in the required front yard or
in the side yard adjacent to the home.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 9.60; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.126 SOIL AND GROUND COVER.
   Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every mobile home park shall be
paved, covered with stone screening or other solid material or protected with a
vegetative growth capable of preventing soil erosion and objectionable dust.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 9.70; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.127 SIGNS.
   (A)   One permanent, low-illuminated identification sign may be permitted at
any entrance to a mobile home park.
   (B)   The sign shall be of ornamental metal, stone, masonry or other
permanent materials, and shall include only the name of the mobile home park.
   (C)   The sign shall not exceed 16 square feet in surface area, and the
maximum height above street grade shall be as follows: if located on the lot
line, it shall not exceed two feet in height; however, the sign may be located
in required yard and for every three feet it is set back from the lot line, the
sign may be one foot greater in height, up to a maximum of six feet.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 9.80; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.128 CONDITIONAL/INTERIM USES.
   The following uses may be permitted in the R-MH Manufactured Home District
on a conditional use basis, following approval in the manner prescribed in §
154.027(B) of this chapter: recreational camping area (RCA), as currently
licensed through the state’s Department of Health.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 9.10; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010; Ord. passed
11-22-2010)
C-A - ARTERIAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
§ 154.140 INTENT.
   The C-A Arterial Commercial District is intended to provide space for
commercial areas located outside the central business district. These districts
accommodate a wide range of facilities with a city- wide impact and include, as
well, much of the commercial frontage along the major transportation arteries.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 10.10; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.141 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses are permitted in the C-A District:
   (A)   Adult establishments, adult bookstores, adult cabarets, adult mini
motion picture theaters, adult motion picture theaters and sexual activity
establishments.
      (1)   Location. These uses shall not be located within 500 feet of each
other, nor shall they be located within 500 feet of any public or parochial
school, licensed day care facility, church, public park or residential zoning
district.
      (2)   Restrictions. All building openings, entries, windows and the like
shall be covered or screened in such a manner as to prevent a view into the
interior from any public or semi-public area; and for new construction, and
whenever else it is considered feasible by the Zoning Administrator, the
building shall be oriented so as to minimize any possibility of viewing the
interior from public or semipublic areas. Advertisements, displays or other
promotional materials shall not be shown or exhibited so as to be visible to
the public from pedestrian sidewalks, walkways or from other public or semi-
public areas. Any such advertisements, displays or other promotional materials
shall be considered as signs and shall comply with §§
154.340  through
154.352 of this chapter.
   (B)   Amusement establishments, including bowling alleys, dance halls, pool
halls, swimming pools and skating rinks;
   (C)   Antique shops;
   (D)   Art shops and picture framing establishments;
   (E)   Automobile service stations, parts and accessory stores or washing
establishments;
   (F)   Automobile, trailer, motorcycle, boat and farm implement
establishments for display, hire, rental and sales (including sales lots),
including as incidental to the major uses all repair work in connection with
their own or customers’ vehicles. However, this division (E) shall not be
construed to include automobile, tractor or machinery wrecking and rebuilding
and used parts yards;
   (G)   Baby and children’s shops;
   (H)   Bakeries or bakery outlet, retail sales only;
   (I)   Banks, savings and loan associations or similar companies;
   (J)   Barber shops or beauty shops;
   (K)   Bed and breakfast lodging;
   (L)   Bicycle shops, sales and repairs;
   (M)   Blueprinting and photostatting establishments;
   (N)   Bookstores;
   (O)   Building materials sales;
   (P)   Business and professional offices;
   (Q)   Business machine sales and service;
   (R)   Business or secretarial schools or colleges, commercial trade schools
or other commercially operated schools for adults;
   (S)   Camera stores;
   (T)   Carpenter and cabinet making shops for retail custom work;
   (U)   Carpet and rug stores, retail sales only;
   (V)   Catalog sales stores;
   (W)   Catering establishments;
   (X)   China and glassware stores;
   (Y)   Churches, temples or synagogues;
   (Z)   Cigar, tobacco and pipe shops;
   (AA)   Clinics;
   (BB)   Clothes cleaning establishments and laundry pick-up stations;
   (CC)   Clothing stores;
   (DD)   Clubs or lodges, non-profit or fraternal;
   (EE)   Coin or philatelic stores;
   (FF)   Collection office of public utility;
   (GG)   Community or neighborhood centers or meeting halls;
   (HH)   Confectionery stores;
   (II)   Dance studios;
   (JJ)   Delicatessens;
   (KK)   Department stores;
   (LL)   Drug stores;
   (MM)   Dry goods stores;
   (NN)   Dwelling units when constructed in conjunction with or as part of a
structure occupied by a use permitted or conditionally permissible by this
chapter;
   (OO)   Employment agencies;
   (PP)   Florist shops;
   (QQ)   Food stores, including supermarkets, dairy stores, produce markets
and meat and/or fish markets;
   (RR)   Funeral homes, mortuaries and crematories;
   (SS)   Furniture and home furnishing stores;
   (TT)   Garden supply, tool and seed stores;
   (UU)   Gift or hobby shops;
   (VV)   Hardware stores;
   (WW)   Health studios, gyms or recreational establishments;
   (XX)   Hobby shops;
   (YY)   Hospitals;
   (ZZ)   Hotels;
   (AAA)   Household appliances, sales and/or repair;
   (BBB)   Jewelry stores and watch repair shops;
   (CCC)   Labor union offices;
   (DDD)   Lawn mower repair shops;
   (EEE)   Leather goods stores;
   (FFF)   Locker plant, for storage and retail shops only;
   (GGG)   Locksmith and gunsmith shops;
   (HHH)   Magazine and newspaper stores;
   (III)   Motels, motor hotels and tourist courts;
   (JJJ)   Music stores or studios;
   (KKK)   Nursery schools or day care centers;
   (LLL)   Office supply stores;
   (MMM)   Optician sales, retail;
   (NNN)   Orthopedic and medical appliance stores;
   (OOO)   Paint, glass and wallpaper stores;
   (PPP)   Parking lots, other than accessory, and subject to the provisions of
§§
154.320 through
154.325 of this chapter;
   (QQQ)   Pawn shops;
   (RRR)   Pet stores;
   (SSS)   Photographic studios, including the developing of film and pictures
when conducted as part of the principal business on the premises;
   (TTT)   Plumbing and heating shops;
   (UUU)   Post offices;
   (VVV)   Printing and publishing;
   (WWW)   Public auction room;
   (XXX)   Public neighborhood recreational or cultural centers;
   (YYY)   Radio and television sales and repair;
   (ZZZ)   Restaurants, taverns and cocktail lounges including live
entertainment or dancing;
   (AAAA)   Shoe or clothing repair shops;
   (BBBB)   Sign painting shops;
   (CCCC)   Signs, in conformance with §§
154.340  through
154.352 of this chapter;
   (DDDD)   Small animal hospitals, and or small animal veterinary clinics;
provided, any outdoor exercising runway shall be at least 200 feet from any
residential boundary. Small animals are defined as pets and companion animals
(i.e., dogs, cats, birds, reptiles);
   (EEEE)   Sporting goods stores;
   (FFFF)   Tailor and dressmaking shops;
   (GGGG)   Taxidermists;
   (HHHH)   Telegraph offices;
   (IIII)   Telephone company offices and answering services;
   (JJJJ)   Television and radio studios;
   (KKKK)   Theaters, indoor;
   (LLLL)   Toy stores;
   (MMMM)   Travel agency;
   (NNNN)   Upholstering shops;
   (OOOO)   Variety stores and convenience stores including fuel sales; and
   (PPPP)   Accessory uses, incidental to and on the same zoning lot as a
permitted principal use.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 10.20; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.142 CONDITIONAL/INTERIM USES.
   The following uses may be permitted in the C-A District on a conditional
basis, following approval in the manner prescribed in §
154.027(B) of this chapter:
   (A)   Drive-in movie theaters;
   (B)   Dwelling units established as the sole principal use of a lot, as
permitted by and subject to the regulations of the least restrictive
residential district adjoining a C-A zoned lot, or in the event of no adjoining
residential district, then the residential uses permitted and subject to the
regulations of the R-3 District;
   (C)   Public utility service uses;
   (D)   Other commercial uses determined by the Board of Appeals and
Adjustment to be of the same general character as the uses permitted in this
district; and
   (E)   Accessory uses, incidental to and on the same zoning lot as the
principal use.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 10.30; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.143 BULK REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Height. A maximum height of buildings shall not exceed 35 feet.
   (B)   Yard setbacks.
      (1)   Front yard. A front yard not less than 25 feet shall be provided.
      (2)   Side yard. No side yard shall be required, except as required in
divisions (B)(4) or (B)(5) of this section. However, if a side yard is
provided, it shall be not less than five feet.
      (3)   Rear yard. A rear yard not less than 25 feet shall be provided,
except as required in division (B)(5) below.
      (4)   Corner side yard. There shall be provided a side yard of not less
than 25 feet in depth in every instance where the side lot line is adjacent to
a public street.
      (5)   Transitional yards. Where the side or rear lot line of a lot in the
C-A District coincides with a side or rear lot line in an adjacent residential
district, a yard shall be provided not less in width than 1.25 times the height
of the wall of the building on the C-A zoned lot. The side yard in the C-
A District shall not be less than 15 feet in width. The rear yard in the C-
A District shall not be less than 25 feet in width. Where a side or rear lot
line in the C-A District coincides with a side or rear lot line in an adjacent
residential district, the yard shall contain a wall, screening fence or
densely-planted compact hedge not less than five feet, nor more than ten feet,
in height, which wall, fence or hedge shall be well maintained.
   (C)   Lot area. There shah be provided not less than 2,000 square feet of
lot area for each commercial establishment. There shall also be provided not
less than 1,800 square feet of lot area for each dwelling unit constructed
under the provisions of §
154.141 of this chapter.
   (D)   Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio shall not exceed 1.0.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 10.40; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.144 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
   Spaces for off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance
with the provisions of §§
154.320 through
154.325 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 10.50; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
C-CBD - CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
§ 154.155 INTENT.
   The C-CBD Central Business District Commercial District is defined as the
major shopping area and center of commerce containing in addition to retail
uses, governmental offices, service uses, professional, cultural, recreational
and entertainment establishments and uses, residence, appropriate industrial
activities and transportation facilities designed to provide space for a wide
variety of retail stores, offices and related activities which serve the entire
city or may even have regional impact. This district is characterized by high
intensity and large bulk development. It is intended that this district not be
mapped outside the downtown area.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 11.10; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.156 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses are permitted in the C-CBD District:
   (A)   Uses permitted in the C-A District;
   (B)   Multiple-family dwellings;
   (C)   Accessory uses incidental to and on the same zoning lot as a permitted
principal use; and
   (D)   Accessory apartments.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 11.20; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 5-22-2000; Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed
8- -2010)
§ 154.157 CONDITIONAL/INTERIM USES.
   The following uses may be permitted in the C-CBD District on a conditional/
interim use basis, following approval in the manner prescribed in §
154.027(B) of this chapter:
   (A)   Drive-in establishments excluding drive-in theaters;
   (B)   Warehousing; and
   (C)   Accessory uses incidental to and on the same zoning lot as the
principal use.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 11.30; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.158 BULK REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Height. The maximum height of buildings shall not exceed 100 feet.
   (B)   Yard setbacks.
      (1)   Front yard. None required.
      (2)   Side yard. None required, except as required in division (B)(5)
below. However, if a side yard is provided, it shall be not less than five
feet.
      (3)   Rear yard. None required.
      (4)   Corner side yard. None required.
      (5)   Transitional yards.
         (a)   Where the side or rear lot line of a lot in the C-CBD District
coincides with a side or rear lot line in an adjacent residential district, a
yard shall be provided not less in width than 1.35 times the height of the wall
of the building on the C-CBD zoned lot. The side yard in the C-CBD District
shall not be less than ten feet in width.
         (b)   Where a side or rear lot line in the C-CBD District coincides
with a side or rear lot line in an adjacent residential district, the yard
provided shall contain a wall, screening fence or densely-planted compact hedge
not less than five feet, nor more than ten feet, in height, which wall, fence
or hedge shall be well maintained.
   (C)   Lot area. No minimum. Also, no minimum lot area per dwelling unit for
multiple-family residential uses.
   (D)   Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio shall not exceed 6.0 for non-
residential uses.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 11.40; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.159 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
   Spaces for off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance
with the provisions of §§
154.320 through
154.325 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 11.50; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
I-1 - LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
§ 154.170 INTENT.
   The I-1 Light Industrial District is designed to provide an environment
suitable for industrial activities that do not create appreciable nuisances or
hazards, or that require a pleasant, hazard- and nuisance-free environment. It
is intended that the permitted uses be compatible and not detrimental to
adjacent properties.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 12.10; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.171 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses are permitted in the I-1 Light Industrial District:
   (A)   Agricultural equipment manufacture, rental or sales;
   (B)   Alcoholic beverages manufacture, bottling or wholesaling;
   (C)   Automobile assembly, body and fender works, painting, upholstery,
repair or sales;
   (D)   Automobile service stations, for the retail sale or dispensing of
fuel, lubricants, tires, batteries, accessories and supplies including
installation and minor services customarily incidental thereto; facilities for
chassis and gear lubrication are permitted only if enclosed in a building;
   (E)   Bottling plants;
   (F)   Building material sales;
   (G)   Car washes;
   (H)   Cartage and express facilities;
   (I)   Cold storage plant;
   (J)   Contractors’, architects’ and engineers’ offices, shops and yards;
such as building, cement, electrical, heating, ventilating and air
conditioning, masonry, painting, plumbing, refrigeration and roofing;
   (K)   Distribution plant;
   (L)   Dog kennel and facility for boarding, breeding or training;
   (M)   Dry cleaning and laundry establishments with no limitation on number
of employees;
   (N)   Dwelling units for watchmen and their families, located on the
premises where they are employed in such capacity;
   (O)   Electrical appliance and equipment manufacturing;
   (P)   Electrical supplies sales, warehousing and distribution;
   (Q)   Electronic instrument and device manufacturing, repair and service;
   (R)   Farm and industrial machinery sales and repair;
   (S)   Film processing;
   (T)   Fuel sales;
   (U)   Fumigating contractor;
   (V)   Garages for storage, repair and servicing of motor vehicles;
   (W)   Greenhouses, wholesale;
   (X)   Ice manufacture, sales and storage;
   (Y)   Instrument manufacturing - dental, optical, surgical, measuring,
musical;
   (Z)   Laboratories for research, testing and experimental purposes;
   (AA)   Large animal hospital and/or large animal veterinary clinics,
provided any outdoor exercising runway shall be at least 200 feet from any
residential boundary. Large animals are defined as horses and food animals
(i.e., cows, pigs and sheep);
   (BB)   Machine shop;
   (CC)   Mail order houses;
   (DD)   Paint mixing (no boiling);
   (EE)   Parking lots, other than accessory, and subject to the provisions of
§§
154.320 through
154.325 of this chapter;
   (FF)   Photographic equipment manufacture (except film and chemicals);
   (GG)   Plating;
   (HH)   Plumbing contractor’s office and plumbing supplies sales and
wholesaling;
   (II)   Pottery and statuary manufacturing;
   (JJ)   Printing and publishing;
   (KK)   Public utility and service uses including:
      (1)   Bus stations, bus terminals, bus turn-arounds (off-street), bus
garages and bus lots;
      (2)   Fire stations;
      (3)   Police stations;
      (4)   Railroad passenger stations;
      (5)   Railroad rights-of-way;
      (6)   Telephone exchanges, telephone transmission equipment buildings and
microwave relay towers;
      (7)   Utility service substations - electric, gas, telephone and water;
and
      (8)   Waterworks, reservoirs, pumping stations and filtration plants.
   (LL)   Radar installations and towers;
   (MM)   Radio and television studios, stations and towers, transmitting and
receiving;
   (NN)   Signs in compliance with §§
154.340  through
154.352 of this chapter;
   (OO)   Trade schools;
   (PP)   Truck terminals;
   (QQ)   Warehousing and storage facilities;
   (RR)   Weighing stations, operated by the state;
   (SS)   The manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of
cosmetics, pharmaceuticals and food products, except fish and meat products,
cereals, sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast, stock feed, flour and the rendering or
refining of fats and oils;
   (TT)   The manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles or
merchandise from previously prepared materials such as bone, cloth, cork,
fiber, leather, paper, plastics, metals or stones, tobacco, wax, yams and wood;
and
   (UU)   Accessory uses incidental to and on the same zoning lot as a
permitted principal use.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 12.20; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.172 CONDITIONAL/INTERIM USES.
   The following uses may be permitted in the I-1 Light Industrial District on
a conditional basis, following approval in the manner prescribed in §
154.027(B) of this chapter: uses permitted in the C-A Arterial Commercial
District, except residential uses:
   (A)   Airports and commercial heliports, including aircraft landing fields,
runways, flight strips and flying schools, together with hangars, terminal
buildings and other auxiliary facilities;
   (B)   Air, railroad and water freight terminals, railroad switching and
classification yards, repair shops and roundhouses;
   (C)   By-products processing;
   (D)   Heliports, private;
   (E)   Institutions for the care or treatment of alcoholics, drug addict
patients or the mentally ill or retarded;
   (F)   Manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of fish
and meat products, cereals, sauerkraut, pickles, vinegar, yeast, stock feed or
flour;
   (G)   Parks and playgrounds;
   (H)   Penal and correctional institutions;
   (I)   Race tracks of all kinds;
   (J)   Recreational buildings or community centers;
   (K)   Stadiums, auditoriums and arenas, open or enclosed;
   (L)   Theaters, automobile drive-ins;
   (M)   Other manufacturing, processing, storage or commercial uses determined
by the Zoning Board of Adjustment to be of the same general character as the
uses permitted in this District and found not to be obnoxious, unhealthful or
offensive by reason of the potential emission or transmission of noise,
vibration, smoke, dust, odors, toxic or noxious matter, glare, heat, fire or
explosives hazards; and
   (N)   Accessory uses incidental to and on the same zoning lot as the
principal use.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 12.30; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.173 PROHIBITED USES.
   The following uses are specifically prohibited from the I-1 Light Industrial
District:
   (A)   Dwelling units and lodging rooms, other than watchmen’s quarters as
specified in §
154.171 of this chapter;
   (B)   Acid manufacture or storage except on a limited scale as an accessory
use to a permitted industry;
   (C)   Garbage, waste materials, offal, dead animal or refuse incineration or
storage;
   (D)   Manufacture of fertilizer;
   (E)   Manufacture or storage of gun powder, fireworks or other explosives;
   (F)   Slaughterhouses and stockyards; and
   (G)   Similar uses which create excessive hazards, noise, vibrations, smoke,
dust, odors, heat, glare or other objectionable influence beyond the property
boundaries.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 12.40; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.174 BULK REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Height. The maximum height of buildings shall not exceed 75 feet or
six stories.
   (B)   Yard setbacks.
      (1)   Front yard. A front yard not less than 25 feet shall be provided.
      (2)   Side yard.
         (a)   No side yard shall be required, except as required in divisions
(B)(4) and (B)(5) below.
         (b)   However, if a side yard is provided, it shall be not less than
five feet.
      (3)   Rear yard. No rear yard shall be required, except as required in
division (B)(5) below.
      (4)   Corner side yard. There shall be provided a side yard of not less
than 25 feet in depth in every instance where the side lot line is adjacent to
a public street.
      (5)   Transitional yards. Where the side or rear lot line in the I-
1 District coincides with a side or rear lot line in an adjacent residential
district, a yard of not less than 15 feet shall be provided along the side or
rear lot line on the industrial lot.
   (C)   Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio shall not exceed 1.5.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 12.50; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.175 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
   Spaces for off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance
with the provisions of §§
154.320 through
154.325 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 12.60; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.176 DEVELOPMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Emissions of noise, vibration, dust, smoke or other particulate
matter, toxic materials, odor or glare shall not exceed the standard set by the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
   (B)   Storage or sale of gas, fuel or oil shall comply with and be approved
by the Chief of the Fire Department.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 12.70; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
I-2 - HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
§ 154.190 INTENT.
   The I-2 Heavy Industrial District is designed to accommodate large,
relatively self-contained and isolated areas intended to be used for industrial
activities whose potential nuisance or hazard generation is moderately high.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 13.10; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.191 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses are permitted in the I-2 Heavy Industrial District:
   (A)   Any use permitted in the I-1 Light Industrial District; and
   (B)   Any other use not in conflict with any provision of city ordinances
regulation of nuisances and not listed in §§
154.192 and
154.193 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 13.20; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.192 CONDITIONAL/INTERIM USES.
   The following uses may be permitted in the I-2 Heavy Industrial District on
a conditional basis, following approval in the manner prescribed in §
154.027(B) of this chapter:
   (A)   Any use listed as a conditional/interim use in the 1-1 Light
Industrial District;
   (B)   Acid manufacture or wholesale storage of acids;
   (C)   Activities involving the manufacture, storage or utilization of
materials or products which decompose by detonation;
   (D)   Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris manufacture;
   (E)   Extraction of gravel, sand or other raw materials;
   (F)   Fat rendering or distillation of bones;
   (G)   Fertilizer manufacture;
   (H)   Garbage, waste materials, offal, dead animal or refuse dumping,
incineration or storage;
   (I)   Gas manufacture;
   (J)   Glue manufacture;
   (K)   Grain elevator;
   (L)   Junk yards and auto graveyards;
   (M)   Petroleum refining;
   (N)   Smelting of tin, copper, zinc or iron ores;
   (O)   Stockyards or slaughterhouses; and
   (P)   Tannery.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 13.30; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.193 PROHIBITED USES.
   The following uses are specifically prohibited from the I-2 Heavy Industrial
District: dwelling units and lodging rooms other than watchman’s quarters as
specified in §
154.171 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 13.40; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.194 BULK REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Height. No height limitation, except where buildings are erected
within 200 feet of a residence or business district, in which case buildings or
structures shall not exceed 75 feet in height.
   (B)   Yard setbacks.
      (1)   Front yard. A front yard not less than 25 feet shall be provided.
      (2)   Side yard. No side yard shall be required, except as required in
divisions (B)(4) and (B)(5) below. However, if a side yard is provided, it
shall be not less than five feet.
      (3)   Rear yard. No rear yard shall be required, except as required in
division (B)(5) below.
      (4)   Corner side yard. There shall be provided a side yard of not less
than 25 feet in depth in every instance where the side lot line is adjacent to
a public street.
      (5)   Transitional yards. Where the side or rear lot line in the I-
2 Heavy Industrial District coincides with a side or rear lot line in an
adjacent residential district, a yard of not less than 15 feet shall be
provided along the side or rear lot line on the industrial lot.
   (C)   Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio shall not exceed 2.0.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 13.50; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.195 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
   Spaces for off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance
with the provisions of §§
154.320 through
154.325 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 13.60; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.196 DEVELOPMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   Emissions of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate matter,
toxic materials, odor or glare shall not exceed the standards set by the
state’s Pollution Control Agency. Storage or sale of gas, fuel or oil shall
comply with and be approved by the Chief of the Fire Department.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 13.70; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
PUD - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
§ 154.210 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The PUD (Planned Unit Development District) is intended to encourage a
more efficient use of land and public services and greater amenity by allowing,
under certain circumstances, a more flexible means of land development or
redevelopment than is otherwise afforded through the strict enforcement of the
zoning requirements of other use districts for lot-by-lot development. Although
PUD developments may appear to deviate in certain aspects from a literal
interpretation of the zoning and subdivision ordinances, the PUD and its
accompanying guidelines are intended to allow freedom of design in order to
promote developments which will be an asset to the city by equaling or
surpassing the quality of developments resulting from the application of more
conventional zoning regulations.
   (B)   PUDs are conceived for use primarily in two situations:
      (1)   Vacant land. Areas of substantial open land where compliance with
this chapter may limit good urban planning, may restrict the full achievement
of the comprehensive plan or may not meet those changes in technology and
demand that would be consistent with the best interest of the city; and
      (2)   Built-up and aged areas. Areas of the city needing rehabilitation
and redevelopment, including areas which may be deficient in public facilities
and services, where it is believed that private investment should be encouraged
to contribute to that redevelopment; and in recognition that the necessary
redevelopment cannot be expected to take place in strict accordance with those
uniform regulations appropriate to more viable and established areas of the
city.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 14.10; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.211 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Each planned unit development, shall be comprised of one or more
subdistricts which shall be as follows:
      (1)   PUD - R and RH, Residential;
      (2)   PUD - C, Commercial; and
      (3)   PUD - I, Industrial.
   (B)   Permitted uses within each PUD subdistrict are as follows:
      (1)   PUD-R and RH: dwelling units in detached, semi-detached, attached
groups of attached or clustered or multi-storied structures, or any combination
thereof;
      (2)   PUD - C:
         (a)   Any commercial use which by design, use and restriction is
compatible with all adjacent uses; and
         (b)   Mixed commercial and residential use, located within the same
building.
      (3)   PUD - I: any industrial use which by design, use and restriction is
compatible with all adjacent uses; and
      (4)   In each of the above types, the following uses are permitted:
         (a)   Public and private educational and recreational facilities; and
         (b)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to a
permitted use.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 14.20; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.212 BULK REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Minimum lot size. There is no minimum site area for establishment of a
PUD District as long as other requirements and guidelines are met.
   (B)   Floor area ratios and open space ratios. The ratios shall be as
follows:
 
       Maximum Floor Area Ratio Minimum Open Space Ratio
PUD-R  0.25                     0.5
PUD-RH 0.75                     0.5
PUD-C  1.0                      0.5
PUD-I  1.0                      0.5
 
   (C)   Approval or rejection. The above bulk regulations, when met, shall not
automatically constitute approval of the submitted plan. The City Council
reserves the right to approve or reject any plans submitted that are not in
conformance with the city’s Comprehensive Plan, are not properly related to
adequate traffic arteries, are not compatible with surrounding land uses or are
not otherwise in the best interest of the city.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 14.30; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.213 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Ownership. A tract of land to be developed as a planned unit
development shall be under the control of:
      (1)   A single owner; or
      (2)   A group of land owners, acting through a corporation, partnership
or joint venture, where each owner agrees in advance to be bound by the
conditions and regulations which will be effective with the district.
   (B)   Plan preparation. The applicant is required to have the necessary
documents and supporting plans prepared by a registered landscape architect,
engineer, architect or certified planner.
   (C)   Number of buildings. More than one building may be placed in one
platted or recorded lot in any PUD.
   (D)   Zoning permit. No zoning permit shall be granted for any building on
land for which a plan for a PUD is in the process of city review or which does
not conform to the approved final plan.
   (E)   Occupancy and use. Occupancy and use of buildings and structures in a
PUD may be permitted when the buildings and structures have been completed to
the satisfaction of the city and the access drives and parking areas are
sufficiently completed to support emergency vehicles at all times and are kept
in a dust free condition. Final surfacing of streets, roadways and parking
areas and landscaping may be deferred over winter months upon written
application to and approval of the city.
   (F)   City and state regulations. Approval of PUD shall not relieve the
owner in any way from complying with the city and state regulations which
dictate circumstances under which subdivision plats must be approved.
   (G)   Covenants, easements and restrictions. The final plan will contain the
proposed covenants, easements and other provisions relating to the bulk,
location and density of the residential units, non-residential uses and public
facilities as are necessary for the welfare of the PUD and are consistent with
the best interest of the city.
   (H)   Streets, utilities, services and public facilities. The uniqueness of
each proposal for a PUD requires the specifications and standards for streets,
utilities and services may be subject to minor modifications from the
specifications and standards established in this chapter and other city
ordinances governing their construction. The City Council may, therefore, waive
or modify the specifications or standards where it is found that they are not
required in the interests of the residents or of the entire city.
   (I)   Open space. A primary function of the PUD provision is to encourage
development which will preserve and enhance the worthwhile, natural terrain
characteristics and not force intense development to utilize all portions of a
given site in order to arrive at the maximum density allowed. In evaluating
each individual proposal the recognition of this objective will be a basic
consideration in granting approval or denial including, but not limited to, the
following:
      (1)   The amount and location of common open space shall be consistent
with the stated purpose and intent of this section; and
      (2)   All common open space shall be labeled as such and as to its intent
or design functions.
   (J)   Architectural style. Architectural style of buildings shall not solely
be a basis for denial or approval of a plan. However, the overall appearance
and compatibility of individual buildings to other site elements or to
surrounding development will be primary considerations in the review stages of
the Planning Commission and the City Council.
   (K)   Review. The Planning Commission shall review each PUD at least once a
year until the development has been completed and shall make a report to the
City Council on the status of the development in each PUD District. If
development is not progressing according to schedule, the owner shall be
required to submit a statement to the city setting forth the reasons for the
lack of progress. If the Council finds that the development has not occurred
according to the established development schedule or is not otherwise
reasonable in the view of the Council, the Council may initiate rezoning to
remove the PUD District. If the City Council finds that insufficient progress
is made toward completion for a 24-month period following notification to the
owner of insufficient progress, the property shall automatically revert to the
zoning district existing on the property immediately prior to PUD zoning
approval. In any event, it shall not be necessary for the council to find the
rezoning to a PUD District was in error.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 14.40; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.214 APPROVAL PROCEDURES.
   The following procedures and requirements shall be met for the establishment
of a PUD District.
   (A)   Pre-application conference.
      (1)   Prior to filing an application for preliminary PUD plan approval,
the applicant shall consult with the Planning Commission to determine the
procedures and requirements governing approval of PUDs and shall submit a
concept plan. This plan should show the generalized overall plan for
development of the proposed PUD area. Included as a part of the overall plan
should be the following elements:
         (a)   Location and size of site;
         (b)   Street location, other public or private drives and generalized
parking areas;
         (c)   Approximate building location;
         (d)   Existing topography and illustration of existing drainage
considerations (proposed grades not necessary at this point);
         (e)   Approximate density and number and types of dwelling units;
         (f)   Existing tree masses and other geologic or environmentally
important characteristics;
         (g)   Proposed private and public ownership boundaries including
proposed private lots for sale as well as common ownership areas; and
         (h)   Project costs.
      (2)   The Planning Commission shall have 30 days in which to review and
comment in regard to the above listed items.
   (B)   Preliminary PUD Plan approval.
      (1)   Following review of and comment upon the concept plan, the
applicant shall submit an application for preliminary PUD plan approval to the
city. The application shall be deemed a petition for rezoning to a PUD
classification and shall include:
         (a)   The location, size and legal description of the site;
         (b)   The nature of the developer’s and landowner’s interest in the
land proposed to be developed including an attorney’s opinion as to ownership
or options to purchase land or lands proposed as part of the development
package;
         (c)   The total number of living units and the overall density of the
project defined as the number of living units per acre. Note: existing or
proposed public or semi-public park, church and school lands shall be excluded
from any residential density computations for purposes of determining total
residential holding capacities;
         (d)   The location and boundaries of proposed land uses, if more than
one proposed;
         (e)   Approximate height and location of buildings and other
structures;
         (f)   Land use intensity ratios computed for the proposed plan;
         (g)   Form of organization proposed to own and maintain public or
private open space;
         (h)   Preliminary layout of the proposed systems for the collection
and treatment of sanitary wastes and disposition of storm water;
         (i)   Proposed source and distribution of water facilities;
         (j)   The substance of covenants, grants of easements or other
restrictions proposed to be imposed upon the use of the land, buildings and
structures, including proposed easements or grants for utilities;
         (k)   The provisions for parking of motor vehicles including the total
number and location of public and private parking spaces;
         (l)   The location and width of proposed public and private streets
and thoroughfares;
         (m)   A schedule showing the proposed phasing and time limitations
within which applications for final approval of all phases and construction of
improvements within phases of the PUD are intended to be filed;
         (n)   Generalized preliminary grading plan, but not to include
detailed final grades or elevations;
         (o)   Generalized landscaping plan, but not to include detailed
planting list or planting plan;
         (p)   Generalized exterior building elevations and facades;
         (q)   Proposed private and public ownership boundaries including
proposed private lots for sale as well as common ownership areas;
         (r)   All maps and diagrams shall be of sufficient scale and size to
permit easy interpretation by the Commission, Council and staff;
         (s)   North arrow and graphic scale shall be provided with all maps or
sketches; and
         (t)   Maps illustrating the following information for the project area
and those adjoining properties within 200 feet (60m) of the proposed project
boundaries excluding street or highway right-of- way:
            1.   Existing zoning;
            2.   Existing land use; and
            3.   Existing ownership.
      (2)   A fee in the amount established by the city to cover the city’s
soft costs for engineering and legal services shall accompany the application.
      (3)   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing, following the
public notice method prescribed for zoning change requests, and make
recommendation to the City Council upon the application for preliminary
approval within 60 days following receipt of all required plans and
documentation. The City Council shall take final action of the preliminary PUD
plan within a reasonable time following receipt of the Planning Commission’s
recommendations.
      (4)   In granting approval of the preliminary PUD plan, the Planning
Commission and the City Council shall determine whether the PUD District
regulations and standards have been satisfied based on the preliminary plans
and specifications, after making the following findings:
         (a)   Ownership or contractual right to develop the property to be
developed is held by the applicant;
         (b)   Provision for public sewer and water facilities is adequate;
         (c)   The streets to be provided will assure a traffic circulation
pattern which minimizes through traffic, allows for adequate turning and
parking and provides ample space for the movement of public and private
vehicles for the servicing of the proposed land uses without blocking traffic;
         (d)   There will not be undue conflicts between pedestrian and
vehicular traffic;
         (e)   The design of open spaces and housing will assure both easy
access and privacy;
         (f)   Adequate street, parking, walkway and accessory lighting will be
provided;
         (g)   Continuity of open space and recreation areas will be
maintained;
         (h)   Provision has been made for:
            1.   The preservation of existing vegetative, geologic, historic or
other environmentally important characteristics of the site; and
            2.   Where existing landscape; materials, are inadequate to create
an esthetically pleasing atmosphere, additional trees, shrubs and other
appropriate plant materials will be added.
         (i)   In a PUD, adequate deed restrictions and covenants are present,
running in favor of any one or more of the following:
            1.   The city;
            2.   An automatic homeowner’s association; or
            3.   Individual homeowners, for the proper maintenance, care and
preservation of the exterior design, all common structures, facilities, sewer
and water utilities, pedestrian and vehicular access and open spaces by the
original and all subsequent owners of property within the development.
         (j)   In addition to other deed restrictions or covenants, running in
favor of the city, there shall be provision for the free and uninhibited access
to all private or common areas by the fire, police or other public safety
vehicles and personnel for the customary performance of their respective duties
and responsibilities.
      (5)   If the primary PUD plan is approved, the approval shall constitute
a rezoning of the property as designed on the plan and the applicant shall
proceed to final PUD plan approval. If the application for preliminary PUD plan
is denied, the applicant must submit another application and fee to receive
consideration.
   (C)   Final PUD plan approval.
      (1)   (a)   Within one year following City Council approval of the
preliminary PUD plan, an application for final PUD plan approval shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission and the City Council.
         (b)   The final PUD plan shall include either the entire site included
in the preliminary PUD plan or a portion thereof in accordance with the phasing
plan approved.
         (c)   Subsequent final PUD plan submittals shall be submitted in
accordance with the approved phasing plan.
      (2)   A fee in the amount established by the city, in addition to the
following information, drawings and data, shall accompany each application:
         (a)   A plan with locations of all structures including placement,
size and type with topography showing two-foot contour intervals;
         (b)   Elevations or sections through the site which will best indicate
the relationship of the building with the various terrain features and site
elements;
         (c)   Detailed grading and drainage plan at two-foot contour
intervals;
         (d)   Utility plan for all public utilities;
         (e)   Detailed landscape plan;
         (f)   Deed restrictions, covenants, agreements, by-laws, of proposed
homeowner’s association and other documents controlling the use of property,
type of construction or development or the activities of future residents;
         (g)   The procedures for approving and recording of plats shall be
followed if the final plan involves platting or division of land or the
platting of public streets; and
         (h)   Any other information which is necessary, to fully represent the
intentions of the preliminary plan.
      (3)   The Planning Commission shall consider the final PUD plan and make
recommendation to the City Council within 60 days following submission of the
required material. The City Council shall make its consideration and
determination within a reasonable time following receipt of the Planning
Commission’s recommendation. In granting final approval of the application, the
Planning Commission and the City Council shall determine whether the following
PUD District regulations and standards have been satisfied based on the final
PUD plans and specifications which shall include final forms of all documents,
maps, tables and other pertinent information previously submitted and revised
to the date of final submittal:
         (a)   The final PUD plan is in substantial conformity to the
preliminary PUD plan approved;
         (b)   Detailed grading plans illustrate:
            1.   Proper provision has been made in regard to drainage both on
and off the site; and
            2.   Especially that adjoining properties are not adversely
affected by improper channelization or concentration of runoff as a result of
the proposed grading.
         (c)   The applicant has entered a development agreement with the city
to provide the public and private improvements including amenities shown on the
plans.
   (D)   Changes.
      (1)   Changes in the final PUD plan involving the location and alignment
of structures not to exceed ten feet (3 m) in any direction and other minor
revisions in the shape of structures may be authorized by the city for good
cause shown provided the changes are within the maximum allowable floor area
limits, are in harmony with the intent of the concept statement as to uses and
densities of use and the architectural style has been approved in writing by
the PUD’s homeowner association or other ownership body.
      (2)   All other changes shall be made only after public hearings by the
Commission and Council, upon notice as provided in division (B) above and any
changes approved by the Council shall be by resolution as an amendment to the
final PUD plan.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 14.50; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
BP - BLUFF PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT
§ 154.225 PURPOSE.
   This overlay district is created to protect and preserve areas in the
community where bluffs and steep slopes represent an enhancement to the
community and a risk of impairment to the health, safety, tax base and general
welfare of the community if left unprotected. Its intent is to establish
reasonable regulations related to development upon and adjacent to the steep
slope areas in the community.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 15.10; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.226 DISTRICT APPLICATION.
   The Bluff Protection (BP) District shall be applied to and superimposed upon
all zoning districts as contained herein as existing or amended by the text and
map of this chapter. The regulations and requirements imposed by the BP
District shall be in addition to those established for districts which jointly
apply. Under the joint application of districts, the more restrictive
requirements shall apply.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 15.20; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.227 BOUNDARIES.
   The boundaries of the BP District shall be defined as those lots in the city
which contain bluffs and/or steep slopes. The boundaries shall be graphically
represented on preliminary and final subdivision plats as slope easements.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 15.30; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.228 DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Persons desiring to construct a structure, perform grading or earth
moving activities or destroy or remove vegetation from land located within the
BP District, but not within the Bluff Impact Zone, including the required
setback area, shall only do so following review and approval by the Planning
Commission.
   (B)   Persons desiring to construct a structure, perform grading or earth
moving activities or destroy or remove vegetation from land located within a
Bluff Impact Zone, including the required setback area, shall only do so
following issuance of a conditional/interim use permit as prescribed in this
chapter.
   (C)   The plan to be submitted for consideration with regard to the
conditional/interim use permit shall include the following information:
      (1)   Existing site conditions including all structures, shrub masses,
trees and topographic conditions and site boundaries;
      (2)   Proposed structures and site improvements, grading changes, tree
and vegetation removal and landscaping improvements, including trees, shrubs
and ground covers;
      (3)   Height and size of any structures proposed to be constructed;
      (4)   Timetable for anticipated dates of construction;
      (5)   Location and design of any private sewage and other sanitary waste
disposal systems; and
      (6)   Erosion control plan during and following construction.
   (D)   Considerations for approval or denial of the conditional/interim use
permit shall include, but not be limited to the following:
      (1)   Degree to which the intent of this chapter is addressed in the
proposal;
      (2)   Compliance with the bulk and setback requirements of this district;
      (3)   Degree to which tree and vegetation removal and slope alteration
has been minimized in the proposed development;
      (4)   Appropriateness of the proposed plant material for the site for
slope protection purposes;
      (5)   The degree to which dislocated vegetation can be relocated or
replanted on the site; and
      (6)   Minimization of hard surfacing or other impervious materials within
35 feet of the bluff or steep slope.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 15.40; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.229 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   The following requirements shall be imposed on all development in the BP
District.
   (A)   Structures shall not be placed within bluff impact zones.
   (B)   Setback from toe or top of the bluff to any structure in any district
shall be no less than 30 feet.
   (C)   The maximum height of any structure shall be no more than 30 feet.
   (D)   No person may conduct a mining or quarry activity or expand a mining
or quarry activity within 30 feet of the toe or top of a bluff or in BP
District.
   (E)   No tower shall be located within one-quarter mile of the bluff impact
zone, except for water reservoirs owned and constructed by the city.
   (F)   No grading, excavating or filling shall be allowed within the bluff
impact zone.
   (G)   Grading and filling within the BP District, but not within a bluff
impact zone, shall comply with the following conditions.
      (1)   No more than one-third of the surface area of a lot shall be devoid
of vegetative ground cover at any time.
      (2)   Temporary ground cover such as mulch shall be used and permanent
cover such as sod shall be planted as soon as possible.
      (3)   Methods to prevent erosion and trap sediment shall be employed in
accordance with regulations of the state’s Pollution Control Agency and
acceptable engineering practices.
      (4)   Fill shall be stabilized according to accepted engineering
standards.
      (5)   A soil erosion control plan must be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator before grading or construction begins on any lot affected by the
regulations of this chapter.
      (6)   Methods, such as silt fences, hay bales and the like must be used
to minimize soil erosion and to trap sediments before they reach any surface
water features.
      (7)   Fill or excavated material must not be placed in a manner that
creates an unstable slope.
      (8)   Alterations of topography will only be allowed if they are
accessory to permitted or conditional/interim uses and do not adversely affect
adjacent or nearby properties.
   (H)   The removal of natural vegetation shall be restricted to prevent
erosion into public waters, to consume nutrients in the soil and to preserve
steep slope aesthetics.
   (I)   Clearcutting is prohibited, except to remove the minimum amount of
vegetation necessary for placing roads, utilities, structures and parking
areas.
   (J)   Natural vegetation shall be restored insofar as feasible after any
construction project.
   (K)   Selective cutting of trees and underbrush is allowed as long as
sufficient cover is left to make cars and structures inconspicuous when viewed
from a distance.
   (L)   All stairways and lifts on bluffs shall be visually inconspicuous.
Stairways and lifts are the preferred alternatives to major topographic
alterations for achieving access up and down bluffs and steep slopes.
Stairways, lifts and landings shall meet the following design requirements.
      (1)   Stairways and lifts must not exceed four feet in width on
residential lots. Wider stairways may be used for commercial properties, public
open space, recreational properties and planned unit developments.
      (2)   Landings for stairways and lifts on residential lots must not
exceed 32 square feet in area. Landings larger than 32 square feet may be used
for commercial properties, public open space, recreational properties and
planned unit developments.
      (3)   Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, lifts or landings.
      (4)   Stairways, lifts and landings may be either constructed on posts or
pilings, or placed into the ground, provided they are designed in a manner that
ensures control of soil erosion.
      (5)   Stairways, lifts and landings must be located in the most visually
inconspicuous portion of lots, as viewed from adjacent areas, assuming summer,
leaf-on conditions whenever practical.
   (M)   Vegetation alterations necessary for the construction of structures
and sewage treatment systems are exempt from the vegetation alteration
standards.
   (N)   Vegetation alterations necessary for the construction of roads and
parking areas are exempt from the vegetation alteration standards.
   (O)   Limited removal of vegetation is allowed subject to the following
standards: on steep slopes which are not located in Bluff Impact Zones,
selective clearing, cutting, pruning and trimming of trees and shrubs is
allowed to provide a view from the dwelling site and to accommodate the
placement of stairways, lifts, landings, picnic areas, access paths, beach and
watercraft access areas, and permitted water oriented accessory structures or
facilities; provided that:
      (1)   The screening of structures, vehicles or other facilities as viewed
from adjacent areas, assuming summer, leaf on conditions, is not reduced by
more than 25%;
      (2)   Along waterways, existing shading of water surface is preserved;
and
      (3)   The above provisions are not applicable to the removal of trees,
limbs or branches that are dead, diseased or pose safety hazards.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 15.50; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS AND CONDITIONS
§ 154.240 CONFORMANCE REQUIRED.
   Except as hereinafter specified, no land, building or structure shall
hereafter be used, and no building or part thereof or other structure shall be
located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered, except
in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which
it is located.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 4.10; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.241 NUMBER OF BUILDINGS PER LOT.
   (A)   Every building shall be located on a lot. Only one principal building
shall be located, erected or moved onto a lot; except that, multiple principal
buildings may be permitted on a lot in the R~3, C-A, C-CBD, I-1, I-2 and PUD
Districts, after a plot plan showing location of proposed buildings and
development of the property shall be approved by the Planning Commission.
   (B)   In review of the plans, the Planning Commission shall consider the
following:
      (1)   Proper provision of parking facilities;
      (2)   Adequate provision of open space;
      (3)   Adequate distance between structures;
      (4)   Adequate provision for handling and storage of trash and rubbish,
and prop screening of handling and storage areas; and
      (5)   Compatibility with development character of surrounding
neighborhood.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 4.20; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.242 ACCESSORY BUILDING AND/OR STRUCTURES.
   (A)   No accessory building and/or structure shall be erected in any
required yard other than a rear yard, except as provided herein. Properties
whose rear yard is adjacent to an alley must have a minimum of a 20-foot
setback for garages if they are accessed from the alley. On a corner lot,
accessory buildings and/or structures shall conform to setback regulations for
principal buildings on the street side. Accessory buildings and/or structures
may be erected as a part of the principal building or may be connected thereto
by a breezeway or similar structure; provided, all yard requirements for a
principal building are complied with. Detached accessory buildings and/or
structures located nearer than 60 feet to the front lot line shall be
considered to be attached to the principal building and all yard requirements
for a principal building must be complied with.
   (B)   Accessory buildings and/or structures which are not a part of the main
building shall not occupy more than 30% of the rear yard; however, this
regulation shall not be interpreted to prohibit the construction of a 440
square foot garage in a rear yard. Accessory buildings shall not have exterior
side walls exceeding ten feet in height.
   (C)   No accessory building and/or structure shall be constructed upon a lot
more than six months prior to the commencement of construction of the main
building.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 4.30; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.243 DRIVEWAY SETBACK.
   Driveways should adhere to a minimum side yard requirements of five feet.
Driveways must allow for vehicle to be parked off-street by providing a minimum
of a 20-foot-long parking stall on their lot.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 4.40; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.244 REQUIRED AREA OR SPACE CANNOT BE REDUCED.
   All lots shall abut a public street and each lot shall have a minimum amount
of street frontage distance as required by the applicable zoning district. No
lot, yard, court, parking area or other space shall be reduced in area or
dimension so as to make the area or dimension less than the minimum required by
this chapter. No part of a yard, court, parking area or other space provided
about or for any building or structure for the purpose of complying with the
provisions of this chapter shall be included as part of a yard, court, parking
area or other space required under this chapter for another building or
structure.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 4.50; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.245 ZONING DISTRICT DIVIDING PROPERTY.
   Where one parcel of property is divided into two or more portions by reason
of different zoning district classifications, each portion shall be used
independently of the other in its respective zoning classification, and for the
purpose of applying the regulations of this chapter, each portion shall be
considered as if in separate and different ownership. Alternatively, the entire
parcel may be used as permitted by the regulations applicable to the most
restrictive zoning classification. However, nothing in this section shall be
construed as permitting residential use of any property within any industrial
district classification.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 4.60; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.246 BULK REGULATIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   The following bulk regulations shall be adhered to within the R-1, R-2 and
R-3 Residential Districts.
   (A)   For all zoning permits issued after the effective date of this
chapter, the principal structure shall have a floor area of not less than 768
square feet and the minimum dimension of the main body of the dwelling unit
shall not be less than 24 feet.
   (B)   All structures shall be roofed with a non-metal type of roofing
material, except copper and pre- finished metal roofs that simulate shingles,
shakes or tiles are permitted. No corrugated steel or galvanized metal roofs
are permitted on all principal structures.
   (C)   All principal structures shall be sided with a material other than
flat or corrugated steel or galvanized metal.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 4.70; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.247 DEVELOPMENT PLANS.
   (A)   In review of development plans as required by §
154.241  of this chapter, the Planning Commission shall consider compliance
with this chapter as well as compatibility of the proposed development with
development characteristics of the surrounding neighborhood. The following
criteria shall be considered in the approval, conditional approval or
disapproval of the development plan:
      (1)   Adequate provision of open space;
      (2)   Adequate placement of landscaping material to screen adjoining
areas of a less intense use;
      (3)   Adequate land area to ensure an acceptable density; and
      (4)   Adequate provision for traffic circulation.
   (B)   The Planning Commission may impose conditions that are more
restrictive than the general regulations for the zoning district in which the
development plan is being proposed.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 4.80; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.248 DIKE SETBACK.
   The dike is the manmade structure constructed by the U.S. Army Corp of
Engineers for flood control protection. There shall be a minimum building
setback requirement of 20 feet from the dike. This distance is to be measured
from whichever is closest the top of the dike or the toe of the dike. The “toe
of the dike” is the point on the dike where there is, as visually observed, a
clearly identifiable break in the slope from gentler to steeper slope above. If
no break in the slope is apparent or if there is disagreement in the breaking
point, the toe of the dike shall be the lowest end of a 50-foot segment
measured on the ground, with an average slope of 20% or greater. The “top of
the dike” is the point of the dike where there is, as visually observed, a
clearly identifiable break in the slope, from steeper to gentler slope above.
If no break in the slope is apparent or if there is disagreement in the
breaking point, the top of the dike shall be the highest end of a 50-foot
segment, measured on the ground, with an average slope of 20% or greater.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 4.90; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.249 HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The height limitations stipulated in this chapter shall not apply to
the following:
      (1)   Farm buildings, architectural features and the like. Barns, silos
or other farm buildings or structures on farms; church spires, belfries,
cupolas and domes, monuments, water towers, fire and hose towers, windmills,
chimneys, smokestacks, flagpoles, radio towers, masts and aerials; parapet
walls extending not more than four feet above the limiting height of the
building; and
      (2)   Places of public assembly. Places of public assembly in churches,
schools and other permitted public and semi-public buildings; provided that,
these are located on the first floor of the building; and, provided that, for
each three feet by which the height of the building exceeds the maximum height
otherwise permitted in the district, its side and rear yards shall be increased
in width or depth by an additional foot over the side and rear yards required
for the highest building otherwise permitted in the district.
   (B)   All such structures above the heights otherwise permitted in the
district shall not occupy more than 25% of the area of the lot and shall be
distant not less than 25 feet in all parts from every lot line not a street lot
line.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 4.100; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.250 FENCES AND WALLS.
   (A)   Residential fences and walls, including retaining walls, are permitted
in any yard and may be constructed on the lot lines in residential districts,
except as herein provided. However, when fences or walls are constructed on the
lot line, the owner must provide evidence of the exact location of the lot
line. Fences or walls shall not in any case exceed a height of six feet; except
the fences or walls shall not exceed a height of four feet in the front yard.
Privacy fences and wood fences that require painting, staining and maintenance
shall have a minimum of two feet setback from all adjoining side and rear lot
lines, unless a written mutual agreement as prescribed by the city between
adjoining property owners is filed with the Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   Security or screening fences are permitted on the lot lines in all
districts, except residential districts, but shall not exceed ten feet in
height. No fence or wall shall interfere with the maintenance of overhead or
underground utilities.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 4.110; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.251 VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   On any corner lot in all districts, except C-CBD District, there is
established a traffic visibility zone at the intersection of two or more
streets.
   (B)   The traffic visibility zone shall include that part of a corner lot
that is within the area bounded by the intersecting street right-of-way lines
and a diagonal line intersecting the street right-of-way lines at a distance of
20 feet from the corner (the point of intersection of the right-of-way lines of
two intersection streets).
   (C)   In any traffic visibility zone, no fence, structure, earth bank,
hedge, planting or other obstruction shall be erected, planted or maintained
which materially impedes vision in the visibility zone between the heights of
three feet and ten feet above the established curb grade.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 4.120; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.252 PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS.
   A swimming pool, as regulated herein, shall be any pool or open tank not
located within a completely enclosed building and containing or normally
capable of containing water to a depth at any point greater than one and one-
half feet. No swimming pool shall be allowed in any residential district,
except as an accessory use and unless it complies with the following conditions
and requirements.
   (A)   The pool is intended and is to be used solely for the enjoyment of the
occupants of the principal building of the property on which it is located and
their guests.
   (B)   The swimming pool shall not be located in a required side yard or
closer than ten feet to any lot line of the property on which it is located.
The pump and filter installations shall be located not closer than 20 feet to
any lot line.
   (C)   The swimming pool or the entire property on which it is located, shall
be so walled or fenced as to prevent uncontrolled access by children from the
street or from adjacent properties. The wall or fence shall be not less than
five feet in height.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 4.130; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.253 HEDGES, LANDSCAPING AND PLANTINGS.
   Hedges, landscaping and plantings requiring upkeep, trimming or maintenance
from the side facing an adjoining side or rear lot shall have a two-foot
setback from all adjoining side and rear lot lines, unless a written mutual
agreement as prescribed by the city between adjoining property owners is filed
with the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 4.140; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.254 BOULEVARDS.
   (A)   Boulevards are city property, and the adjacent property owner is
responsible for maintenance for lawn, plantings and landscaping in a manner
that does not affect the health and safety of residents.
   (B)   (1)   No permanent structures other than mailboxes may be placed on a
boulevard without the written permission of the adjoining property owner and
Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Mailboxes must be placed in accordance with U.S. Post Office
regulations.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 4.150; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES
§ 154.265 INTENT.
   (A)   Within the districts established by this chapter, there exists lots,
structures, uses of land and structures and characteristics of use which were
lawful prior to adoption or amendment of this chapter but are prohibited,
regulated or restricted under the terms of this chapter or future amendments.
It is the intent of this chapter to permit these non-conformities to continue
until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the
intent of this chapter that non-conformities shall not be enlarged upon or
extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited
elsewhere in the same district.
   (B)   Non-conforming uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible
with permitted uses in the districts involved. A non-conforming use of
structure, a non-conforming use of land, or a non- conforming use of structure
and land in combination shall not be extended or enlarged after the passage of
this chapter by attachment on a building or premises or additional signs
intended to be seen from off the premises or by the addition of other uses of a
nature which would generally be prohibited in the district involved.
   (C)   To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building
for which a zoning permit was lawfully issued prior to the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this chapter and upon which a total building
construction has been diligently carried on.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 19.10; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.266 NON-CONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.
   In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, where a lot
has less area or width than required by the district and was a lot of record at
the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, a single-family
dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be constructed on the lot.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 19.20; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.267 NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter that could not be built under the terms hereof by
reason of restrictions: on area, lot coverage, height, yard, its location on
the lot or other requirements concerning the structure, the structure may be
continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions.
   (A)   No such non-conforming structure may be enlarged or altered in such a
way which increases its non-conformity, but any structure or portion thereof
may be altered to decrease its non-conformity.
   (B)   Should the non-conforming structure or non-conforming portion of a
structure be destroyed or deteriorated to an extent of more than 50% of its
replacement cost at time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed, except
in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Should the structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in
which it is located after it is moved.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 19.30; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.268 NON-CONFORMING USES OF LAND.
   The lawful use of land, where the use involves no individual structure with
a replacement cost exceeding an amount as set by City Council from time to
time, which becomes non-conforming under the terms of this chapter as adopted
or amended, may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to
the following provisions.
   (A)   No non-conforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended, to
occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this chapter.
   (B)   No non-conforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other
portion of the lot or parcel which was not occupied by the use at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this chapter.
   (C)   If any such non-conforming use of land ceases for any reason for a
period of more than six months, any subsequent use of the land shall conform to
the district regulations for the district in which the land is located.
   (D)   No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this
chapter shall be erected in connection with the non-conforming use of land.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 19.40; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.269 NON-CONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES AND PREMISES IN COMBINATION.
   If the lawful use involving individual structures with a replacement cost of
greater than an amount as set by City Council from time to time or of such a
structure and premises in combination, becomes non-conforming under the terms
of this chapter as adopted or amended, the lawful use may be continued so long
as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions.
   (A)   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter
in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing
the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located.
   (B)   Any non-conforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for the use at the time of
adoption or amendment of this chapter. No such use shall be extended to occupy
any land outside the building.
   (C)   If no structural alterations are made, a non-conforming use of a
structure may be changed to another non-conforming use of similar nature within
the same or a more restricted classification. Whenever a non-conforming use has
been changed to a more restricted use or to a conforming use, the use shall not
thereafter be changed to a less restrictive use.
   (D)   In the event that a non-conforming use of a structure, or structure
and land in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for a period of one year,
the use of the same shall thereafter conform to the uses permitted in the
district in which it is located. Where non-conforming use status applies to a
structure and land in combination, removal or destruction of the structure
shall eliminate the non- conforming status of the land.
   (E)   Any structure devoted to use made non-conforming by this chapter that
is destroyed or deteriorated to an extent of 50% or more of its original cost
or market value at the time of destruction or deterioration, exclusive of the
foundations, shall not be reconstructed and used as before the happening. If
the structure be less than 50% destroyed above the foundation, it may be
reconstructed and used as before; provided, it be done within six months of the
happening, and be built of like or similar materials.
   (F)   When non-conforming use status applies to a structure and premises in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the non-
conforming status of the land. DESTRUCTION, for the purpose of this division
(F), is defined as damage or deteriorated to an extent of more than 50% of the
replacement cost at the time of destruction.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 19.50; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.270 REQUIRED REPAIRS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or
restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be
unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of
the official.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 19.60; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.271 UNAUTHORIZED NON-CONFORMITIES.
   Any use of land, use of structure or any structure in existence at the time
of adoption of this chapter which was not an authorized non-conformity under
previous zoning ordinances, shall not be authorized to continue its non-
conforming status pursuant to this chapter or amendments thereto.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 19.70; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
§ 154.285 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The legislature of the state has, in M.S. Chapter 103F and Chapter 462, as
they may be amended from time to time, delegated the responsibility to local
government units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
(Ord. passed 6-24-2019)
§ 154.286 PURPOSE.
   (A)   (1)   This subchapter regulates development in the flood hazard areas
of the city.
      (2)   These flood hazard areas are subject to periodic inundation, which
may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption
of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for
flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base.
      (3)   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health,
safety and general welfare by minimizing these losses and disruptions.
   (B)   This subchapter is adopted to comply with the rules and regulations of
the National Flood Insurance Program codified as 44 C.F.R. parts 59 through 78,
as amended, so as to maintain the community’s eligibility in the National Flood
Insurance Program.
   (C)   This subchapter is, in part, intended to preserve the natural
characteristics and functions of watercourses and floodplains in order to
moderate flood and storm water impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil
erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational
opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic
development.
(Ord. passed 6-24-2019)
§ 154.287 LANDS TO WHICH SUBCHAPTER APPLIES.
   (A)   This subchapter applies to all lands within the jurisdiction of the
city within the boundaries of the Floodway, Flood Fringe and General Floodplain
Districts. The boundaries of these districts are determined by scaling
distances on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, or as modified in accordance with §
154.294(A)(2) of this chapter.
   (B)   The Floodway, Flood Fringe and General Floodplain Districts are
overlay districts that are superimposed on all existing zoning districts. The
standards imposed in the overlay districts are in addition to any other
requirements in this subchapter. In case of a conflict, the more restrictive
standards will apply.
   (C)   Where a conflict exists between the floodplain limits illustrated on
the official floodplain maps and actual field conditions, the flood elevations
shall be the governing factor in locating the regulatory floodplain limits.
   (D)   Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries will be
given a reasonable opportunity to present their case to the Planning Commission
and to submit technical evidence.
(Ord. passed 6-24-2019)
§ 154.288 INCORPORATION OF MAPS BY REFERENCE.
   The following maps together with all attached material are hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of the Official Zoning Map and this
chapter. The attached material includes the Flood Insurance Study for Fillmore
County, Minnesota, and Incorporated Areas and the Emergency Management Agency.
These materials are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
 
27045C0134E
27045C0142E
27045C0153E
27045C0161E
 
(Ord. passed 6-24-2019)
§ 154.289 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants or other private agreements. However, where this
chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter prevail.
All other ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the
extent of the inconsistency only.
(Ord. passed 6-24-2019)
§ 154.290 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   This subchapter does not imply that areas outside the floodplain districts
or land uses permitted within the districts will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This subchapter does not create liability on the part of city or its
officers or employees for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
subchapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. passed 6-24-2019)
§ 154.291 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, clause, provision or portion of this subchapter is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of law, the remainder of this subchapter
shall not be affected and shall remain in full force.
(Ord. passed 6-24-2019)
§ 154.292 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. A use or structure on the same lot with, and of
a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or
structure.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation of the “regional flood”. The term BASE
FLOOD ELEVATION is used in the flood insurance study.
   BASEMENT. Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor
or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of the
depth of excavation below ground level.
   CONDITIONAL USE. A specific type of structure or land use listed in the
official control that may be allowed, but only after an in-depth review
procedure and with appropriate conditions or restrictions as provided in the
official zoning controls or building codes and upon a finding that:
      (1)   Certain conditions as detailed in the zoning ordinance exist; and
      (2)   The structure and/or land use conform to the comprehensive land use
plan if one exists and are compatible with the existing neighborhood.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading,
paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
   EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT. A method of determining the location of
floodway boundaries so that floodplain lands on both sides of a stream are
capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.
   FARM FENCE. An open type of fence of posts and horizontally run wire,
further defined by M.S. § 344.02, subd. 1(a) through 1(d), as it may be amended
from time to time, and is not considered to be a structure under this chapter.
Fences that have the potential to obstruct flood flows, such as chain link
fences and rigid walls, are regulated as structures under this subchapter.
   FLOOD. A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the stage
of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry areas.
   FLOOD FREQUENCY. The frequency for which it is expected that a specific
flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
   FLOOD FRINGE. The portion of the special flood hazard area (1% annual chance
flood) located outside of the floodway. FLOOD FRINGE is synonymous with the
term FLOODWAY FRINGE used in the Flood Insurance Study.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP. An official map on which the Federal Insurance
Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available
digitally is called a DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM).
   FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source.
   FLOODPLAIN. The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or
watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood.
   FLOOD-PROOFING. A combination of structural provisions, changes or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the
reduction or elimination of flood damages.
   FLOODWAY. The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and
those portions of the adjoining floodplain which are reasonably required to
carry or store the regional flood discharge.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area,
is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided that, the enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-
elevation design requirements of 44 C.F.R. § 60.3.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include the term “recreational vehicle”.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures, including additions and improvements, and
placement of manufactured homes, for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of this subchapter.
   OBSTRUCTION. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence,
stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across or projecting
into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory floodplain which may impede,
retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by
catching or collecting debris carried by the water.
   ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOODPLAIN. Lands inundated by the “regional flood” (see
definition).
   PRINCIPAL USE OR STRUCTURE. All uses or structures that are not accessory
uses or structures.
   REACH. A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a
stream or river influenced by a natural or human-made obstruction. In an urban
area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge crossings
would most typically constitute a REACH.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is 400
square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, is
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and
is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. For the
purposes of this subchapter, the term RECREATIONAL VEHICLE is synonymous with
the term “travel trailer/travel vehicle”.
   REGIONAL FLOOD. A flood which is representative of large floods known to
have occurred generally in the state and reasonably characteristic of what can
be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 1% chance
or 100-year recurrence interval. REGIONAL FLOOD is synonymous with the term
BASE FLOOD used in a Flood Insurance Study.
   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (RFPE). An elevation not less than one
foot above the elevation of the regional flood, plus any increases in flood
elevation caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from
designation of a floodway.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. A term used for flood insurance purposes,
synonymous with ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOODPLAIN.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement or other improvement that occurred before the permits expiration
date. The actual START is either the first placement of permanent construction
of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage
of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers,
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. Any thing constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the
ground or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings,
factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, decks manufactured homes,
recreational vehicles not considered travel ready as detailed in §
154.302 of this chapter and other similar items.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Within any consecutive 365-day period, any
reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair),
repair after damage, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the
“start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures that
have incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a “historic structure”; provided that, the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
“historic structure.” For the purpose of this chapter, “historic structure” is
as defined in 44 C.F.R. § 59.1.
(Ord. passed 6-24-2019)
§ 154.293 ANNEXATIONS.
   The Flood Insurance Rate Map panels adopted by reference into §
154.288 of this chapter may include floodplain areas that lie outside of the
corporate boundaries of the city at the time of adoption of this subchapter. If
any of these floodplain land areas are annexed into the city after the date of
adoption of this subchapter, the newly annexed floodplain lands will be subject
to the provisions of this subchapter immediately upon the date of annexation.
(Ord. passed 6-24-2019)
§ 154.294 FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS; ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   (1)   Districts.
         (a)   Floodway District. The Floodway District includes those areas
within Zone AE areas delineated within floodway areas as shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Maps adopted in §
154.288 of this chapter.
         (b)   Flood Fringe District. The Flood Fringe District includes areas
within Zone AE areas on the Flood insurance Rate Maps adopted in §
154.288 of this chapter, but located outside of the floodway.
         (c)   General Floodplain District. The General Floodplain District
includes those areas within Zone A areas (that do not have a floodway
delineated) as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps adopted in §
154.288 of this chapter.
      (2)   Applicability. Where Floodway and Flood Fringe districts are
delineated on the floodplain maps, the standards in §§
154.295 and
154.296 of this chapter will apply, depending on the location of a property.
Locations where Floodway and Flood Fringe Districts are not delineated on the
floodplain maps are considered to fall within the General Floodplain District.
Within the General Floodplain District, the Floodway District standards in §
154.295 of this chapter apply unless the floodway boundary is determined,
according to the process outlined in §
154.297 of this chapter.
   (B)   (1)   Permit required. A permit must be obtained from the Zoning
Administrator to verify if a development meets all applicable standards
outlined in this chapter prior to conducting the following activities:
         (a)   The erection, addition, modification, rehabilitation or
alteration of any building, structure or portion thereof. Normal maintenance
and repair also requires a permit if the work, separately or in conjunction
with other planned work, constitutes a substantial improvement, as defined in
this chapter;
         (b)   The construction of a dam, on-site septic system, or any fence
not meeting the definition of a farm fence outlined in §
154.292 of this chapter;
         (c)   The change or extension of a non-conforming use;
         (d)   The repair of a structure that has been damaged by flood, fire,
tornado or any other source;
         (e)   The placement of fill, excavation of materials or the storage of
materials or equipment within the floodplain;
         (f)   Relocation or alteration of a watercourse (including
stabilization projects or the construction of new or replacement culverts and
bridges), unless a public waters work permit has been applied for; and
         (g)   Any other type of “development”, as defined in this subchapter.
      (2)   Minimum development standards. All new construction and substantial
improvements must be:
         (a)   Designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
floatation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
         (b)   Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage;
         (c)   Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
and
         (d)   Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, ductwork,
plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
      (3)   Flood capacity. Floodplain developments must not adversely affect
the hydraulic capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any tributary
watercourse or drainage system.
      (4)   Material storage, processing. The storage or processing of
materials that are, in time of flooding, flammable, explosive or potentially
injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited.
(Ord. passed 6-24-2019) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.295 FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW).
   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses, subject to the standards set forth
in division (B) below, are permitted uses if otherwise allowed in the
underlying zoning district or any applicable overlay district:
      (1)   General farming, pasture, grazing, farm fences, outdoor plant
nurseries, horticulture, forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting;
      (2)   Loading areas, parking areas, streets, trails, airport landing
strips, railroads, bridges, culverts, utility transmission lines and pipelines;
      (3)   Open space uses, including, but not limited to, private and public
golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds,
boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves,
game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, hunting and fishing areas and
single or multiple purpose recreational trails;
      (4)   Residential yards, lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas,
provided these uses do not include associated accessory structures; and
      (5)   Grading or land alterations associated with stabilization projects.
   (B)   Standards for floodway permitted uses.
      (1)   The use must have a low flood damage potential.
      (2)   The use must not involve structures or obstruct flood flows. The
use must not cause any increase in flood damages, nor any increase in flood
elevations in areas where a floodway has been established, as certified by a
registered professional engineer.
      (3)   Any facility that will be used by employees or the general public
must be designed with a flood warning system that provides adequate time for
evacuation if the area is inundated to a depth and velocity such that the depth
(in feet) multiplied by the velocity (in feet per second) would exceed a
product of four upon occurrence of the regional (1% chance) flood.
   (C)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be allowed as conditional
uses following the standards and procedures set forth in §
154.304 of this chapter and further subject to the standards set forth in
division (D) below, if otherwise allowed in the underlying zoning district:
      (1)   Structures accessory to primary uses listed in divisions (A)(1)
through (A)(3) above and primary uses listed in divisions (C)(2) and (C)(3)
below;
      (2)   Extraction, fill and storage of soil, sand, gravel and other
materials;
      (3)   Marinas, boat rentals, permanent docks, piers, wharves, water
control structures and navigational facilities;
      (4)   Storage yards for equipment, machinery or materials;
      (5)   Fences that have the potential to obstruct flood flows; and
      (6)   Levees or dikes intended to protect agricultural crops for a
frequency flood event equal to or less than the ten-year frequency flood event.
   (D)   Standards for floodway conditional uses.
      (1)   General. A conditional use must not cause any increase in flood
damages, nor any increase in flood elevations in areas where a floodway has
been established, as certified by a registered professional engineer.
      (2)   Fill; storage of materials and equipment.
         (a)   Fill, dredge spoil and other similar materials deposited or
stored in the floodplain must be protected from erosion by vegetative cover,
mulching, riprap or other acceptable method. Permanent sand and gravel
operations and similar uses must be covered by a long-term site development
plan.
         (b)   Temporary placement of fill, other materials or equipment which
would cause an increase to the stage of the 1% chance or regional flood may
only be allowed if the City Council has approved a plan that assures removal of
the materials from the floodway based upon the flood warning time available.
      (3)   Accessory structures. Accessory structures, as identified in
division (C)(1) above, may be permitted; provided that:
         (a)   Structures are not intended for human habitation;
         (b)   Structures will have a low flood damage potential;
         (c)   Structures will be constructed and placed so as to offer a
minimal obstruction to the flow of flood waters;
         (d)   Structures must be elevated on fill or structurally dry flood-
proofed and watertight to the regulatory flood protection elevation.
Certifications consistent with §
154.304 of this chapter shall be required; and
         (e)   As an alternative, an accessory structure may be flood-proofed
in a way to accommodate internal flooding. To allow for the equalization of
hydrostatic pressure, there shall be a minimum of two openings on at least two
sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above grade. The openings shall have a minimum net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding, have a net area of not less than one square inch for every square
foot of enclosed area subject to flooding, and shall allow automatic entry and
exit of flood waters without human intervention. A flood-proofing certification
consistent with §
154.302 of this chapter shall be required.
      (4)   Structural works. Structural works for flood control that will
change the course, current or cross-section of protected wetlands or public
waters are subject to the provisions of M.S. § 103G.245, as it may be amended
from time to time.
      (5)   No increase. A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the floodway
must not cause an increase to the 1% chance or regional flood. The technical
analysis must assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a
stream.
(Ord. passed 6-24-2019)
§ 154.296 FLOOD FRINGE DISTRICT (FF).
   (A)   Permitted uses. Permitted uses are those uses of land or structures
allowed in the underlying zoning district(s) that comply with the standards in
division (B) below.
   (B)   Standards for flood fringe permitted uses.
      (1)   All structures, including accessory structures, must be elevated on
fill so that the lowest floor, as defined, is at or above the regulatory flood
protection elevation. The finished fill elevation for structures must be no
lower than one foot below the regulatory flood protection elevation and the
fill must extend at the same elevation at least 15 feet beyond the outside
limits of the structure. Elevations must be certified by a registered
professional engineer, land surveyor or other qualified person designated by
the community.
      (2)   As an alternative to the fill requirements of division (B)(12)
above, structures accessory to the uses identified in division (A) above. A may
be designed to accommodate the inundation of flood waters, meeting the
following provisions:
         (a)   The accessory structure constitutes a minimal investment and
satisfy the development requirements in §
154.294(B)(2) of this chapter.
         (b)   Any enclosed accessory structure shall not exceed 576 square
feet in size, and only be used for parking and storage. Any such structure
shall be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer, or be
designed in accordance with the following flood-proofing standards: to allow
for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there shall be a minimum of two
openings on at least two sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings
shall be no higher than one foot above grade. The openings shall have a minimum
net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding, and shall allow automatic entry and exit of flood
waters without human intervention.
      (3)   The cumulative placement of fill or similar material on a parcel
must not exceed 1,000 cubic yards, unless the fill is specifically intended to
elevate a structure in accordance with division (B)(1) above, or if allowed as
a conditional use under division (C)(3) below.
      (4)   All service utilities, including ductwork, must be elevated or
water-tight to prevent infiltration of flood waters.
      (5)   All fill must be properly compacted and the slopes must be properly
protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable method.
      (6)   All new principal structures must have vehicular access at or above
an elevation not more than two feet below the regulatory flood protection
elevation, or must have a flood warning/emergency evacuation plan acceptable to
the City Council.
      (7)   Accessory uses such as yards, railroad tracks and parking lots may
be at an elevation lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation.
However, any facilities used by employees or the general public must be
designed with a flood warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation
if the area is inundated to a depth and velocity such that the depth (in feet)
multiplied by the velocity (in feet per second) would exceed a product of four
upon occurrence of the regional (1% chance) flood.
      (8)   Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles must meet the
standards of §
154.300 of this chapter.
   (C)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be allowed as conditional
uses following the standards and procedures set forth in §
154.304 of this chapter and further subject to the standards set forth in
division (D) below, if otherwise allowed in the underlying zoning district(s).
      (1)   The placement of flood-proofed non-residential basements below the
regulatory flood protection elevation. Residential basements, are not allowed
below the regulatory flood protection elevation.
      (2)   The cumulative placement of more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill
when the fill is not being used to elevate a structure in accordance with
division (B)(1) above.
      (3)   The use of methods other than fill to elevate structures above the
regulatory flood protection elevation. This includes the use of: stilts,
pilings, filled stem walls or above grade, internally flooded enclosed areas
such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages, meeting the standards in division
(D)(4) below.
   (D)   Standards for flood fringe conditional uses.
      (1)   The standards for permitted uses in the flood fringe, listed in
divisions (B)(4) through (B)(8) above, apply to all conditional uses.
      (2)   All areas of non-residential structures, including basements, to be
placed below the regulatory flood protection elevation must be structurally dry
flood-proofed, which requires making the structure water-tight with the walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the
effects of buoyancy. A flood-proofing certification consistent with §
154.302(B) of this chapter shall be required.
      (3)   The placement of more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill or other
similar material on a parcel (other than for the purpose of elevating a
structure to the regulatory flood protection elevation) must comply with an
approved erosion/sedimentation control plan.
         (a)   The plan must clearly specify methods to be used to stabilize
the fill on site for a flood event at a minimum of the regional (1% chance)
flood event.
         (b)   The plan must be prepared and certified by a registered
professional engineer or other qualified individual acceptable to the City
Council.
         (c)   The plan may incorporate alternative procedures for removal of
the material from the floodplain if adequate flood warning time exists.
      (4)   (a)   Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill may
be utilized to elevate a structure’s lowest floor above the regulatory flood
protection elevation. The base or floor of an enclosed area shall be considered
above-grade and not a structure’s basement or lowest floor if:
            1.   The enclosed area is above grade on at least one side of the
structure;
            2.   It is designed to internally flood; and
            3.   It is used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage.
         (b)   These alternative elevation methods are subject to the following
additional standards.
            1.   Above-grade, fully enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck
under garages must be designed to internally flood and include a minimum of two
openings on at least two sides of the structure. The bottom of all openings
shall be no higher than one foot above grade, and have a minimum net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding unless a registered professional engineer or architect certifies that
a smaller net area would suffice.
            2.   Flood-proofing certifications consistent with §
154.302(B) of this chapter shall be required. The structure shall be subject to
a deed-restricted non-conversion agreement with the issuance of any permit.
(Ord. passed 6-24-2019)
§ 154.297 GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT (GF).
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   The uses listed in §
154.296(A) of this chapter are permitted uses.
      (2)   All other uses are subject to the floodway/flood fringe evaluation
criteria specified in division (B) below. Section
154.295 of this chapter applies if the proposed use is determined to be in the
Floodway District. Section
154.296 of this chapter applies if the proposed use is determined to be in the
Flood Fringe District.
   (B)   Procedures for determining floodway boundaries and regional flood
elevations.
      (1)   Requirements for detailed studies. Developments greater than 50
lots or five acres, or as requested by the zoning administrator, shall be
subject to a detailed study to determine the regulatory flood protection
elevation and the limits of the Floodway District. The determination of the
floodway and flood fringe must be consistent with accepted hydrological and
hydraulic engineering standards, and must include the following components, as
applicable:
         (a)   Estimate the peak discharge of the regional (1% chance) flood;
         (b)   Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood based
upon a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and overbank areas; and
         (c)   Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the regional
flood without increasing flood stages more than one-half foot. A lesser stage
increase than one-half foot is required if, as a result of the stage increase,
increased flood damages would result. An equal degree of encroachment on both
sides of the stream within the reach must be assumed in computing floodway
boundaries, unless development or geographic features warrant other analysis,
as approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
      (2)   Alternative methods. For areas where a detailed study is not
available or required, the regional flood elevation must be identified to
determine the boundaries of the special flood hazard area. The Zoning
Administrator must use the best available data to determine the regional flood
elevation. The entire floodplain must be treated as floodway until there is a
floodway determination.
         (a)   In those areas of the special flood hazard area where the
floodway has not been determined, allowable uses are restricted to those
identified in §
154.295(A) and (C) of this chapter. The proposed development must not increase
flood stages more than one-half foot, as determined by a professional engineer
or by using accepted engineering practices approved by the Zoning
Administrator. A stage increase less than one-half foot must be used if
increased flood damages would result.
         (b)   If buildings or other development prohibited in floodways are
proposed, a floodway/flood fringe determination is required to verify the
development is within the flood fringe. The floodway/flood fringe determination
must be done by a professional engineer or by using other accepted engineering
practices approved by the Zoning Administrator. Any such proposal must assume a
one-half foot stage increase for the purposes of determining the regulatory
flood protection elevation to accommodate for future cumulative impacts.
      (3)   Review. The Zoning Administrator will review the submitted
information and assess the technical evaluation and the recommended Floodway
and/or Flood Fringe District boundary. The assessment must include the
cumulative effects of previous floodway encroachments. The Zoning Administrator
may seek technical assistance from an engineer or other expert person or
agency, including the Department of Natural Resources. Based on this
assessment, the Zoning Administrator may approve or deny the application.
      (4)   Permit application processing. Once the Floodway and Flood Fringe
District boundaries have been determined, the Zoning Administrator must process
the permit application consistent with the applicable provisions of §§
154.295 through
154.296 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-24-2019)
§ 154.298 SUBDIVISION STANDARDS.
   No land may be subdivided which is unsuitable for reasons of flooding or
inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment facilities. Manufactured
home parks and recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds are considered
“subdivisions” under this subchapter.
   (A)   All lots within the floodplain districts must be able to contain a
building site outside of the Floodway District at or above the regulatory flood
protection elevation.
   (B)   All subdivisions must have road access both to the subdivision and to
the individual building sites no lower than two feet below the regulatory flood
protection elevation, unless a flood warning emergency plan for the safe
evacuation of all vehicles and people during the regional (1% chance) flood has
been approved by the City Council. The plan must be prepared by a registered
engineer or other qualified individual and must demonstrate that adequate time
and personnel exist to carry out the evacuation.
   (C)   For all subdivisions in the floodplain, the Floodway and Flood Fringe
District boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation and the required
elevation of all access roads must be clearly labeled on all required
subdivision drawings and platting documents.
   (D)   In the General Floodplain District, applicants must provide the
information required in §
154.297(B) of this chapter to determine the regional flood elevation, the
Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries and the regulatory flood
protection elevation for the subdivision site.
   (E)   Subdivision proposals must be reviewed to assure that:
      (1)   All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage within the flood prone area;
      (2)   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical
and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage; and
      (3)   Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure of flood hazard.
(Ord. passed 6-24-2019)
§ 154.299 UTILITIES, RAILROADS, ROADS AND BRIDGES.
   (A)   Public utilities. All public utilities and facilities such as gas,
electrical, sewer, and water supply systems to be located in the floodplain
must be flood-proofed in accordance with the state’s Building Code or elevated
to the regulatory flood protection elevation.
   (B)   Public transportation facilities. Railroad tracks, roads and bridges
to be located within the floodplain must comply with §§
154.295 and
154.296 of this chapter. These transportation facilities must be elevated to
the regulatory flood protection elevation where failure or interruption of
these facilities would result in danger to the public health or safety or where
the facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or
auxiliary roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where
failure or interruption of transportation services would not endanger the
public health or safety.
   (C)   On-site water supply and sewage treatment systems. Where public
utilities are not provided:
      (1)   On-site water supply systems must be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and are subject to the
provisions in Minn. Rules Chapter part 4725.4350, as amended; and
      (2)   New or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems
and discharges from the systems into flood waters, they must not be subject to
impairment or contamination during times of flooding, and are subject to the
provisions in Minn. Rules Chapter part 7080.2270, as amended.
(Ord. passed 6-24-2019)
§ 154.300 MANUFACTURED HOMES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   Manufactured homes. Manufactured homes and manufactured home parks are
subject to applicable standards for each floodplain district. In addition:
      (1)   New and replacement manufactured homes must be elevated in
compliance with §
154.296 of this chapter and must be securely anchored to a system that resists
flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but
are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is in addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements
for resisting wind forces.
      (2)   (a)   New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing
manufactured home parks must meet the appropriate standards for subdivisions in
§
154.298 of this chapter.
         (b)   New or replacement manufactured homes in existing manufactured
home parks must meet the vehicular access requirements for subdivisions in §
154.298(A)(2) of this chapter.
   (B)   Recreational vehicles. New recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds
and expansions to existing recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds are
prohibited in any floodplain district. Recreational vehicles placed in existing
recreational vehicle parks, campgrounds or lots of record in the floodplain
must either:
      (1)   Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in division (A) above;
or
      (2)   Be travel ready, meeting the following criteria:
         (a)   The vehicle must have a current license required for highway
use;
         (b)   The vehicle must be highway ready, meaning on wheels or the
internal jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities commonly used in campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks;
         (c)   No permanent structural type additions may be attached to the
vehicle; and
         (d)   Accessory structures may be permitted in the Flood Fringe
District; provided that, they constitute a minimal investment, do not hinder
the removal of the vehicle should flooding occur, and meet the standards
outlined in §§
154.294(B)(2) and
154.297(B)(2) of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-24-2019)
§ 154.301 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR; DUTIES.
   A Zoning Administrator or other official designated by the Board of Appeals
and Adjustments must administer and enforce this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 6-24-2019)
§ 154.302 PERMITS; APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Application for permit. Permit applications must be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator on forms provided by the Zoning Administrator. The permit
application must include the following as applicable:
      (1)   A site plan showing all pertinent dimensions, existing or proposed
buildings, structures and significant natural features having an influence on
the permit;
      (2)   Location of fill or storage of materials in relation to the stream
channel;
      (3)   Copies of any required municipal, county, state or federal permits
or approvals; and
      (4)   Other relevant information requested by the Zoning Administrator as
necessary to properly evaluate the permit application.
   (B)   Certification. The applicant is required to submit certification by a
registered professional engineer, registered architect or registered land
surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter. Flood-proofing measures must
be certified by a registered professional engineer or registered architect as
being in compliance with applicable flood-proofing standards in the state’s
Building Code. Accessory structures designed in accordance with §
154.296(B)(2) of this chapter are exempt from certification; provided,
sufficient assurances are documented. Any development in established floodways
must not cause any increase in flood elevations or damages, as certified by a
registered professional engineer.
   (C)   Certificate of zoning compliance for a new, altered or non-conforming
use. No building, land or structure may be occupied or used in any manner until
a certificate of zoning compliance has been issued by the Zoning Administrator
stating that the use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of
this subchapter.
   (D)   Recordkeeping of certifications and as-built documentation. The Zoning
Administrator must maintain records in perpetuity documenting:
      (1)   All certifications referenced in division (B) above as applicable;
and
      (2)   Elevations complying with §
154.296(B)(1) of this chapter. The Zoning Administrator must also maintain a
record of the elevation to which structures and alterations to structures are
constructed or flood-proofed.
   (E)   Notifications for watercourse alterations. Before authorizing any
alteration or relocation of a river or stream, the Zoning Administrator must
notify adjacent communities. If the applicant has applied for a permit to work
in public waters pursuant to M.S. § 103G.245, as it may be amended from time to
time, this will suffice as adequate notice. A copy of the notification must
also be submitted to the Chicago Regional Office of the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA),
   (F)   Notification to FEMA when physical changes increase or decrease base
flood elevations. As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months
after the date the supporting information becomes available, the Zoning
Administrator must notify the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA of the changes by
submitting a copy of the relevant technical or scientific data.
(Ord. passed 6-24-2019)
§ 154.303 VARIANCES.
   An application for a variance to the provisions of this chapter will be
processed and reviewed in accordance with applicable state statutes and §
154.027 of this chapter.
   (A)   Adherence to state floodplain management standards. A variance must
not allow a use that is not allowed in that district, permit a lower degree of
flood protection than the regulatory flood protection elevation for the
particular area or permit standards lower than those required by state law.
   (B)   Additional variance criteria. The following additional variance
criteria of the Federal Emergency Management Agency must be satisfied.
      (1)   Variances must not be issued by a community within any designated
regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result,
      (2)   Variances may only be issued by a community upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public
or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      (3)   Variances may only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
   (C)   Flood insurance notice.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator must notify the applicant for a variance
that:
         (a)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance;
and
         (b)   The construction below the base or regional flood level
increases risks to life and property.
      (2)   The notification must be maintained with a record of all variance
actions.
   (D)   General considerations. The community may consider the following
factors in granting variances and imposing conditions on variances and
conditional uses in floodplains:
      (1)   The potential danger to life and property due to increased flood
heights or velocities caused by encroachments;
      (2)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others;
      (3)   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems, if any, and the
ability of these systems to minimize the potential for disease, contamination
and unsanitary conditions;
      (4)   The susceptibility of any proposed use and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of the damage on the individual owner;
      (5)   The importance of the services to be provided by the proposed use
to the community;
      (6)   The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location;
      (7)   The availability of viable alternative locations for the proposed
use that are not subject to flooding;
      (8)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and
development anticipated in the foreseeable future;
      (9)   The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Land Use
Plan and floodplain management program for the area;
      (10)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
      (11)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site.
   (E)   Submittal of hearing notices to the Department of Natural Resources
(DNR). The Zoning Administrator must submit hearing notices for proposed
variances to the DNR sufficiently in advance to provide at least ten days’
notice of the hearing. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. mail
to the respective DNR area hydrologist.
   (F)   Submittal of final decisions to the DNR. A copy of all decisions
granting variances must be forwarded to the DNR within ten days of the action.
The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. mail to the respective DNR
area hydrologist.
   (G)   Record-keeping. The Zoning Administrator must maintain a record of all
variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and must report
the variances in an annual or biennial report to the Administrator of the
National Flood Insurance Program, when requested by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
(Ord. passed 6-24-2019)
§ 154.304 CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   Administrative review. An application for a conditional use permit
under the provisions of this chapter will be processed and reviewed in
accordance with this chapter.
   (B)   Factors used in decision-making. In passing upon conditional use
applications, the Board of Appeals and Adjustments must consider all relevant
factors specified in other sections of this chapter, and those factors
identified in §
154.303(E) of this chapter.
   (C)   Conditions attached to conditional use permits. In addition to the
standards identified in §§
154.295(D) and
154.296(D) of this chapter, the Board of Appeals and Adjustments may attach the
conditions to the granting of conditional use permits as it deems necessary to
fulfill the purposes of this subchapter. The conditions may include, but are
not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Limitations on period of use, occupancy and operation;
      (2)   Imposition of operational controls, sureties and deed restrictions;
and
      (3)   Requirements for construction of channel modifications,
compensatory storage, dikes, levees and other protective measures.
   (D)   Submittal of hearing notices to the Department of Natural Resources
(DNR). The Zoning Administrator must submit hearing notices for proposed
conditional uses to the DNR sufficiently in advance to provide at least ten
days’ notice of the hearing. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S.
mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist.
   (E)   Submittal of final decisions to the DNR. A copy of all decisions
granting conditional uses must be forwarded to the DNR within ten days of the
action. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. mail to the
respective DNR area hydrologist.
(Ord. passed 6-24-2019)
§ 154.305 NON-CONFORMITIES.
   A use, structure or occupancy of land which was lawful before the passage or
amendment of this chapter but which is not in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter may be continued subject to the following conditions. Historic
structures, as defined in §
154.292 of this chapter, are subject to the provisions below.
   (A)   A non-conforming use, structure or occupancy must not be expanded,
changed, enlarged or altered in a way that increases its flood damage potential
or degree of obstruction to flood flows, except as provided in division (B)
below. Expansion or enlargement of uses, structures or occupancies within the
Floodway District is prohibited.
   (B)   Any addition or structural alteration to a non-conforming structure or
non-conforming use that would result in increasing its flood damage potential
must be protected to the regulatory flood protection elevation in accordance
with any of the elevation on fill or flood-proofing techniques (i.e., FP1
through FP4 flood-proofing classifications) allowable in the state’s Building
Code, except as further restricted in division (D) below.
   (C)   If any structure experiences a substantial improvement, as defined in
this subchapter, then the entire structure must meet the standards of §§
154.295 and
154.296 of this chapter for new structures, depending upon whether the
structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively.
   (D)   If any non-conformity is substantially damaged, as defined in this
subchapter, it may not be reconstructed, except in conformity with the
provisions of this subchapter. The applicable provisions for establishing new
uses or new structures in §§
154.295 and
154.296 of this chapter will apply depending upon whether the use or structure
is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe, respectively.
   (E)   If any non-conforming use or structure experiences a repetitive loss,
as defined in §
154.292 of this chapter, it must not be reconstructed, except in conformity
with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 6-24-2019)
§ 154.306 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Floodplain designation; restrictions on removal. The floodplain
designation on the Official Zoning Map must not be removed from floodplain
areas unless it can be shown that the designation is in error or that the area
has been filled to or above the elevation of the regulatory flood protection
elevation and is contiguous to lands outside the floodplain. Special exceptions
to this rule may be permitted by the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) if
it is determined that, through other measures, lands are adequately protected
for the intended use.
   (B)   Amendments require DNR approval. All amendments to this subchapter
must be submitted to and approved by the Department of Natural Resources (DNR)
prior to adoption.
   (C)   Map revisions require ordinance amendments. The floodplain district
regulations must be amended to incorporate any revisions by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency to the floodplain maps adopted in §
154.288 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-24-2019)
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
§ 154.320 INTENT.
   The intent of the establishment of off-street parking and loading
requirements is to provide ample, accessible parking and loading facilities to
reduce or prevent traffic congestion, hazardous traffic conditions and
inconveniences to residents and visitors, and to promote the health, safety and
welfare of the community.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 17.10; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.321 EXCEPTIONS.
   When a commercial or industrial use or use of a public nature is located in
the C-CBD District, the off-street parking requirements may be waived, except
when the use is predominantly transportation oriented (i.e., automobile service
station, car wash, drive-in or fast food type restaurant or transportation
terminal).
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 17.20; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.232 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIRED.
   (A)   For all buildings and structures erected and all uses of land
established after the effective date of this chapter, accessory parking and
loading facilities shall be provided as required by the regulations of this
chapter.
   (B)   Whenever the existing use of a building or structure shall hereafter
shall be increased or changed to a new use, parking and loading facilities
shall be provided as required for the new use.
   (C)   Accessory off-street parking facilities in existence on the effective
date of this chapter shall not be subsequently reduced below, or if already
less than the requirements set forth in this chapter shall not be further
reduced below, the requirements for a similar new building or use under the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 17.30; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.323 OFF-STREET PARKING; SPATIAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   Ratios. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in the
prescribed ratios for the respective uses as follows:
Automobile sales establishment                                        2 spaces for each employee or manager
                                                                      and 2 spaces for each service stall
                                                                      1 space for each employee or manager;
                                                                      2 spaces per service stall; 5 spaces
                                                                      per stall for a car wash operation in
Automobile service stations                                           conjunction with the station. Space
                                                                      provided in service stalls or at gas
                                                                      pumps shall not be used to satisfy
                                                                      off-street parking requirements
Banks, business and professional office buildings                     1 space for each 300 square feet of
                                                                      floor area
Boarding houses, lodging houses, sororities, fraternities and         1 space for each 2 beds
dormitories
Bowling alleys                                                        6 spaces for each lane
                                                                      Spaces equal to 5 times the capacity
Car washes                                                            of the facility and 1 space for each
                                                                      employee or manager
Churches, auditoriums, theaters                                       1 space for each 5 seats
Clinics - medical, dental, veterinary                                 3 spaces for each doctor and 1 for
                                                                      each 2 staff members
Commercial retail sales and service establishments                    1 space for each 200 square feet of
                                                                      floor area
Dwellings
   One- and two-family dwellings and dwelling units with accessory 2 spaces for each dwelling unit
apartments
   Multiple-family dwellings                                       1.5 spaces for each dwelling unit
   Senior citizen multiple-family dwelling                         1 space for each dwelling unit
                                                                      Except where otherwise specified,
                                                                      parking spaces required on an
      Employee or staff member parking                          employee basis shall be based on the
                                                                      maximum number of employees on duty,
                                                                      or residing, or both, on the premises
                                                                      at any one time
Furniture and appliance stores                                        1 space for each 600 square feet of
                                                                      floor area
Governmental buildings and public service businesses                  1 space for each 500 square feet of
                                                                      floor area
                                                                      1 space for each 2 beds; 1 space for
Hospitals                                                             each 2 employees; 1 space for each
                                                                      doctor based on the maximum number of
                                                                      doctors on duty at one time
                                                                      1 space for each 2 dwelling units; 1
                                                                      space for each 2 employees; and
Hotels                                                                spaces equal to 30% of the capacity
                                                                      of any restaurant, tavern and/or
                                                                      cocktail lounge operated in
                                                                      conjunction with the hotel
Laundromats                                                           1 space for each 200 square feet of
                                                                      floor area
                                                                      1 space for each 2 employees and 1
Lumber yards and building supply stores                               space for each 300 square feet of
                                                                      floor area of office space
                                                                      1 space for each 2 employees of the
Manufacturing, industrial and wholesale establishments                largest shift, plus 1 space for each
                                                                      250 square feet of office space
                                                                      2 spaces for each dwelling unit and
Mobile home parks                                                     additional space for storage or
                                                                      accessory vehicles as required in §
                                                                      154.121 of this chapter
                                                                      8 spaces for each parlor and 1 space
Mortuaries and funeral homes                                          for each vehicle maintained on the
                                                                      premises
                                                                      1 space for each dwelling unit; 1
                                                                      space for each manager on duty; 1
                                                                      space for each staff member; and
Motels                                                                spaces equal to 30% of the capacity
                                                                      of any restaurant, tavern and/or
                                                                      cocktail lounge operated in
                                                                      conjunction with the motel
Museums, art galleries, libraries and historic sites                  1 space for each 1,000 square feet of
                                                                      floor area
Nursing homes and convalescent homes                                  1 space for each 3 beds
                                                                      Spaces equal to 30% of the capacity
Private clubs, lodges, union halls and the like                       in persons of the clubs, lodges or
                                                                      halls
Recreational amusement establishments, swimming pools, golf courses   Spaces equal to 30% of the capacity
and the like                                                          of the facility
Restaurants - sit-down type, taverns cocktail lounges                 Spaces equal to 30% of the capacity
                                                                      of the restaurant, tavern or lounge
Restaurants - fast food type                                          1 space for each 50 square feet of
                                                                      floor area
Schools                                                                
   Elementary and junior high schools, preschools and day care     1 space for each staff member
centers
   High schools, trade schools and colleges                        1 space for each staff member and 1
                                                                      space for each 3 students
Shopping centers                                                      4.5 spaces for each 1,000 square feet
                                                                      of floor area
Sports arenas, football stadiums, gymnasiums                          1 space for each 5 seats
                                                                      1 space for each 2 employees and 1
Transfer and storage companies, cartage companies                     space for each vehicle maintained on
                                                                      the premises
Transportation terminals                                              1 space for each 100 square feet of
                                                                      floor area
 
      (2)   Unlisted uses. Off-street parking requirements for any use not
listed shall be determined by the Planning Commission.
      (3)   Computation. When determination of the number of off-street parking
spaces required by this chapter results in a requirement of a fractional space,
the fraction shall be counted as one parking space.
      (4)   Collective provisions. Off-street parking facilities for separate
uses may be provided collectively if the total number of spaces so provided is
not less than the sum of the separate requirements for each such use; and,
provided that, all regulations governing location of accessory parking spaces
in relation to the use served are adhered to. Further, no parking space or
portion thereof shall serve as a required space for more than one use unless
otherwise authorized by the Board of Adjustment. The Planning Commission and
the Council may request that the additional parking spaces, not to exceed the
total number required by ordinance, be developed for parking upon finding that
the existing parking is not adequate for the development and is an imposition
on adjacent properties and the general welfare of the public. Upon the finding,
the owner of the development shall comply with the recommendation of the
Council.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 17.40; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 5-22-2000; Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed
8- -2010)
   (B)   (1)   Submission of plot plan. Any application for a zoning permit or
for an occupancy certificate where no zoning permit is required shall include
therewith a plot plan, drawn to scale and fully dimensioned, showing any off-
street parking or loading facilities to be provided in compliance with this
chapter.
      (2)   Location. All required parking spaces for any use shall be located
on the same lot as the building or use served, except in cases where
conformance to this requirement causes practical difficulties, in which case
the Planning Commission may approve an alternate plan upon submission. In cases
where facilities are permitted on land other than the zoning lot on which the
building or use served is located, the facilities shall be in the same
possession as the zoning lot occupied by the building or use to which the
parking facilities are accessory. The possession may be either by deed or
lease, the term of the lease to be determined by the Planning Commission. The
owner of the land on which the parking facilities are to be located shall be
bound by covenants filed on record in the office of the County Recorder,
requiring the owner, his or her heirs and assigns, to maintain the required
number of parking facilities for the duration of the use served or of the
lease, whichever shall terminate sooner.
      (3)   Front yard/corner side yard. No portion of a required front yard or
corner side yard shall be used for off-street parking in the R-3 District. In
the single- and two-family residential zones, no portion of a required front
yard or corner side yard shall be used for off-street parking except upon an
improved driveway providing access to a garage, carport or parking area for a
dwelling. Driveways must allow for a vehicle to be parked off street, by
providing a minimum of a 20-foot long parking stall on their lot.
      (4)   Character. Accessory off-street parking spaces may be open to the
sky or enclosed in a building.
      (5)   Design and maintenance. All off-street parking areas shall comply
with the following regulations.
         (a)   Parking areas containing spaces for eight or more cars shall be
improved with an all-weather, dust-free surface acceptable to the City
Engineer, which is best suited to the size, type and location of the parking
lot. Crushed stone may be allowed as a temporary surfacing material prior to
full completion of the parking area.
         (b)   Each required off-street parking space shall open directly upon
an aisle or driveway of the width and design as to provide safe and efficient
means of vehicular access to the parking space. All off-street parking
facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a
street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movement.
Driveway width and construction shall be in accordance with applicable city
ordinances.
         (c)   Each required off-street parking space shall be at least eight
feet six inches in width and at least 19 feet in length, exclusive of access
drives or aisles, ramps, columns or office or work areas. The space shall have
a vertical clearance of at least six feet six inches and shall be measured at
right angles to the axis of the vehicle. Aisles shall be not less than 24 feet
wide for 90-degree parking, 17 feet wide for 60-degree parking, 13 feet wide
for 45-degree parking (angle shall be measured between center line of parking
space and center line of aisle), and 12 feet wide for parallel parking. For
parallel parking, the minimum length of the parking space shall be increased to
23 feet. Parking spaces for compact cars may be provided at the ratio of not
more than one in 20 adjacent to required tree areas. The Planning Commission
may approve the provision of compact car spaces at a greater ratio in a parking
lot where, in the Commission’s determination, proper use can be adequately
controlled. The compact car spaces shall be not less than 15 feet long and
eight feet six inches wide.
         (d)   Driveway widths shall conform to a minimum width of ten feet and
a maximum width of 28 feet.
         (e)   Exits from the areas to public thoroughfares shall be clearly
posted with stop signs. Appropriate entrance, exit and directional signs shall
be maintained where required. All signs shall conform with the “Minnesota
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways”.
         (f)   Raised curbing, tire stops and other devices shall be provided
as required to separate parking areas from traffic lanes, to provide for
traffic control and direction within the parking lot interior, and between all
landscape areas and adjacent parking lot and driveway paving.
         (g)   Proposed grading and storm drainage shall be as required by the
city code or as may be deemed necessary by the City Engineer.
         (h)   Any lights used to illuminate the area shall be so arranged so
as to reflect the light away from adjoining premises and streets. The light
intensity at the perimeter of a parking lot for the following uses shall not
exceed the following recommended foot candle levels:
Entrance driveway           4 - 8
Institutional office        1 - 1.5
Loading platforms           10 - 15
Motel and hotel             1 - 1.5
Parcel pickup areas         10 - 15
Public parking              1 - 2
Sheltered parking           5 - 10
Shopping centers and stores 2 - 4
 
         (i)   Where the area abuts property zoned for residential purposes, or
abuts a public street or alley adjacent to property zoned for residential
purposes, it shall be separated and screened therefrom by an ornamental fence,
wall or evergreen planting, and/or other type of landscape planting capable of
sufficiently shielding headlight glare as shall be approved by the Planning
Commission any of which shall be well maintained at a height of not less than
five feet, except as otherwise provided for in division (B)(5)(k) below.
         (j)   Where the area abuts a public street or alley intersection, no
plantings or fence, wall or other obstruction shall exceed a height of three
feet above the elevation of the established street grade, for a distance of at
least 20 feet in each direction from the lot corner of the intersection.
         (k)   Each entrance and exit to and from the area shall be constructed
and maintained so that no planting, fence, wall or obstruction shall exceed a
height of three feet above the driveway grade for a distance of at least 20
feet in each direction from the edge of each entrance and exit driveway.
         (l)   Landscaped areas shall occupy not less than 10% of the total
area not occupied by buildings or other structures. Trees shall be planted with
a spacing of not to exceed 100 feet and there shall be at least one tree for
each 20 parking spaces. All trees planted shall have a trunk diameter of at
least one and one-half inches measured six inches above the ground. All such
landscaping shall be continuously maintained. (Note: parking structures shall
be exempt from this requirement.) All landscape planting plans shall be
approved by the Planning Commission. When the strict application of these
requirements creates an unusual hardship, the requirements may be reduced upon
approval by the Planning Commission.
         (m)   Landscape planting and special features to be retained or
created, such as walks, walls, fences and the like shall be shown on the
submitted plan for the interior and exterior of the parking areas; it is
intended that existing trees be saved whenever possible. The character and
appearance of the surrounding neighborhood shall be taken into consideration in
the selection of the type of materials and plantings which are proposed for the
improvements.
         (n)   Provisions shall be made for the storage and/or removal of snow
from the parking areas. Snow storage areas shall be designated as close as
practical to drains or catch basins. Snow storage on planting areas should be
avoided to prevent physical and salt damage to plant material. Snow removed
from off-street parking lots shall not be placed on street rights-of-way.
         (o)   The parking facilities required shall be made available as soon
after the time they become required as weather and soil conditions will
reasonably permit, but in no case more than 12 months after the date of the
certificate of occupancy. In the event that occupancy is obtained prior to
completion of the parking facilities, a bond or cash escrow shall be deposited
with the City Clerk in an amount sufficient to guarantee completion of the
work.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 17.50; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.324 OFF-STREET LOADING BERTHS; SPATIAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Spatial requirements.
      (1)   Prescribed ratios. Off-street loading berths shall be provided in
the prescribed ratios for the respective uses, as follows.
         (a)   For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be
provided for buildings containing 10,000 to 200,000 square feet of gross floor
area or fraction thereof:
            1.   Multiple-family dwellings;
            2.   Schools;
            3.   Boarding houses, lodging houses, sororities, fraternities,
dormitories;
            4.   Churches, auditoriums, theaters;
            5.   Hotels;
            6.   Motels;
            7.   Private clubs, union halls; and
            8.   Nursing homes, convalescent homes.
         (b)   For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be
provided for buildings containing 10,000 to 100,000 square feet of gross floor
area; for each additional 100,000 square feet of gross floor area up to 500,000
square feet one additional loading berth shall be provided, plus one additional
loading berth for each additional 500,000 square feet of gross floor area or
fraction thereof in excess of 500,000 square feet:
            1.   Banks, business and professional office buildings;
            2.   Clinics - medical, dental, veterinary;
            3.   Hospitals;
            4.   Recreational amusement; and
            5.   Sports arenas, football stadiums, gymnasiums.
         (c)   For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be
provided for buildings containing 5,000 to 40,000 square feet of gross floor
area. For buildings containing 40,000 to 100,000 square feet of gross floor
area, two loading berths shall be provided plus one additional loading berth
for each additional 100,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction
thereof:
            1.   Laundries;
            2.   Manufacturing, industrial or wholesale establishments; and
            3.   Transfer and storage companies, cartage and express companies.
         (d)   Every building or establishment not previously listed, or which
required the receipt or distribution of material or merchandise by trucks or
similar vehicles, shall provide off-street loading berths as follows:
 
Gross Floor Area of Establishments In Thousands of Sq. Ft. Required Number
5,000 to 20,000                                            1
20,000 to 35,000                                           2
35,000 to 60,000                                           3
60,000 to 100,000                                          4
 
         (e)   For each additional 200,000 square feet of gross floor area or
fraction thereof over 100,000 square feet of gross floor area, one additional
loading berth shall be provided.
      (2)   Central loading. Central loading facilities may be substituted for
loading berths on the individual zoning lots providing the following conditions
are fulfilled.
         (a)   Each zoning lot served shall have direct access to the central
loading area without crossing streets or alleys at grade.
         (b)   Total berths provided shall meet the requirements based on the
sum of the several types of uses served (area of types of uses may be totaled
before computing number of loading berths).
         (c)   No zoning lot served shall be more than 500 feet from the
central loading area.
         (d)   Any tunnel or ramp connecting the central loading area within
the zoning lot served shall be not less than seven feet in width and have a
clearance of not less than seven feet.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 17.60; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
   (B)   Standards for off-street loading berths.
      (1)   Access. Each required off-street loading berth shall be designed
with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner
which will least interfere with traffic movement, and shall be subject to
approval by the administrative officer.
      (2)   Location.
         (a)   All required loading berths shall be located on the same zoning
lot as the use served. All motor vehicle loading berths shall be completely
screened from residential properties by building walls or a uniformly painted
solid fence, wall or door or any combination thereof, not less than eight feet
in height.
         (b)   No permitted or required loading berth shall be located within
30 feet of the nearest point of intersection of any two streets.
      (3)   Design.
         (a)   Size. A required off-street loading berth shall be adequately
designed for type of use it will serve and shall be approved by the City
Engineer.
         (b)   Encroachment. Off-street loading berths shall be designed so
that vehicles using the loading berth shall not encroach upon alley or street
rights-of-way.
         (c)   Surfacing. All open off-street loading berths shall be surfaced
with an all-weather dustless material capable of bearing a live load of 200
pounds per square foot.
         (d)   Drainage. All loading berths shall be provided with adequate
drainage facilities to carry surface and storm waters into storm sewers or
drainage ditches.
      (4)   Utilization. Space allocated to any off-street loading berth shall
not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-
street parking facilities or portions thereof.
      (5)   Minimum facilities. Uses for which off-street loading facilities
are required, but which are located in buildings of less floor area than the
minimum prescribed for the facilities, shall be provided with adequate
receiving facilities, accessible by motor vehicle, off an adjacent alley,
service drive or open space on the same zoning lot.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 17.70; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
§ 154.325 HANDICAPPED PARKING.
   All parking facilities will comply to federal and state handicap
accessibility guidelines including Department of Justice, 28 C.F.R. part 36,
“Non-Discrimination on the Basis of Disability by Public Accommodations and in
Commercial Facilities” (ADA requirements).
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 17.80; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
SIGN REGULATIONS
§ 154.240 APPLICATION.
   Any signs hereafter erected or maintained shall conform to the provisions of
this subchapter and any other provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 8-23-2010)
§ 154.241 PURPOSE.
   Because signs are an important and necessary element to business and
organizations in all segments of the community, the purpose of this chapter is
to promote growth in an orderly and attractive manner and to provide standards
to safeguard life, health, property and public welfare, by regulating the type,
area, height, construction, illumination, location and maintenance of all signs
and sign structures in the city.
(Ord. passed 8-23-2010)
§ 154.242 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED SIGN. A sign or remote sign which no longer correctly directs or
exhorts any person, advertises a bona fide business, lessor, owner, product or
activity conducted or product available on the premises where the sign is
displayed.
   ADMINISTRATION. The Zoning Administrator and/or his, her or their designee
or designated official is hereby authorized by the City Council to administer
and enforce this subchapter.
   APARTMENT SIGN. Sign which identifies an apartment building or a group of
apartment buildings of eight or more units.
   AREA OF A SIGN. The area of the panel(s) or modules(s) on which sign copy is
painted, etched, engraved or attached, exclusive of any structural support. The
AREA OF A BILLBOARD is the area of the sign available to attach any type of
bulletin or poster panel and frame, exclusive of the base and structural
support. The AREA OF A SIGN consisting only of individual alphabetic, numeric
and symbolic characters without background or affixed directly to a wall is the
area within a single continuous perimeter of straight lines at right angles
enclosing the characters.
   AWNING SIGN. A sign on or attached to a temporary retractable or fixed
shelter composed of non-rigid material, except for the supporting framework and
braced entirely from the exterior wall of the building.
   BANNER SIGN. A temporary sign composed of lightweight material enclosed or
not enclosed in a rigid frame, secured or mounted so as to allow movement of
the sign caused by movement of the atmosphere.
   BEACON. Illumination which comes from lamps, lenses or devices designed to
focus or concentrate the light rays of the source.
   BILLBOARD. A sign, including the supporting structures, which direct the
attention of the general public on a public street or walk to business, service
or activity not offered or sold upon the premises where such a sign is located.
   BUSINESS SIGN. A sign which directs attention to a business or profession
conducted upon the premises at which the sign is located, and which may refer
to goods or services produced, offered for sale or obtained at the premises.
   CANOPY or MARQUEE. A permanent roof-like shelter either freestanding or
extending from part or all of a building fascia over a public right-of-way or a
portion of the premises and constructed of some durable material such as metal,
glass or plastic.
   CANOPY OR MARQUEE SIGN. Any sign attached to or constructed on the fascia or
hung from a canopy or marquee.
   CHANGING SIGN (AUTOMATIC). A sign such as electronically or electrically
controlled public service information signs, message centers or reader boards
where different automatic changing messages of an informative or commercial
nature of interest to the traveling public are shown.
      (1)   MESSAGE CENTER. A sign which contains a changing message within the
copy area which remains on for a specified minimum period of time and blacks
out for a specified minimum period of time between messages.
      (2)   ELECTRONIC READER BOARD. A sign which contains a traveling message,
or a message which appears to be traveling and usually in a horizontal manner.
The characters incorporated into any message remain constant, and do not change
in hue or intensity, as they travel or appear to travel across or through the
automatic changing copy of the sign.
      (3)   PUBLIC SERVICE INFORMATION SIGN. Any sign intended primarily to
promote messages of general interest to the community such as time,
temperature, date, atmospheric conditions and news or traffic control.
   CONSTRUCTION SIGN. A sign placed at a construction site identifying the
project or the name of the architect, engineer, contractor, financier or other
involved parties.
   DIRECTIONAL SIGN. Any sign which is designed and erected solely for the
purpose of traffic or pedestrian direction and which is placed on the property
to which or on which the public is directed. The sign contains no advertising
copy.
   DOUBLE-FACED SIGN. A sign with faces on both sides showing in opposite
directions and shall constitute one advertising sign.
   EXEMPT SIGNS. Signs exempted from normal permit requirements.
   FACE OF A SIGN. The entire area of a sign on which copy could be placed.
   FLASHING SIGN. Any sign which contains an intermittent or flashing light
source, or which includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing light by
means of animation or an externally mounted intermittent light source.
   GROUND SIGN. A sign which is firmly attached to the ground in a permanent
location not attached to or forming part of a building.
   HEIGHT OF SIGN. The vertical distance measured from the adjacent street
grade or upper surface of the nearest street curb to the highest point of a
sign.
   HOME OCCUPATION SIGN. A sign identifying a residential professional office
or home occupation.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN. Any sign which emanates light either by means of exposed
tubing or lamps on its surface, or by means of illumination transmitted through
the sign faces.
   INFORMATIONAL SIGN. Any sign giving information to employees, visitors or
delivery vehicles, but containing no advertising or identification.
   INSTITUTIONAL SIGN. A sign or bulletin board which identifies the name or
other characteristics of a public, semipublic or private institution on the
site where the sign is located. “Institutions” shall include churches, schools,
city buildings and other non-profit, governmental or charitable organizations.
   INTEGRAL SIGN. A sign carrying the name of a building, its date of erection,
monumental citations, commemorative tablets, addresses and the like when carved
into stone, concrete or similar material or made of bronze, aluminum or other
permanent type of construction and made an integral part of the structure.
   NON-CONFORMING SIGN (LEGAL). Any advertising structure or sign which was
lawfully erected and maintained prior to such time as it came within the
purview of this chapter, and any amendments thereto, and which fails to conform
to all applicable regulations and restrictions of this chapter.
   OWNER/OCCUPANT SIGN. A sign which identifies the name of the owner or
occupant of a residential, commercial or industrial building.
   PAINTED WALL SIGN. An advertisement painted directly on the wall of a
building.
   PEDESTAL SIGN. A sign supported by one or more columns, uprights or braces
in or upon the ground, not attached to or forming part of a building.
   POLITICAL SIGN. A sign on behalf of a candidate for office or measures on
election ballots.
   PORTABLE SIGN. A sign not permanently attached to the ground or a building,
allowing it to be moved to various locations.
   PROJECTING SIGN. Any sign other than a wall sign, awning, marquee or canopy
which is attached to and projects from a structure, building face or wall.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The particular distance across a public street, alley,
sidewalk or boulevard measured from property line to property line. When
property lines on opposite sides of the public street are not parallel, the
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY width shall be determined by the City Engineer.
   REAL ESTATE SIGN. A sign pertaining to the sale, lease or rental of the
property upon which it is located.
   REVOLVING/FLASHING SIGN. Illuminated sign on which the illumination is not
kept stationary or constant in intensity and/or color at all times when the
sign is in use.
   ROOF SIGN. A sign erected upon the roof or parapet of a building, the entire
face of which is situated above the roof level of the building to which it is
attached and which is wholly or partially supported by the building.
   SIGN. Any identification, description, illustration or device illuminated or
non-illuminated which is visible from any public place or is located on private
property and exposed to the public and which directs attention to a product,
service, place, activity, person, institution, business or solicitation,
including any permanently installed or situated merchandise; or any emblem,
painting, banner, pennant, placard or temporary sign designed to advertise,
identify or convey information. For the purpose of removal, SIGNS shall also
include all sign structures. However, a SIGN shall not include any display of
official court, public office notices or traffic signs, nor shall it include
the flag, separate emblem or insignia of a nation, political unit or school or
religious group, or incombustible tablet or lettering built into the wall of a
building or other structure. A SIGN inside a building is not included unless
its face is visible only from the exterior building. The “Rushford” sign
located on the westerly bluff face shall not be considered a SIGN for purposes
of this chapter.
   SIGN POSTERS/HANDBILLS. Flyer/brochure-type sign advertising event or
activity.
   SUBDIVISION PLAT SIGN. A temporary sign which advertises a new subdivision
plat.
   TRAFFIC SIGN. A sign which is erected by a governmental unit for the purpose
of directing or guiding traffic.
   UNLAWFUL SIGN. A sign which violates this chapter or which the Administrator
may declare as unlawful if it becomes dangerous to public safety by reason of
dilapidation or abandonment.
   WALL SIGN. Any sign affixed in such a way to a building or structure that
its exposed face is parallel to or approximately parallel to the plane of the
building or structure on which it is affixed.
(Ord. passed 8-23-2010)
§ 154.343 INTENT.
   It is the intent of this subchapter to regulate the construction, use and
maintenance of signs of all types within the city and permit the signs in a
manner which will protect the public health, safety and general welfare of
persons within the city, which will reduce advertising distractions and
obstructions which may contribute to traffic hazards and which will enhance and
protect the appearance of the community.
(Ord. passed 8-23-2010)
§ 154.344 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Applicability. All signs erected, repaired, altered, relocated or
maintained within the city or within areas that are allowed to be regulated by
the city due to their immediate proximity to city boundaries shall comply with
the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter
or relocate any sign subject to the provisions of this subchapter without first
obtaining a sign permit in compliance with the provisions of §
154.027 of this chapter, except as provided herein. A separate permit shall be
required for a sign or signs on a single supporting structure when the group of
signs is erected at one time. These regulations shall not be construed to
require a permit for a change of copy on a sign, nor for the repainting,
cleaning and other normal maintenance or repair of a sign or sign structure for
which a permit has previously been issued; provided that, the sign or sign
structure is not modified in any way. In all events, a permit must be obtained
before any visible work is done in connection with the erection, alteration or
relocation. Any permit or license issued in conflict with this chapter shall be
null and void and of no effect whatever. A sign permit fee will be charged when
an application form is completed. If no progress has been made in one year, a
new permit will be required.
   (C)   MN/DOT regulations. All sign, other than those exempted herein,
adjacent to T.H. 30, T.H. 16, and T.H. 43 shall be in conformance with the
state’s Department of Transportation (MN/DOT) regulations. For specific
regulations, contact MN/DOT District Traffic Engineer at (507) 285-7381.
   (D)   Exempt signs. The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to the
following:
      (1)   Real estate signs not exceeding six square feet in area which
advertise the sale, resale or lease of the premises upon which the signs are
located only;
      (2)   Construction signs posted for no longer than one year and not
exceeding 32 square feet in area;
      (3)   Owner/occupant signs, home occupation signs and institutional signs
not exceeding two square feet; provided that, the number of the signs does not
exceed one for each use or occupant;
      (4)   Traffic or other municipal or state signs, legal notices, railroad
crossing signs and the temporary, emergency or non-advertising signs as may be
approved by the City Council;
      (5)   Signs required by law, including legal notices or advertisements
prescribed by law or posted by any lawful officer or agent;
      (6)   Integral signs;
      (7)   Political or campaign signs as approved and provided for in state
statutes;
      (8)   Informational signs not exceeding four square feet, including, but
not limited to, signs identifying rest rooms, public telephones, walkways or
signs providing direction such as parking lot entrance and exit signs and those
of similar nature;
      (9)   Handbills/sign posters erected on private property with permission
of the owner; and
      (10)   Subdivision plat signs posted for no longer than two years and not
to exceed 32 square feet in area.
   (E)   Traffic hazards. Signs shall not be located at the intersection of any
streets in such a manner as to obstruct clear and adequate vision; nor any
location where, by reason of the position, shape or color, it may interfere
with, obstruct the view or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal
or device; nor shall any sign make use of the words “stop”, “look”, “danger”,
“caution”, “warning” or any other word, phrase, symbol or character in such
manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. The source of light
from any sign shall not be directed toward any oncoming vehicular traffic with
the intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or impair the vision of the
driver of any motor vehicle.
   (F)   Sign encroachment. No sign shall encroach upon nor extend over public
property, except in compliance with city ordinances. No sign, except for
informational banners of community-wide importance displayed on a temporary
basis with the written permission of property owners, and except for a wall
sign which is located at least eight feet above grade and which projects not
more than 15 inches over public property shall be permitted to encroach upon or
extend over the right of way of T.H. 30, T.H. 16 or T.H. 43. The city shall
facilitate and obtain any necessary MDOT approvals for any applicant requesting
a temporary banner extending over state rights-of-way.
   (G)   Unallowable signs. No signs shall be painted on, attached to or
affixed to any trees, rocks or similar organic or inorganic natural matter, or
on any power line pole or telephone pole.
   (H)   Sign painting. The exposed uprights, superstructure and/or backside of
all signs shall be painted a neutral color such as light blue, gray, tan or
white unless it can be illustrated that the part of the sign designed or
painted in another manner is integral to the overall design of the sign.
   (I)   Maintenance of ground signs and surrounding area. The owner, lessee or
manager of the property upon which a sign is located is responsible for
assuring the proper appearance of the sign, including a reasonable area around
the base of the sign. A sign which becomes dangerous to the public safety by
reason of dilapidation or abandonment will be considered unlawful.
   (J)   Subdivision, addition or apartment signs. One sign not exceeding 24
square feet in area, or two signs not exceeding 12 square feet each, shall be
permitted at any exclusive or major enhance to a subdivision or addition, the
signs restricted to use of the subdivision or addition name only.
   (K)   Bonus of landscaping. For each two square feet of landscaped garden
area installed at the base and properly maintained the use of a ground sign
shall be permitted one additional square foot of area over that normally
permitted, up to a maximum increase of 20% of the normal sign area.
(Ord. passed 8-23-2010)
§ 154.345 ON-PREMISES SIGNS.
   On-premises signs shall be permitted in accordance with the following
requirements.
   (A)   Display area. The sum total area in square feet of all sign display
area shall not exceed 1.5% times the width of the building front, up to 400
square feet of sign area.
   (B)   Ground signs, including pedestal signs.
      (1)   No ground sign or supporting structure shall be placed, adjoining a
driveway, in an area bounded by the adjacent street or alley right-of-way, the
adjacent driveway line, and diagonal line intersecting the right-of-way and
driveway lines at a distance of ten feet from the point of intersection of the
right-of-way and driveway lines.
      (2)   No ground sign shall be placed in the traffic visibility zone as
defined herein.
      (3)   Ground signs located within 100 feet of any residentially zoned
property shall not exceed 25 feet in height. Ground signs in commercial and
industrial zoned property shall not exceed 30 feet in height.
      (4)   One ground sign is permitted on each premise for each street
frontage. Where a parcel’s frontage exceeds 300 feet one additional sign may be
permitted for each additional 300 feet of street frontage in excess of the
first 300 feet of street frontage abutting the developed portion of the parcel.
   (C)   Wall signs.
      (1)   No wall sign shall project over a roof or parapet line.
      (2)   Wall signs may not project from the wall to which they are affixed
by more than 15 inches.
      (3)   Painted wall signs are permissible following the area requirements
above. Murals of artistic or historical significance, or of benefit to the
entire community, shall not be considered signs for the purpose of this
chapter, but review will be required before permission is granted.
   (D)   Projecting signs.
      (1)   All projecting signs shall be installed in a manner such that no
angle iron support structures are visible above a roof, building face or wall.
      (2)   No projecting sign shall extend more than six feet above a roof or
parapet.
      (3)   Projecting signs may extend over a public street or alley right-of-
way only after issuance of a conditional/interim use permit in compliance with
this chapter. However, no signs projecting over street or alley right-of-way
shall be allowed in the C-CBD District or extending over the right-of-way of
T.H. 30, T.H. 16 and T.H. 43 in Rushford, except time and temperature data or
signs constructed or printed as an integral part of an awning, shall be
permitted.
      (4)   The area of a projecting sign is calculated on one face of the sign
only.
      (5)   Projecting signs shall have a minimum clearance of ten feet above
grade.
      (6)   The number of projecting signs per use shall not exceed one.
      (7)   Swinging signs must be securely fastened with appropriate hardware.
The Planning Commission reserves the right to restrict the size, weight and
design to ensure public safety.
   (E)   Awning signs.
      (1)   No awning sign may extend over public property more than seven feet
from the face of a supporting building, nor extend nearer than two feet to the
face of the nearest curb line measured horizontally. In no case shall the
awning sign extend over public property greater than two-thirds of the distance
from the lot line to the curb in front of the building site.
      (2)   All portions of any awning sign shall be at least eight feet above
any public walkway, except when a valance is attached. Any valance shall not
extend more than 12 inches below the roof of the awning at the point of
attachment and in no instance shall any portion of a valance be less than seven
feet in height above the public walkway.
      (3)   No awning sign shall project over a roof or parapet line.
      (4)   Awning signs shall have non-combustible frames and coverings. When
collapsed, retracted or folded, the design shall be such that the awning does
not block any required exit.
   (F)   Canopy or marquee. Every marquee shall be so located as not to
interfere with the operation of any exterior standpipe or obstruct the clear
passage of a means of egress from the building or the installation or
maintenance of electrifiers.
      (1)   Projection and clearance. The horizontal clearance between a
marquee and the curb line shall not be less than two feet. A marquee projecting
more than two-thirds of the distance from the property line to the curb line
shall not be less than 12 feet above the ground or pavement below and shall not
exceed 25 feet in length along the direction of the street.
      (2)   Thickness. The maximum height or thickness of a marquee measured
vertically from its lowest to its highest point shall not exceed three feet
when the marquee projects more than two-thirds of the distance from the
property line to the curb line and shall not exceed nine feet when the marquee
is less than two-thirds of the distance from the property line to the curb
line.
   (G)   Portable signs.
      (1)   Portable signs shall be allowed to be erected and maintained for a
period not to exceed 30 days. Each permit issued for the usage shall be
effective only for the period. The portable sign shall be removed immediately
upon expiration of the permit. No permit issuance for a portable sign on the
same property shall be permitted within the ensuing two-month period after the
date of expiration of the permit.
      (2)   Portable signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area.
      (3)   Portable signs shall not be allowed to be erected or maintained
upon any public right-of- way.
      (4)   Portable signs must advertise the use located on the premises.
   (H)   Banners, pennants and the like. Banners, ribbons, pennants, twirling
signs, balloons or other similar devices shall be permitted in a commercial or
industrial district for a period not to exceed thirty days in conjunction with
a special promotion of a business, or in a residential district in conjunction
with an open house or model home demonstration for a period commencing two days
before and ending two days following the demonstration, the total period of use
not to exceed 30 days.
   (I)   A-frame and/or sandwich board signs. A-frame or sandwich board signs
shall be permitted only in compliance with the following requirements:
      (1)   One such sign per business at a maximum size of 24 inches by 48
inches;
      (2)   The signs will be allowed in the public right-of-way only when
directly adjacent to the principal entrance of the business; and
      (3)   The signs may only be placed in the public right-of-way during
daylight hours.
(Ord. passed 8-23-2010)
§ 154.346 OFF-PREMISES SIGNS.
   Off-premises signs shall be permitted in the C-A, I-1 and I-2 Districts,
only in compliance with the following requirements.
   (A)   Off-premises signs shall not exceed 300 square feet in area, nor 35
feet in height.
   (B)   All off-premises signs shall comply with set-back requirements for
main buildings in the zoning district in which they are located.
   (C)   Off-premises signs shall be of the ground sign type only.
   (D)   There shall be a minimum spacing of 300 feet between off-premises sign
structures located on the same street, facing the same traffic flow. One sign
facing shall be permitted for each sign structure in the C-A Districts. Single-
or double-faced signs shall be permitted in any given traffic flow in the I-
1 or I-2 Districts.
   (E)   Off-premises signs shall be located at least 75 feet from any
residential zoning district, public building, church or school, except where
the zoning districts are separated by a public street or railroad. In such
case, off-premises signs may be placed within the 75-foot limit providing it
complies with the building setback requirements of division (B) above.
   (F)   All off-premises signs shall have written permission from property
owner stating the size, location and period of time for which permission is
granted.
(Ord. passed 8-23-2010)
§ 154.347 DIRECTIONAL SIGNS PERMITTED ON PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Subject to the provisions of this section, the owner or operator of an
airport, library, community center, church, hospital, institution of an
educational, philanthropic or charitable nature, cemetery, mausoleum, mortuary,
governmental institution or armory may place directional sign on any city
street sign located adjacent to a state highway or county road or state aid
designated street within the city.
   (B)   Any such sign shall be 216 square inches as per state guidelines.
   (C)   The city may mandate the design of the sign; except that, all such
signs shall conform to the coloring and construction materials used in State
Highway Department information signs.
   (D)   (1)   No sign shall be erected pursuant to this section until the
person or agency erecting the sign has obtained a sign permit and approval on
the specific location of the sign. The city’s Zoning Administrator will issue
the sign permit after consulting with the Public Works Director as to the
public safety of the proposed sign.
      (2)   No sign permit will be issued for a sign that would constitute a
hazard to public safety.
   (E)   The city shall install any such sign for which a permit issued after
the person or agency requesting the sign has paid the costs thereof. The person
or agency erecting the sign shall be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep
of any sign placed on a city street sign. In the event the sign so installed is
not maintained and kept in the same condition as the city street sign or become
a hazard to public safety, the city, at its option, may request the person or
agency to remove the sign. If the sign is not removed, the city may remove the
sign and recover the costs thereof from the person or agency erecting the same.
(Ord. passed 8-23-2010)
§ 154.348 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   The following signs are prohibited in all zoning districts, except as
otherwise provided by this chapter.
   (A)   Flashing signs, revolving signs or beacon signs. No signs shall be
permitted which makes use of beacon lights, flashing, blinding or traveling
lights with reflectors or reflecting materials used to increase the intensity
of the sign illumination. However, automatic changing signs shall be permitted.
   (B)   Moving signs. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no sign,
or any portion thereof, shall be permitted which moves or assumes any motion
constituting a non-stationary condition. This requirement is not intended to
prohibit any form of signage attached to a motor vehicle.
   (C)   Roof signs. A sign erected upon the roof or parapet of a building, the
entire face of which is situated above the roof level of the building to which
it is attached and which is wholly or partially supported by the building, is
prohibited.
   (D)   Billboard signs. No billboard sign is to be placed along a state or
federal scenic byway.
   (E)   Sign posters/handbills. No posters or handbills on public property or
on private property without permission of the owner.
(Ord. passed 8-23-2010)
§ 154.349 UNLAWFUL SIGNS.
   Signs which have become dangerous to public safety by reason of dilapidation
or abandonment.
   (A)   Removal required. Unlawful signs shall be removed by the owner of the
sign. Any such sign not removed shall be subject to removal by the city 30 days
after the Zoning Administrator shall have served a notice of removal on the
owner thereof by mail, or if the owner cannot be found, publication in the
legal newspaper of the city. The notice of removal shall specify the nature of
the violation, the action required by the owner, the date by which the action
must be completed and an opportunity to appear before the City Council and be
heard as to any objections concerning the proposed action of the Council. If
the owner of the sign is not the owner of the premises on which the sign
located, the owner of the premises shall also be served.
   (B)   Removal by city; expense responsibility of owner. If, after the notice
has been served, the party or parties served fail to remove the sign in
accordance with the terms of the notice, and after having heard the objections
thereto, if any, the Council does not determine otherwise, the council may
cause the sign to be removed at the expense of the city and recovered in the
manner in which improvements are assessed. This shall not limit any other
rights which the city has to enforce collection of the cost against the owner
of the sign and the owner of the property.
   (C)   Exception. Permanent signs applicable to a business temporarily
suspended because of a change of ownership or management of the business shall
not be deemed abandoned unless the property remains vacant for a period of more
than six months.
(Ord. passed 8-23-2010)
§ 154.350 NON-CONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   Permitted to continue. Within the districts established by this
chapter, there exist signs and sign structures which were lawful before this
chapter was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited under the terms of
this chapter or future amendment. It is the intent of this subchapter to permit
these non-conformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage
their survival. It is further the intent of this subchapter that non-
conformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended or used as a
basis for allowing additional signs or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same
district.
   (B)   Restrictions. Any sign or sign structure which does not conform to the
use regulations contained in this subchapter at the time it becomes applicable
may be continued subject to the following provisions.
      (1)   Damage. Any conforming sign or sign structure which has been
damaged such that its value has been reduced to less than 50% of its fair-
market value prior to the damage shall be required to conform to the use
regulations of this chapter.
      (2)   Repairs. The repairs and maintenance work as required to keep a
non-conforming sign or sign structure in sound condition may be made; provided
that, no additions shall be made to a non- conforming sign.
(Ord. passed 8-23-2010)
§ 154.351 APPEALS.
   (A)   The Board of Appeals and Adjustments shall have the power and duty of
hearing appeals or requests on the following cases:
      (1)   Appeals from any action of the Zoning Administrator in granting or
denying a sign permit;
      (2)   Appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative officer in the
enforcement of this chapter; and
      (3)   Requests for variances as in other cases involving zoning
ordinances of the city, from the literal provisions of this chapter in
instances where their strict enforcement would cause undue hardship because of
circumstances unique to the individual property under consideration. In
granting a variance, the Board may impose conditions to ensure compliance and
to protect adjacent properties. The Board may not permit as a variance any sign
which is not permitted in the zoning district in question by this chapter.
   (B)   All appeals are subject to the procedures as set forth in §
154.027 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 8-23-2010)
§ 154.352 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Right of entry. This chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning
Administrator and/or his, her or their designee or designated officials of the
city and shall have the right to enter at any reasonable hour upon any
premises, for the purpose of enforcement of this chapter.
   (B)   Violations. If it is found that any of the provisions of this chapter
are being violated, the Zoning Administrator shall notify in writing the
persons responsible for the violations, indicating the nature of the violation
and ordering the action necessary to correct it or shall take the action
authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance with or to prevent continued
violation of its provisions. The person responsible for the violation shall be
given 30 days to correct the violation, except in the case of a violation
involving portable signs where the person responsible for the violation shall
be given five days to correct the violation.
(Ord. passed 8-23-2010)
EROSION AND LAND-DISTURBANCE CONTROLS
§ 154.365 APPLICABILITY.
   This subchapter applies to land-disturbance activities on lands within the
boundaries and jurisdiction of the city. Permits granted under this subchapter
do not release the permittee, landowner or land user from other applicable
federal, state or local regulations. The issuance of a permit under this
subchapter is not a guarantee that the resulting land-disturbance activity will
be acceptable to other persons or parties and the city assumes no
responsibility for any cost, suit, liability or award which might be assessed
due to the acceptance of a control plan or issuance of permits, or because of
any adverse effect upon any person or property attributed to a project of the
permittee.
(Ord. passed 5-15-2001)
§ 154.366 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   ACCESS ROAD DEVELOPMENT. Any excavation or filling for the construction of
roads and trails where access is needed for public or private use.
   AGRICULTURAL LAND USE. Use of land for planting, growing, cultivating and
harvesting of crops for human or livestock consumption and pasturing or yarding
of livestock.
   CONTROL MEASURE. A practice or combination of practices to control erosion
and attendant pollution.
   CONTROL PLAN. A written description and or plan map of the number,
locations, sizes and other pertinent information of soil and water erosion
control measures designed to meet the requirements of this subchapter submitted
by the applicant for review and acceptance by the Zoning Administrator.
   EROSION. The detachment and movement of soil, sediment or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
   FLOODPLAIN ZONE. All lands in the city, which are within 1,000 feet of the
ordinary high water mark of navigable waters; or within the floodplain zone of
the city.
   LAND-DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY. Any human-made change of the land surface,
including removing protective cover to expose the soil, excavating, filling,
grading, construction of buildings, roads, parking lots and similar facilities,
but not including cultivation of agricultural land.
   LANDOWNER. Any person having fee title or contract ownership of the land.
   LAND USER. Any person who uses the land as owner, operator, lessors, renter
or occupier who is providing a service that requires access or alterations of
the land in order to perform the service, or by any other arrangement which
gives the person the responsibility of private or public land use.
   LETTER OF CREDIT. A writing from a party of known financial means
guaranteeing the performance of a certain act or payment of a certain amount of
money.
   PERENNIAL WATERS. The springs, rivers, lakes, ponds or wetlands lasting or
continuing throughout the year and includes all public waters and all bodies of
water adapted or used for public purposes.
   PERMIT. The authority granted by the city’s Zoning Administrator to conduct
activities regulated by this subchapter.
   POLLUTANT CONTROL REQUIREMENTS. Control measures used to meet the
requirements of this chapter and other relevant.
   RESTRICTED DEVELOPMENT AREA. All land which exists in the Bluff Protection
Overlay District (§§
154.225 through
154.229 of this chapter).
   RUNOFF. The rainfall, snowmelt or irrigation water flowing over the ground
surface.
   SITE. The entire area on which the land-disturbance activity is proposed in
the permit application.
   SLOPE. The grade of the land determined by the vertical rise or fall in per
feet, per horizontal length in feet, measured perpendicular to the existing
land contour and expressed as a percentage.
   STABILIZE. To make the site steadfast or firm minimizing soil movement.
   SURETY BOND. A cash bond submitted to the city in order to ensure proper
performance of erosion-control activities.
   TRACKING. The detachment and movement of soil, sediment or rock fragments by
vehicle tires.
   WETLANDS. Those areas where water is at, near or above the land surface long
enough to be capable of supporting aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and which
have soils indicative of wet conditions.
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The Zoning Administrator or designee of the city.
(Ord. passed 5-15-2001)
§ 154.367 DESIGN CRITERIA, STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR CONTROL MEASURES.
   All control measures required to comply with this subchapter shall meet the
design criteria, standards and specifications described in this subchapter or
approved by the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. passed 5-15-2001)
§ 154.368 MAINTENANCE OF CONTROL MEASURES.
   All control measures necessary to meet the requirements of this subchapter
shall be properly maintained by the landowner or land user to ensure adequate
performance and to prevent nuisance conditions.
(Ord. passed 5-15-2001)
§ 154.369 CONTROL OF EROSION AND POLLUTANTS DURING LAND-DISTURBANCE ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Applicability. This section applies to any of the following sites:
      (1)   Those involving land-disturbance activities, other than
agricultural land uses, affecting surface area of 4,000 square feet or more on
slopes less than 20%;
      (2)   Those involving land-disturbance activities, other than
agricultural land uses, affecting a surface area of 2,000 square feet or more
on slopes 20% and greater;
      (3)   Within the Floodplain Zone;
      (4)   Those involving excavation or filling or a combination of both
affecting 400 cubic yards or more of soil;
      (5)   Those required by the Zoning Administrator to obtain an erosion
control permit; and
      (6)   Other sites as determined by the Zoning Administrator where actual
or potential erosion problems warrant corrective action.
   (B)   Erosion and other pollutant control requirements. The following
requirements shall be met on all sites described in division (A) above.
      (1)   Site dewatering. Water pumped from a site shall be treated by
control measures required by §
154.370 of this chapter or other measures acceptable to the Zoning
Administrator. Water may not be discharged in a manner that causes erosion from
or sedimentation to move from the site to land belonging to other persons or
perennial waters.
      (2)   Tracking. Each site shall have roads, access drives and parking
areas of sufficient width and length to minimize sediment tracked onto public
or private roadways. Any sediment reaching a public or private road shall be
removed by street cleaning, not flushing, before the end of each workday.
      (3)   Drain inlet protection. All storm drain inlets shall be protected
with straw bales, filter fabric or equivalent barriers upon completion of the
inlet and until the site has been stabilized.
      (4)   Site erosion control. The following shall attain site erosion
control.
         (a)   All site developments and land-disturbance activities shall be
planned and implemented to best fit the terrain, minimize exposed area and
retain as much existing vegetation as possible.
         (b)   Runoff from areas adjacent to the site shall be diverted around
disturbed areas where possible.
         (c)   All land that is exposed during or after site development shall
be seeded with a cover crop or sodded within two weeks after the site
development is completed. If an area being developed is over 20,000 square
feet, it shall be done in stages as much as feasible, and each stage shall be
seeded with a cover crop or sodded as required herein. A cover crop shall
consist of grasses or other crops that are acceptable to the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service for the county.
         (d)   All land-disturbance activities on the site shall be conducted
in a logical sequence in accordance with the control plan to minimize the area
of bare soil exposed at one time.
      (5)   Washing out and cleaning of cement trucks. Washing out and cleaning
of cement trucks into the city storm sewers is prohibited.
   (D)   Cuts and fills. Cuts and fills shall be planned and constructed to
minimize the length and steepness of slopes.
   (E)   Channels and flow areas. Channels and other concentrated flow areas
shall be properly designed and constructed to control runoff within and from
the site in a manner that will not erode the conveyance and receiving channels.
   (F)   Sediment control. Sediment shall be contained on-site through the use
of filter fabric fences, straw bale fences, sediment basins or other methods
approved by the Zoning Administrator.
   (G)   Erosion of earth storage piles. Erosion of earth storage piles shall
be controlled with silt fence, 25 feet of grass buffer in slopes of less than
5%, straw bale barriers or other approved control measures.
   (H)   Erosion control measures. If any erosion control measures do not work
as anticipated, or there are damages for any reason, the measures shall be
repaired or improved immediately, or by permission of the Zoning Administrator,
within such time limits, not to exceed ten calendar days, as are approved in
writing by the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. passed 5-15-2001) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.370 PERMITS AND CONTROL PLANS.
   (A)   Approval. No landowner or land user may commence a land-disturbance
activity subject to this subchapter without receiving prior acceptance of a
control plan from the Zoning Administrator. An application for a permit, or
submission of a control plan, authorizes the Zoning Administrator to enter the
site to view the site and obtain information required for the review of the
control plan. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for creating forms
to be used for the purposes of this subchapter subject to the approval of the
forms by the City Council.
   (B)   Control plan contents. Required contents of control plans will depend
on the slope of the land proposed for the land-disturbance, amount of land to
be disturbed and proximity of the proposed land- disturbance activity to
streams, rivers, lakes, private properties and wetlands.
      (1)   Category A. A “Standard Erosion Control Plan for Minor Land-
Disturbances” may be submitted in lieu of a more detailed plan if all of the
following conditions are met:
         (a)   Twenty thousand square feet of land or less will be disturbed;
         (b)   One thousand cubic yards or less of excavation or filling will
occur;
         (c)   Land-disturbances will not occur within Floodplain Zone; and
         (d)   Final grades will be no steeper than three horizontal to one
vertical (3:1).
      (2)   Category B. Category B control plans will be required for land-
disturbance activities where any of the conditions of divisions (B)(1)(a), (B)
(1)(b) and (B)(1)(d) above cannot be met. Category B plans will also be
required for land-disturbance activities on slopes of 12%. or greater but less
than 20%. These control plans shall conform to the Category B and C checklist.
      (3)   Category C. Category C control plans will be required for land-
disturbance activities where slopes are 20% or greater. These control plans
shall conform to the Category B and C checklist.
      (4)   Category changes. The city’s Zoning Administrator may reduce the
category of the plan if the land-disturbance activity is determined to provide
minimal off-site erosion potential.
      (6)   Restricted development areas. The city has determined that land-
disturbance activities on slopes in excess of 25% create an erosion hazard and
that the potential for off-site damage to public and private property warrants
protection of these environmentally sensitive areas. Land-disturbance
activities regulated by this subchapter on slopes greater than 25% are limited
to the following:
         (a)   Access road developments for residential purposes where a
Category C control plan has been submitted and a permit has been granted; and
         (b)   Utilities installations where a Category C control plan has been
submitted and a permit has been granted.
   (C)   Review of control plan. Control plans are to be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall determine within ten
calendar days if the requirements of this subchapter have been met. Time frames
will begin upon receipt of the control plan by the Zoning Administrator.
Special conditions may warrant extended review periods.
   (D)   If conditions are not met. The Zoning Administrator shall inform the
applicant if the control conditions are not met, and may either require
additional information, require resubmittal or may disapprove the plan. Within
seven calendar days of receipt of the additional information, the Zoning
Administrator shall issue or deny the permit. If the plan is disapproved, the
Zoning Administrator shall inform the applicant in writing of the reasons for
disapproval.
   (E)   Application for permits. Permits shall be applied for at the City
Clerk’s office. Permits shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator upon
acceptance of the control plan and payment of any applicable fees.
      (1)   Duration. Category A, B and C permits shall be valid for one year.
The Zoning Administrator may extend any permit one or more times for up to an
additional 180 days. The Zoning Administrator may require additional control
measures as a condition of the extension if they are necessary to meet the
requirements of this subchapter.
      (2)   Surety bond or letter of credit. As a condition of approval and
issuance of the permit, the Zoning Administrator may require the applicant to
deposit a surety bond or a letter of credit to guarantee a good faith execution
of the approved control plan if the applicant has not met the conditions of
previous plan requirements.
         (a)   Permit conditions. All permits shall require the landowner or
user to:
            1.   Obtain permission from the Zoning Administrator prior to
modifying the control plan;
            2.   Install and maintain all control measures as identified in the
control plan;
            3.   Repair any siltation or erosion damage to adjoining areas,
such as perennial waters, wetlands and drainage ways resulting from land-
disturbance activities or acts of nature;
            4.   If practical, keep a copy of the control plan on the site;
            5.   Notify the Zoning Administrator within 48 hours of completion
of the land- disturbance activity; and
            6.   If practical, keep permit posted so as to be visible from a
public roadway at entrance to the site.
         (b)   Additional permit conditions. All permits approved by the Zoning
Administrator shall require the landowner or land user to:
            1.   Meet with the Zoning Administrator for a final inspection to
determine if all of the conditions of the permit approval have been met; and
            2.   Provide the Zoning Administrator with as-built plans of
engineered practices to ensure proper installation of erosion control and storm
water management measures.
(Ord. passed 5-15-2001)
§ 154.371 INSPECTION.
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to inspect the site at any time
prior to or after the issuance of the permit.
   (B)   If the land disturbance is being carried out without a permit and
control plan, the Zoning Administrator shall initiate enforcement of this
subchapter.
(Ord. passed 5-15-2001)
§ 154.372 FEES.
   Control plan review fees will be established by the City Council. Only one
fee per each control plan submitted may be charged. A resubmittal of a plan
previously rejected will require a new fee. The City Council will review fees
each year in January and make adjustments as necessary.
(Ord. passed 5-15-2001)
§ 154.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be convicted of a misdemeanor and shall
reimburse the cost of prosecution for each violation or shall be imprisoned for
a period not to exceed 30 days, or both. Each day that a violation is permitted
to exist constitutes a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 8-11-1997, § 20.40; Ord. passed 11- -1997; Ord. passed 2- -2000;
Ord. passed 6- -2001; Ord. passed 7- -2006; Ord. passed 8- -2010)
   (B)   (1)   Violation constitutes a misdemeanor. Violation of the provisions
of §§
154.285 through
154.306 of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements
(including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection
with grants of variances or conditional uses) constitute a misdemeanor and will
be punishable as defined by law.
      (2)   Other lawful action. Nothing in §§
154.285 through
154.306 of this chapter restricts the city from taking such other lawful action
as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. If the responsible party
does not appropriately respond to the Zoning Administrator within the specified
period of time, each additional day that lapses will constitute an additional
violation of §§
154.285 through
154.306 of this chapter and will be prosecuted accordingly.
      (3)   Enforcement. Violations of the provisions of §§
154.285 through
154.306 of this chapter will be investigated and resolved in accordance with
the provisions of §§
154.020 through
154.026 of this chapter. In responding to a suspected ordinance violation, the
Zoning Administrator and city may utilize the full array of enforcement actions
available to it including, but not limited to, prosecution and fines,
injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders for corrective measures or a
request to the National Flood Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance
availability to the guilty party. The city must act in good faith to enforce
these official controls and to correct ordinance violations to the extent
possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood
Insurance Program.
   (C)   (1)   Petty misdemeanor. Any violation of §§
154.340  through
154.352 of this chapter shall be a petty misdemeanor punishable according to
petty misdemeanor limits as established from time to time by the state. Each
day that violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   Removal without notice. If a sign is found to be an immediate and
serious danger to the public because of its unsafe condition, it may be removed
without notice, and notice of removal and reasons for such shall be served as
soon as possible under the terms of §§
154.340  through
154.352 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 8-23-2010; Ord. passed 6-24-2019)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS
TABLE I: FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
A 19-100 8-12-2019   Granting a cable television system franchise to Ace
                     Telephone Association, d/b/a Acentek
A 19-101 9-23-2019   Granting a cable television system franchise to Mediacom
                     Minnesota LLC
-        4-14-2025   Granting a gas distribution system franchise to Minnesota
                     Energy Resources, a subsidiary of WEC Energy Group
                    
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Minnesota Statutes
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES
M.S. Cite Code Section
M.S. Cite                       Code Section
10                              Charter § 41
41                              Charter § 47
84.92, subd. 8, 9 and 10        71.03
88.01 to 88.195                 91.02
103F                            154.285
103G.245                        154.295;
                                154.302
134                             31.01
144.391                         111.01
                                92.02;
144.411 through 144.417         92.04;
                                110.23
144.414, subd. 5(b)             92.02;
                                92.03
144.417, subd. 4                92.02;
                                92.03
145A                            154.006
148                             154.006
148B                            154.006
150A                            154.006
152                             154.006
153                             154.006
157                             154.006
157.16                          110.03
157.16, subd. 3d                110.03
158                             154.006
                                70.16;
                                71.04;
169                             71.05;
                                71.23;
                                71.25
169.13                          71.05
169.045                         71.20
169.045, subd. 1 and 2          71.02
169.045, subd. 7                71.04;
                                71.25
169.045, subd. 1(3)             71.03
169.68                          94.02
169.70                          71.04
169.522                         71.25
216                             31.02
260.755, subd. 12               92.06
297F.01, subd. 3                111.02
                                110.01;
                                110.02;
                                110.21;
                                110.24;
340A                            110.34;
                                110.46;
                                110.62;
                                110.64;
                                110.99
340A.14, subd. 6                110.23
340A.101                        110.03;
                                110.23
340A.301, subd. 6(d) and 7(b)   110.23
340A.301, subd. 7               110.23
340A.401, subd. 1               110.23
340A.402                        110.32
340A.404, subd. 4a              110.23
340A.404, subd. 4b              110.23
340A.404, subd. 5               110.23
340A.405                        110.23
340A.408                        110.24
340A.408, subd. 2b              110.23
340A.408, subd. 3               110.23
340A.409                        110.26
340A.414                        110.08
340A.415                        110.99
340A.503(2)                     110.62;
                                110.63
340A.503(6)                     110.62;
                                110.63
340A.504                        110.06
340A.504, subd. 3c              110.23
340A.509                        110.02
340A.801                        110.26
344.02, subd. 1(a) through 1(d) 154.292
349                             112.01
360.063                         153.01
412.111                         152.01
412.221, subd. 8                152.01
429                             50.07;
                                152.45
429.101                         152.45
444.075                         53.001
461.12                          111.99
462                             154.001;
                                154.285
469.190                         32.14
604.20 to 604.205               154.006
624.714                         130.03
626.862                         10.20
631.48                          10.99
                                
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
-        8-13-1990   90.06
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
-        - -         150.01;
                     150.99
-        - -         152.20—
                     152.26
-        - -         154.091
                     152.40—
-        6-17-1974   152.48;
                     152.99
                     153.01—
-        10-20-1976  153.11;
                     153.99
                     91.15—
-        4-4-1977    91.21;
                     91.99
-        6-19-1978   31.03
400      3-26-1979   70.01;
                     70.99
-        6-18-1979   70.30;
                     70.99
-        5-5-1982    112.01;
                     112.99
-        12-19-1985  71.60—
                     71.62
-        3-24-1986   51.01
-        7-25-1988   151.01;
                     151.99
-        9-25-1989   112.02;
                     112.99
                     90.01—
-        2-26-1990   90.11;
                     90.99
-        6-11-1990   31.01
-        7-23-1990   30.01—
                     30.06
                     71.40—
-        4-8-1991    71.48;
                     71.99
-        11-23-1992  31.02
-        2-22-1993   31.01
-        4-10-1995   32.01—
                     32.14
                     53.001—
                     53.006;
                     53.020—
                     53.024;
                     53.035—
                     53.044;
-        6-26-1995   53.055—
                     53.058;
                     53.070—
                     53.074;
                     53.085—
                     53.091;
                     53.999
-        8-26-1996   91.02;
                     91.99
                     154.001;
                     154.002;
                     154.004—
                     154.006;
                     154.020—
                     154.027;
                     154.041—
                     154.043;
                     154.056;
                     154.057;
                     154.059;
                     154.060;
                     154.075—
                     154.077;
                     154.079;
                     154.090;
                     154.091;
                     154.094;
                     154.105—
                     154.109;
                     154.120—
                     154.128;
                     154.140—
                     154.143;
-        11- -1997   154.155—
                     154.159;
                     154.170—
                     154.172;
                     154.174—
                     154.176;
                     154.190—
                     154.195;
                     154.210;
                     154.212—
                     154.214;
                     154.225;
                     154.226;
                     154.228;
                     154.229;
                     154.232;
                     154.240;
                     154.242—
                     154.254;
                     154.265—
                     154.271;
                     154.320;
                     154.321;
                     154.323;
                     154.325;
                     154.999
                     154.001—
                     154.006;
                     154.020—
                     154.027;
                     154.040—
                     154.043;
                     154.056;
                     154.057;
                     154.059;
                     154.060;
                     154.075—
                     154.079;
                     154.090;
                     154.091;
                     154.094;
                     154.105—
                     154.109;
                     154.120—
                     154.128;
                     154.140—
                     154.143;
                     154.155—
-        8-11-1997   154.159;
                     154.170—
                     154.172;
                     154.174—
                     154.176;
                     154.190—
                     154.195;
                     154.210;
                     154.212—
                     154.214;
                     154.225;
                     154.226;
                     154.228;
                     154.229;
                     154.232;
                     154.240—
                     154.254;
                     154.265—
                     154.271;
                     154.320;
                     154.321;
                     154.325;
                     154.999
-        10-13-1998  53.021
                     110.45—
-        12-14-1998  110.49;
                     110.99
                     110.60—
-        12-14-1998  110.64;
                     110.99
-        9-27-1999   53.022;
                     53.037
                     154.001—
                     154.006;
                     154.020—
                     154.027;
                     154.041—
                     154.043;
                     154.056;
                     154.057;
                     154.059;
                     154.060;
                     154.075—
                     154.079;
                     154.090;
                     154.091;
                     154.094;
                     154.105—
                     154.109;
                     154.120—
                     154.128;
                     154.140—
                     154.144;
                     154.155—
-        2- -2000    154.159;
                     154.170—
                     154.172;
                     154.174—
                     154.176;
                     154.190—
                     154.195;
                     154.210;
                     154.212—
                     154.214;
                     154.225;
                     154.226;
                     154.228;
                     154.229;
                     154.232;
                     154.240;
                     154.242—
                     154.254;
                     154.265—
                     154.271;
                     154.320—
                     154.323;
                     154.325;
                     154.999
-        5- -2000    154.006
                     154.006;
-        5-22-2000   154.091;
                     154.156;
                     154.232
                     52.01—
                     52.06;
-        1-14-2001   52.20—
                     52.29;
                     52.40—
                     52.45
                     94.01—
-        4-9-2001    94.04;
                     94.99
-        5-15-2001   154.365—
                     154.372
                     154.001—
                     154.006;
                     154.020—
                     154.027;
                     154.040—
                     154.043;
                     154.056;
                     154.057;
                     154.059;
                     154.060;
                     154.075—
                     154.079;
                     154.090;
                     154.091;
                     154.094;
                     154.105—
                     154.109;
                     154.120—
                     154.128;
                     154.140—
                     154.144;
-        6- -2001    154.155—
                     154.159;
                     154.170—
                     154.172;
                     154.174—
                     154.176;
                     154.190—
                     154.196;
                     154.210—
                     154.214;
                     154.225—
                     154.229;
                     154.232;
                     154.240;
                     154.242—
                     154.254;
                     154.265—
                     154.271;
                     154.320;
                     154.321;
                     154.323;
                     154.325;
                     154.999
-        11-13-2001  50.01—
                     50.16
                     71.20—
-        11-12-2002  71.26;
                     71.99
-        7-14-2003   10.35—
                     10.41
                     154.001—
                     154.006;
                     154.020—
                     154.027;
                     154.040—
                     154.043;
                     154.055—
                     154.060;
                     154.075—
                     154.079;
                     154.090;
                     154.091;
                     154.094;
                     154.105—
                     154.109;
                     154.120—
                     154.128;
                     154.140—
                     154.144;
                     154.155—
-        7- -2006    154.159;
                     154.170;
                     154.171;
                     154.174—
                     154.176;
                     154.190—
                     154.196;
                     154.210—
                     154.214;
                     154.225—
                     154.229;
                     154.232;
                     154.240;
                     154.242—
                     154.254;
                     154.265—
                     154.271;
                     154.320;
                     154.321;
                     154.324;
                     154.325;
                     154.999
-        1-28-2008   91.01;
                     91.99
-        5-12-2008   152.01—
                     152.08
3961     3-15-2010   130.99
                     154.001—
                     154.006;
                     154.020—
                     154.027;
                     154.040—
                     154.043;
                     154.055—
                     154.060;
                     154.075—
                     154.079;
                     154.090—
                     154.094;
                     154.105—
                     154.109;
                     154.120—
                     154.128;
                     154.140—
-        8- -2010    154.144;
                     154.155—
                     154.159;
                     154.170—
                     154.176;
                     154.190—
                     154.196;
                     154.210—
                     154.214;
                     154.225—
                     154.229;
                     154.232;
                     154.240—
                     154.254;
                     154.265—
                     154.271;
                     154.320—
                     154.325;
                     154.999
                     154.340—
-        8-23-2010   154.352;
                     154.999
-        10-12-2010  53.037
-        11-22-2010  154.128
                     110.01—
                     110.08;
-        3-26-2012   110.20—
                     110.34;
                     110.99
                     90.40—
-        5-14-2012   90.47;
                     90.99
-        5-13-2013   152.01—
                     152.08
                     90.25—
-        8-12-2013   90.29;
                     90.99
                     130.01—
                     130.03;
-        9-22-2014   130.15;
                     130.16;
                     130.99
                     50.01;
                     50.02;
                     50.04—
-        - -2015     50.09;
                     50.11;
                     50.13—
                     50.16
                     32.02;
-        1-25-2016   32.07;
                     32.14
                     50.01;
                     50.02;
                     50.04—
                     50.06;
-        - -2017     50.08;
                     50.09;
                     50.11;
                     50.13—
                     50.16
                     50.01;
                     50.02;
                     50.04—
-        - -2018     50.06;
                     50.08—
                     50.11;
                     50.13—
                     50.16
                     154.285—
-        6-24-2019   154.306;
                     154.999
A 19-100 8-12-2019   TSO Table I
A 19-101 9-23-2019   TSO Table I
                     92.01—
-        11-12-2019  92.08;
                     92.99
                     111.01—
                     111.06;
18.0     12-16-2019  111.20—
                     111.36;
                     111.99
                     71.01—
-500     5-26-2020   71.05;
                     71.99
                     70.15—
15       4-12-2021   70.29;
                     70.99
-        - -2024     50.01—
                     50.16
-        4-14-2025   TSO Table I
                    
 
 
