CITY CODE
of
SABIN, MINNESOTA
2005
Code current through:
Ord. 9-16-25, passed September 16, 2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the city of Sabin, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to
and including ordinance 9-16-25, passed September 16, 2025. Ordinances of the
city adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the city
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
American Legal Publishing
Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they have not been incorporated into
the code and they may not show the original ordinances in their entirety.
Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions concerning
the ordinances listed.
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
SABIN CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the city council, this city code is hereby declared to be
and shall hereafter constitute the official city code of Sabin. This city code
of ordinances shall be known and cited as the SABIN CITY CODE and is hereby
published by authority of the city council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the city as provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this city code by title in any legal documents. (2005 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The city code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (2005 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the city code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this city code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this city code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
the city code. (2005 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this city code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Said code, while in
actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and
remain the property of the city and shall be returned to the office of the city
clerk-treasurer when directed so to do by order of the city council. (2005
Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
   A.   Ordinances Repealed And Ordinances Saved From Repeal: All general
ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this city code are
hereby repealed, except such as are included in this city code or are by
necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; ordinances
granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and
ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants;
salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys
or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the city; and all special ordinances.
   B.   Limitations On Repeal: The repeal of the ordinances, as provided in
subsection A of this section, shall not affect any debt or fee which is
accrued, any duty imposed, any penalty incurred, nor any action or proceeding
commenced under or by virtue of the ordinances repealed or the term of office
of any person holding office at the time these ordinances take effect; nor
shall the repeal of any ordinance have the effect of reviving any ordinance
heretofore repealed or superseded. (2005 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this city code or by virtue of section
1-2-1 of this chapter, excepting as the city code may contain provisions for
such matters, in which case, this city code shall be considered as amending
such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (2005 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not,
as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act
done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued
or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect
any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either
by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Current Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this city code. (2005 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this city code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this code, or any part thereof. The city council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (2005 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: General Rules Of Interpretation
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: GENERAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the mayor and city council may be fully carried
out.
   B.   Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of any
provision of this code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted
for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
   C.   Computation Of Time: Whenever a notice is required to be given or an
act to be done in a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had,
the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall not be counted
in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be held shall
be counted.
   D.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or some other city officer to do some act or perform some
duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other
officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section
specify otherwise.
   E.   Gender: A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be
applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to
males.
   F.   Joint Authority: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or
more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers.
   G.   May/Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is mandatory.
   H.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   I.   Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
   J.   Officers And Employees Generally: Whenever any officer or employee is
referred by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the
words "of the city of Sabin".
   K.   Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
   L.   Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city
has been changed in the content of this city code to "title", "chapter",
"section" and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the city's ordinances is not meant
to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2005 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
CITY: The city of Sabin, county of Clay, state of Minnesota.
CODE: The city code of the city of Sabin.
COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the city council of the city of Sabin.
COUNTY: The county of Clay, state of Minnesota.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MSA: Minnesota Statutes Annotated, as amended.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any
act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the city, or any activity which, by its perpetuation, can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
STATE: The state of Minnesota.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
WHOLESALER AND WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall
be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things
to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such
person's proper mark. (2005 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the city code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (2005 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Liability Of Officers
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY 1 :
   A.   Misdemeanor Violation; Penalties: Violation of a provision of this code
is a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, a person may be punished by a
fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or such other amount
set by law, or imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days, or such
other term set by law, or both, but in either case, the costs of prosecution
may be added. Each act of violation and each day on which a violation occurs or
continues is a separate violation.
   B.   Definition Of Misdemeanor And Petty Misdemeanor: A "misdemeanor" is an
offense or crime that the city council is empowered to punish with fine or
imprisonment; a "petty misdemeanor" is as defined by law.
   C.   Limitation; Compliance With Statute: The provisions of subsection A of
this section notwithstanding, no penalty shall be greater than that established
by state statute for the same offense. (2005 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. MSA § 412.231.
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Penalty: The penalty provided in this chapter shall be
applicable to every section of this city code the same as though it were a part
of each and every separate section.
   B.   Acts Punishable Under Different Sections: In all cases where the same
offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of
this city code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but
not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same
offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be
considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
   C.   Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to
do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this city code
and there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach,
the provisions of this chapter shall apply. (2005 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this city code designating the duties of any officer or
employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for
any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the
intention of the city council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty. (2005 Code)
CHAPTER 5
CITY COUNCIL RULES
SECTION:
1-5-1: Meetings
1-5-2: Presiding Officer
1-5-3: Minutes
1-5-4: Order Of Business
1-5-5: Quorum And Voting
1-5-6: Ordinances, Resolutions, Motions, Petitions And Communications
1-5-7: Committees
1-5-8: Suspension Or Amendment Of Rules
1-5-1: MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings: Regular meetings of the city council shall be held on
the third Tuesday of each calendar month at seven thirty o'clock (7:30) P.M.
Any regular meeting falling upon a holiday shall be held on the next following
business day at the same time and place. All meetings, including special and
adjourned meetings, shall be held in the Sabin community center. A schedule of
the regular meetings shall be kept on file at the Sabin community center. If
the council decides to hold a regular meeting at a time or place different from
the time or place stated in its schedule of regular meetings, it shall give the
same notice of the meeting that is provided for a special meeting. (Ord., 11-
18-1997)
   B.   Special Meetings: The mayor or any two (2) members of the council may
call a special meeting of the council. For a special meeting, except an
emergency or a special meeting for which a notice requirement is otherwise
expressly established by statute, the council shall post written notice of the
date, time, place and purpose of the meeting in the window of the council
offices of the Sabin community center or on the door of its usual meeting room.
The notice shall also be mailed or otherwise delivered to each person who has
filed a written request for notice of special meetings with the council. This
notice shall be posted and mailed or delivered at least three (3) days before
the date of the meeting. As an alternative to mailing or otherwise delivering
notice to persons who have filed a written request for notice of special
meetings, the council may publish the notice once, at least three (3) days
before the meeting, in the official newspaper of the city. A person filing a
request for notice of special meetings may limit the request to notification of
meetings concerning particular subjects, in which case, the council shall send
notice to that person only concerning special meetings involving those
subjects. The expiration date for requests for notices of special meetings
pursuant to this subsection shall expire on June 30 of each year, and requests
for notices shall be refiled on or after January 1 of each year for the
following year ending December 31. Not more than sixty (60) days before the
expiration date of a request for notice, the council shall send notice of the
refiling requirement to each person who filed during the preceding year. (Ord.
113, 1987)
   C.   Emergency Meetings: An emergency meeting may be called by any member of
the council or the mayor. For an emergency meeting, the council shall make good
faith efforts to provide notice of the meeting to each news medium that has
filed a written request for notice if the request includes the news medium's
telephone number. Notice of the emergency meeting shall be given by telephone
or by any other method used to notify the members of the council. Notice shall
be provided to each news medium which has filed a written request for notice as
soon as reasonably practicable after notice has been given to the members.
Notice shall include the subject of the meeting. Posted or published notice of
an emergency meeting shall not be required. An "emergency" meeting is a special
meeting called because of circumstances that, in the judgment of the council,
require immediate consideration by the council. If matters not directly related
to the emergency are discussed or acted upon at an emergency meeting, the
minutes of the meeting shall include a specified description of the matters.
The notice requirement of this subsection supersedes any statutory notice
requirement for a special meeting that is an emergency meeting.
   D.   Recessed Or Continued Meetings: If a meeting is a recessed or continued
session of a previous meeting, and the time and place of the meeting was
established during the previous meeting and recorded in the minutes of that
meeting, then no further published or mailed notice is necessary. For purposes
of this subsection, the term "meeting" includes a public hearing conducted
pursuant to Minnesota statutes chapter 429 or any other law requiring a public
hearing by the city. (Ord. 113, 1987; amd. 2005 Code)
   E.   Closed Meetings: The notice requirements of this section apply to
closed meetings.
   F.   Actual Notice: If a person received actual notice of a meeting of the
council at least twenty four (24) hours before the meeting, all notice
requirements of this section are satisfied with respect to that person,
regardless of the method of receipt of notice.
   G.   Initial Meeting: At the first regular council meeting of January of
each year, the council shall:
      1.   Designate the depositories of city funds.
      2.   Designate the official newspaper.
      3.   Choose an acting mayor from the council members who shall perform
the duties of the mayor during the disability or absence of the mayor from the
city or, in case of a vacancy in the office of mayor, until a successor has
been appointed and qualifies.
      4.   Appoint such officers and employees, and such members of boards,
commissions, and committees, as may be necessary. (Ord. 113, 1987)
   H.   Public Meetings: All council meetings, including special and adjourned
meetings and meetings of council committees, except those which may be closed
in accordance with Minnesota statutes chapter 13D, shall be open to the public.
(Ord. 113, 1987; amd. 2005 Code)
1-5-2: PRESIDING OFFICER:
   A.   Mayor Serve As; Absences: The mayor shall preside at all meetings of
the council. In the absence of the mayor, the acting mayor shall preside. In
the absence of both, the clerk-treasurer shall call the meeting to order and
shall preside until the council members present at the meeting choose one of
their number to act temporarily as presiding officer.
   B.   Procedure: The presiding officer shall preserve order, enforce the
rules of procedure herein prescribed, and determine without debate, subject to
the final decision of the council on appeal, all questions of procedure and
order. Except as otherwise provided by statute or by these rules, the
proceedings of the council shall be conducted in accordance with "Robert's
Rules Of Order, Revised".
   C.   Appeals: Any member may appeal to the council from a ruling of the
presiding officer. If the appeal is seconded, the member may speak once solely
on the question involved, and the presiding officer may explain his ruling, but
no other council member shall participate in the discussion. The appeal shall
be sustained if it is approved by a majority of the members present.
   D.   Rights Of Presiding Officer: The presiding officer may make motions,
second motions, or speak on any question; except, that on demand of any council
member, he shall vacate the chair and designate a council member to preside
temporarily. (Ord. 105, 3-11-1980)
1-5-3: MINUTES:
   A.   Keeping Minutes: Minutes of each council meeting shall be kept by or
under the supervision of the clerk-treasurer or, in his absence, the deputy
clerk-treasurer. In the absence of both, the presiding officer shall appoint a
secretary pro tem. Ordinances, resolutions, and claims need not be recorded in
full in the minutes if they appear in other permanent records of the clerk-
treasurer and can be accurately identified from the description given in the
minutes. (Ord. 105, 3-11-1980)
   B.   Approvals: The minutes of each meeting shall be reduced to typewritten
form, and copies thereof shall be delivered to each council member as soon as
practicable after the meeting. At the next regular council meeting following
such delivery, approval of the minutes shall be considered by the council. The
minutes need not be read aloud, but the presiding officer shall call for any
additions or corrections. If there is no objection to a proposed addition or
correction, it may be made without a vote of the council. If there is an
objection, the council shall vote upon the addition or correction. If there are
no additions or corrections, the minutes shall stand approved. Once the minutes
are approved, the clerk-treasurer shall sign the minutes, and they shall be
filed in the minutes book. (Ord., 11-18-1997)
1-5-4: ORDER OF BUSINESS:
   A.   Order Established: Each meeting of the council shall convene at the
time and place appointed therefor. Council business shall be conducted in the
following order:
      1.   Call to order.
      2.   Roll call.
      3.   Approval of minutes.
      4.   Clerk-treasurer's report.
      5.   Approval of bills.
      6.   Citizens to be heard.
      7.   Public hearings.
      8.   Petitions, requests, and communications.
      9.   Ordinances and resolutions.
      10.   Reports of officers, boards, and committees.
      11.   Unfinished business.
      12.   New business.
      13.   Miscellaneous.
      14.   Adjournment.
   B.   Varying Order: The order of business may be varied by the presiding
officer, but all public hearings shall be held at the time specified in the
notice of hearing. (Ord. 105, 3-11-1980)
1-5-5: QUORUM AND VOTING:
   A.   Quorum: At all council meetings, a majority of all the council members
elected shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a
smaller number may adjourn from time to time.
   B.   Recording Votes: The votes of the members on any question may be taken
in any manner which signifies the intention of the individual members, and the
votes of the members on any action taken shall be recorded in the minutes. The
vote of each member shall be recorded on each appropriation of money, except
for payments of judgments, claims, and amounts fixed by statute. If any member
is present but does not vote, the minutes, as to his name, shall be marked
"Present - Not Voting".
   C.   Votes Required For Various Issues: A majority vote of all members of
the council shall be necessary for approval of any ordinance unless a larger
number is required by statute. Except as otherwise provided by statute, a
majority vote of a quorum shall prevail in all other cases. (Ord. 105, 3-11-
1980)
1-5-6: ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, MOTIONS, PETITIONS AND COMMUNICATIONS:
   A.   Ordinances:
      1.   Readings: Every ordinance shall be presented in writing. An
ordinance need not be read in full unless a member of the council requests such
a reading.
      2.   Proof Of Signing And Publication: Every ordinance passed by the
council shall be signed by the mayor, attested by the clerk- treasurer, and
filed by the clerk-treasurer in the ordinance book. Proof of publication of
every ordinance shall be attached and filed with the ordinance.
      3.   Repeals And Amendments: Every ordinance repealing a previous
ordinance or a section or subdivision thereof shall give the number, if any,
and the title of the ordinance or code number of the ordinance to be repealed
in whole or in part. Each ordinance amending an existing ordinance or part
thereof shall set forth in full each amended section or subdivision as it will
read with the amendment.
   B.   Resolutions, Motions, Petitions, Communications: Every resolution or
motion shall be stated in full or presented in writing, in which case, it need
not be read in full, before it is submitted to a vote by the presiding officer
and shall be recorded in the minutes. Every petition or other communication
addressed to the council shall be in writing and shall be read in full upon
presentation to the council unless the council dispenses with the reading. Each
petition or other communication shall be recorded in the minutes by title and
filed with the minutes in the office of the clerk-treasurer. (Ord. 105, 3-11-
1980)
1-5-7: COMMITTEES:
Any matter brought before the council for consideration may be referred by the
presiding officer to the appropriate committee or to a special committee
composed of one or more members appointed by him for a written report and
recommendation before it is considered by the council as a whole. Each
committee report shall be signed by a majority of the members and shall be
filed with the clerk-treasurer prior to the council meeting at which it is to
be submitted. Minority reports may be submitted. Each committee shall act
promptly and faithfully on any matter referred to it. (Ord. 105, 3-11-1980)
1-5-8: SUSPENSION OR AMENDMENT OF RULES:
These rules may be suspended only by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the members
present and voting. These rules may be amended only by a two-thirds (2/3) vote
of all of the members of the council. (Ord. 105, 3-11-1980)
CHAPTER 6
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES; FINANCES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Clerk And Treasurer; Offices Combined
1-6-2: Bookkeeper
1-6-3: Annual Audit
1-6-1: CLERK AND TREASURER; OFFICES COMBINED:
The office of city treasurer is hereby abolished, and instead, the offices of
clerk and treasurer are hereby combined into the office of clerk-treasurer, as
provided by Minnesota statutes section 412.591, subdivision 2(a). (Ord., 8-31-
2004; amd. 2005 Code)
1-6-2: BOOKKEEPER:
   A.   Clerk-Treasurer Duties Delegated: The city council ordains that all of
the bookkeeping duties of the city clerk-treasurer may be delegated to other
responsible parties. The delegation shall be directed from time to time by
council resolution.
   B.   Bond: The officer or employee to whom the duties have been delegated
shall furnish a fidelity bond conditioned on the faithful exercise of his or
her duties. Premiums on such bond shall be paid from city funds. (Ord. 21, 9-
14-1993)
1-6-3: ANNUAL AUDIT:
There shall be an annual audit of the city's financial affairs by the state
auditor or a public accountant in accordance with minimum auditing procedures
prescribed by the state auditor. (Ord., 8-31-2004)
TITLE 2
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
ARTICLE A. INTOXICATING LIQUOR
SECTION:
2-1A-1: State Law Adopted
2-1A-2: Licenses Required
2-1A-3: Ineligibility For License
2-1A-4: Application For License
2-1A-5: Insurance Requirements
2-1A-6: License Fees
2-1A-7: Grant Or Denial Of License
2-1A-8: Term Of License
2-1A-9: Transfer Of License
2-1A-10: Conditions Of License
2-1A-11: Days And Hours Of Operation; Presence And Consumption
2-1A-12: Entertainment Restrictions
2-1A-13: Suspension Or Revocation Of License
2-1A-1: STATE LAW ADOPTED:
The provisions of Minnesota statutes chapter 340A, relating to the definitions
of terms, licensing, consumption, sales, conditions of bonds of licensees,
hours of sales, and all other matters pertaining to the retail sale,
distribution, and consumption of intoxicating liquor are adopted and made a
part of this article as if set out in full. (Ord. 108, 6-14-1982; amd. 2005
Code)
2-1A-2: LICENSES REQUIRED:
No person, except a wholesaler or manufacturer to the extent authorized under
state license, shall directly or indirectly deal in, sell, or keep for sale in
the city any intoxicating liquor without a license to do so as provided in this
article. Liquor licenses shall be of two (2) kinds: on sale and off sale
licenses. (Ord. 108, 6-14-1982)
   A.   On Sale Licenses:
      1.   On sale licenses shall be issued only to hotels, clubs, restaurants,
bowling alleys, and exclusive liquor stores and shall permit on sale of liquor
only. (Ord. 108, 6-14-1982; amd. 2005 Code)
      2.   A special on sale license for the sale of intoxicating liquor on
Sunday shall be issued only to bowling centers and to hotels, restaurants, and
clubs as defined in Minnesota statutes section 340A.101. All sales at such
establishments shall be in accordance with Minnesota statutes section 340A.504,
subdivision 3. (Ord., 1-6-1998)
   B.   Off Sale Licenses: Off sale licenses shall be issued only to drugstores
and exclusive liquor stores and shall permit off sales of liquor only. (Ord.
108, 6-14-1982)
2-1A-3: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Persons Ineligible: No license shall be granted to any person made
ineligible for such a license by state law. No license shall be issued to an
individual who is not a resident of the city. A request for variance may be
filed with the city clerk-treasurer regarding issuance of a license to an
individual residing outside of the city limits. (Ord., 1-6-1998; amd. 2005
Code)
   B.   Places Ineligible:
      1.   General Prohibition: No license shall be issued for any place or any
business ineligible for such a license under state law.
      2.   Delinquent Taxes And Charges: No license shall be granted for
operation on any premises on which taxes, assessments, or other financial
claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid.
      3.   Proximity To Certain Institutions: No license shall be granted
within two hundred feet (200') of any school or within two hundred feet (200')
of any church. In applying this restriction, the distance shall be measured
between the main front entrances of the two (2) buildings following the route
of ordinary pedestrian travel. (Ord. 108, 6-14-1982)
2-1A-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Every application for a license to sell liquor shall state the name of the
applicant, his age, representations as to his character, with such references
as the council may require, his citizenship, the type of license applied for,
the business in connection with which the proposed license will operate and its
location, whether the applicant is the owner and operator of the business, how
long he has been in that business at that place, and such other information as
the council may require from time to time. In addition to containing such
information, the application shall be in the form prescribed by the state
commissioner of public safety and shall be verified and filed with the city
clerk-treasurer. No person shall make a false statement in an application.
(Ord. 108, 6-14-1982)
2-1A-5: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Liability Insurance: Prior to the issuance of a liquor license, the
applicant shall file with the city clerk-treasurer a liability insurance policy
in the amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) coverage for one
or more persons and shall comply with the provisions of Minnesota statutes
section 340A.409 relating to liability insurance policies.
   B.   Approval Of Security: The security offered under this section shall be
approved by the city council and in the case of applicants for off sale
licenses, by the state commissioner of public safety. Liability insurance
policies shall be approved as to form by the city attorney. Operation of a
licensed business without having on file with the city at all times effective
security as required in this section is a cause for revocation of the license.
(Ord. 108, 6-14-1982; amd. 2005 Code)
2-1A-6: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Fees Established: The annual fee for a liquor license shall be one
thousand six hundred dollars ($1,600.00) for an on sale license and one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for an off sale license, which fees are subject to review and
change annually by council resolution.
   B.   Payment And Disposition Of Fees: Each application for a license shall
be accompanied by a receipt from the city clerk- treasurer for payment, in
full, of the license fee and the fixed investigation fee required under
subsection 2-1A-7A of this article, if any. All fees shall be paid into the
general fund. If an application for a license is rejected, the clerk-treasurer
shall refund the amount paid as the license fee. (Ord. 108, 6-14-1982)
   C.   Refunds: No refund of any fee shall be made except as authorized by
statute and except as provided in subsection B of this section. (Ord. 108, 6-
14-1982; amd. 2005 Code)
2-1A-7: GRANT OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   Preliminary Investigation; Fee: On an initial application for an on
sale license and on application for transfer of an existing on sale license,
the applicant shall pay with his application an investigation fee of five
hundred dollars ($500.00), and the city shall conduct a preliminary background
and financial investigation of the applicant. The application, in such case,
shall be made on a form prescribed by the state bureau of criminal apprehension
and shall contain such additional information as the council may require. If
the council deems it in the public interest to have an investigation made on a
particular application for renewal of an on sale license, it shall so
determine. If the council determines that a comprehensive background and
investigation of the applicant is necessary, it may conduct the investigation
itself or contract with the bureau of criminal apprehension for the
investigation. No license shall be issued, transferred, or renewed if the
results show to the satisfaction of the council that issuance would not be in
the public interest. If an investigation outside the state is required, the
applicant shall be charged the actual cost not to exceed ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00). The fee, after deducting any initial investigation fee already
paid, shall be payable by the applicant whether or not the license is granted.
(Ord. 108, 6-14-1982; amd. 2005 Code)
   B.   Hearing; Issuance Or Denial Of License: The city council shall
investigate all facts set out in the application and not investigated in the
preliminary background and financial investigation conducted pursuant to
subsection A of this section. Opportunity shall be given to any person to be
heard for or against the granting of the license. After the investigation and
hearing, the council shall, in its discretion, grant or refuse the application.
No off sale license shall become effective until said license, together with
the security furnished by the applicant, has been approved by the state
commissioner of public safety. (Ord. 108, 6-14-1982)
2-1A-8: TERM OF LICENSE:
Each license shall be issued for a period of one year; except, that if the
application is made during the license year, a license may be issued for the
remainder of the year for a pro rata fee, with any unexpired fraction of a
month being counted as one month. Every license shall expire on June 30. (Ord.
108, 6-14-1982)
2-1A-9: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
Each license shall be issued only to the applicant and for the premises
described in the application. No license may be transferred to another person
or place without city council approval. Any transfer of stock of a corporate
licensee is deemed a transfer of the license, and a transfer of stock without
prior council approval is a ground for revocation of the license. (Ord. 108, 6-
14-1982)
2-1A-10: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
Every license is subject to the conditions of this section and all other
provisions of this article and of any other applicable ordinance, state law or
regulation.
   A.   Responsibility Of Licensee: Every licensee is responsible for the
conduct of his place of business and the conditions of sobriety and order in
it. The act of any employee on the licensed premises authorized to sell
intoxicating liquor is deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the licensee
shall be liable to all penalties provided by this article and the law equally
with the employee.
   B.   Inspections: Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health
officer, or properly designated officer or employee of the city to enter,
inspect, and search the premises of the licensee during business hours without
a warrant.
   C.   Display During Prohibited Hours: No on sale establishment shall display
liquor to the public during hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited.
   D.   Federal Stamps: No licensee shall possess a federal wholesale liquor
dealer's special tax stamp or a federal gambling stamp. (Ord. 108, 6-14-1982)
   E.   Persons Denied Access 1 : The legal drinking age shall be the same as
that defined by Minnesota statutes section 340A.503, adopted by reference as
part of this section. (Ord. 108B, 2-15-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  4-4-2 of this code for liquor prohibitions regarding minors.
2-1A-11: DAYS AND HOURS OF OPERATION; PRESENCE AND CONSUMPTION:
   A.   Days And Hours Established: The hours and days of sale for licenses
issued pursuant to the terms of this article shall be the same as those set
forth in section 340A.504 of the intoxicating liquor act of the state of
Minnesota adopted by reference as a part of this section. (With the exception
that liquor establishments may open no earlier than 11:00 A.M. on Sundays, and
establishments serving liquor on Sundays must obtain a special license under
subsection 2-1A-2A2 of this article.) (Ord. 108B, 10-19-1999; amd. Ord. 108B,
2-15-2000)
   B.   Presence On Premises: No patrons of on sale license holders shall
remain on the licensed premises after one thirty o'clock (1:30) A.M., and in
any event, no persons except bona fide employees of the license holder or a
janitorial service shall remain on the licensed premises after one thirty
o'clock (1:30) A.M. unless they are actively engaged in a cleanup operation for
the premises. (Ord. 108B, 2-15-2000)
   C.   Consumption After Hours; Removal Of Beverages From Premises: No person,
including employees of licensed premises or of the cleaning service, shall
consume any intoxicating liquor or malt liquor, 3.2 percent malt liquor or low
alcohol malt liquor on the licensed premises after one thirty o'clock (1:30)
A.M. and until the licensed premises can next properly be opened for business.
Any consumed intoxicating liquor or malt liquor, 3.2 percent malt liquor or low
alcohol malt liquor remaining on the premises, other than that necessary for
inventory purposes, shall be disposed of at one thirty o'clock (1:30) A.M. No
unconsumed intoxicating liquor or malt liquor, 3.2 percent malt liquor or low
alcohol malt liquor shall be removed from the premises for consumption at a
different place by any employee or patron. (Ord. 108B, 2-15-2000; amd. 2005
Code)
2-1A-12: ENTERTAINMENT RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
   ENTERTAINMENT: All forms and types of performing or entertaining for patrons
on licensed premises without regard to whether the person performing or
entertaining is paid a monetary consideration or other consideration or merely
performs or entertains without consideration.
   NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or
buttocks, or the human female breast, including the nipple or any portion below
the nipple, with less than a full opaque covering; provided, however, for
entertainment purposes only, "with less than a full opaque covering" shall mean
or include the wearing of pasties.
   B.   Prohibited Acts: No entertainment on a licensed premises shall contain:
      1.   The performance of acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual
acts which are prohibited by law.
      2.   The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the
breasts, buttocks, anus, or genitals.
      3.   The actual or simulated displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva,
or genitals.
      4.   The performance of any nude dancing or display of nudity by
employees of the licensed premises or patrons of the licensed premises.
   C.   Responsibility Of Licensee: A licensee shall have the duty and
responsibility of supervising all "entertainment" as defined herein, and any
violation of this section shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the
liquor license held by the licensee. (Ord. 108B, 2-15-2000)
2-1A-13: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The council may suspend or revoke any liquor license subject to the limitations
and according to the procedure provided by law. (Ord. 108, 6-14-1982)
ARTICLE B. 3.2 PERCENT MALT LIQUOR
SECTION:
2-1B-1: Definitions
2-1B-2: Licenses Required
2-1B-3: Ineligibility For License
2-1B-4: Application For License
2-1B-5: Insurance Requirements
2-1B-6: License Fees
2-1B-7: Grant Or Denial Of License
2-1B-8: Term Of License
2-1B-9: Transfer Of License
2-1B-10: Conditions Of License
2-1B-11: Days And Hours Of Operation
2-1B-12: Minors
2-1B-13: Suspension Or Revocation Of License
2-1B-1: DEFINITIONS:
ESTABLISHMENT SELLING 3.2 PERCENT MALT LIQUORS: An establishment for the sale
of 3.2 percent malt liquor, cigars, cigarettes, all forms of tobacco, beverages
and soft drinks at retail.
3.2 PERCENT MALT LIQUOR: Any malt liquor containing not less than one-half of
one percent (0.5%) alcohol by volume nor more than 3.2 percent alcohol by
weight. (Ord. 108, 6-14-1982; amd. 2005 Code)
2-1B-2: LICENSES REQUIRED:
No person, except wholesalers and manufacturers to the extent authorized by
law, shall deal in or dispose of by gift, sale or otherwise, or keep or offer
for sale, any 3.2 percent malt liquor within the city without first having
received a license as hereinafter provided. Licenses shall be of three kinds:
a) regular on sale; b) temporary on sale; and c) off sale.
   A.   Regular On Sale: Regular on sale licenses shall be granted only to bona
fide clubs, establishments selling 3.2 percent malt liquor, exclusive on sale
liquor stores, restaurants and hotels where food is prepared and served for
consumption on the premises. On sale licenses shall permit the sale of 3.2 malt
liquor for consumption on the premises only.
   B.   Temporary On Sale: Temporary on sale licenses shall be granted only to
bona fide clubs and charitable, religious, and nonprofit organizations for the
sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor for consumption on the premises only.
   C.   Off Sale: Off sale licenses shall permit the sale of 3.2 percent malt
liquor at retail in the original package, for consumption off the premises
only. (Ord. 108, 6-14-1982; amd. 2005 Code)
2-1B-3: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Persons Ineligible: No license shall be granted to or held by any
person who:
      1.   Is under twenty one (21) years of age;
      2.   Has, within five (5) years prior to the application for such
license, been convicted of a felony, or of violating any law of this state or
local ordinance relating to the manufacture, sale, or distribution of
intoxicating liquors or 3.2 percent malt liquor and cannot show competent
evidence under Minnesota statutes section 364.03 of sufficient rehabilitation
and present fitness to perform the duties of a 3.2 percent malt liquor
licensee;
      3.   Is a manufacturer of 3.2 percent malt liquor or is interested in the
control of any place where 3.2 percent malt liquor is manufactured;
      4.   Is not of good moral character;
      5.   Is or during the period of this license becomes the holder of a
federal retail liquor dealer's special tax stamp for the sale of intoxicating
liquor at any place unless there has also been issued to him a local license to
sell intoxicating liquor at such place; or
      6.   Is not the proprietor of the establishment for which the license is
issued.
   B.   Premises Ineligible:
      1.   Violations; License Revocation: No license shall be granted for sale
on any premises where a licensee has been convicted of the violation of this
article, or of the state 3.2 percent malt liquor or liquor law, or where any
license hereunder has been revoked for cause until five (5) years has elapsed
after such conviction or revocation. (Ord. 108, 6-14-1982; amd. 2005 Code)
      2.   Proximity To Certain Institutions: No license shall be granted for
any place within two hundred feet (200') of any public school or within two
hundred feet (200') of any church. In applying this restriction, the distance
shall be measured between the main front entrances of the two (2) buildings
following the route of ordinary pedestrian travel.
      3.   Delinquent Taxes And Charges: No license shall be granted for
operation on any premises upon which taxes or assessments or other financial
claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid. (Ord. 108, 6-14-1982)
2-1B-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Generally: Every application for a license to sell 3.2 percent malt
liquor shall be made to the city clerk-treasurer on a form supplied by the city
and containing such information as the clerk-treasurer or the city council may
require. It shall be unlawful to make any false statement in an application.
(Ord. 108, 6-14-1982; amd. 2005 Code)
   B.   Temporary On Sale Licenses: All applications for temporary on sale
licenses must be filed with the clerk-treasurer not less than thirty (30) days
prior to the date for which the license is requested. (Ord. 108, 6-14-1982)
2-1B-5: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
All applications, including application for temporary on sale licenses, must be
accompanied by proof satisfactory to the city of liability insurance policy in
the amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) coverage for one or
more persons and shall comply with the provisions of Minnesota statutes section
340A.409 relating to liability insurance policies. (Ord. 108, 6-14-1982; amd.
2005 Code)
2-1B-6: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Payment And Disposition Of Fees: Each application for a license shall
be accompanied by a receipt from the city clerk- treasurer for payment in full
of the required fee for the license. All fees shall be paid into the general
fund of the city. Upon rejection of any application for a license, the clerk-
treasurer shall refund the amount paid. (Ord. 108, 6-14-1982)
   B.   Refunds: No part of the fee paid for any license issued under this
article shall be refunded under any circumstances, other than as provided in
subsection A of this section. (Ord. 108, 6-14-1982; amd. 2005 Code)
2-1B-7: GRANT OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
The city council shall investigate all facts set out in the application.
Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or against the
granting of the license, except in the case of a temporary on sale license.
After such investigation and hearing, the council shall grant or refuse the
application in its discretion. (Ord. 108, 6-14-1982)
2-1B-8: TERM OF LICENSE:
Every license except a temporary license shall expire on June 30 in each year.
Each license except a temporary license shall be issued for a period of one
year; except, that if a portion of the license year has elapsed when the
license is granted, the license shall be issued for the remainder of the year
for a pro rata fee. In computing such fee, any unexpired fraction of a month
shall be counted as one month. A temporary license shall be issued for a
specific period in which a special event to which the sale is incident is being
held, and such period shall be stated on the license. (Ord. 108, 6-14-1982)
2-1B-9: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
Each license shall be issued to the applicant only and shall not be
transferable to another holder. Each license shall be issued only for the
premises described in the application. No license may be transferred to another
place without the approval of the council. (Ord. 108, 6-14-1982)
2-1B-10: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
Every license shall be granted subject to the conditions in this section and
all other provisions of this article and of any other applicable ordinance of
the city or state law. (Ord. 108, 6-14-1982; amd. Ord., 1-6-1998)
   A.   Sales To Certain Persons: No 3.2 percent malt liquor shall be sold or
served to any intoxicated person or to any person under twenty one (21) years
of age 1 .
   B.   Consumption By Underage Persons 2 : No person under twenty one (21)
years of age shall be permitted to consume 3.2 percent malt liquor on the
licensed premises.
   C.   Gambling 3 : No gambling or any gambling device shall be permitted on
any licensed premises except paddle wheels, tipboards, and raffles licensed by
the city on the premises of a 3.2 percent malt liquor licensee.
   D.   Interest Of Manufacturers Or Wholesalers: No manufacturer or wholesaler
of 3.2 percent malt liquor shall have any ownership of or interest in an
establishment licensed to sell at retail contrary to the provisions of
Minnesota statutes section 340A.308. No retail licensee and manufacturer or
wholesaler of 3.2 percent malt liquor shall be parties to any exclusive
purchase contract. No retail licensee shall receive any benefits contrary to
law from a manufacturer or wholesaler of 3.2 percent malt liquor and no such
manufacturer or wholesaler shall confer any benefits contrary to law upon a
retail licensee.
   E.   Liquor Dealer's Stamp: No licensee shall sell 3.2 percent malt liquor
while holding or exhibiting in the licensed premises a federal retail liquor
dealer's special tax stamp unless he is licensed under the laws of Minnesota to
sell intoxicating liquors. (Ord. 108, 6-14-1982; amd. Ord., 1-6-1998; 2005
Code)
   F.   Sales, Consumption And Display Of Intoxicating Liquor:
      1.   a. No licensee who is not also licensed to sell intoxicating liquor
and who does not hold a consumption or display permit shall sell or permit the
consumption and display of intoxicating liquors on the licensed premises or
serve any liquids for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquor. The
presence of intoxicating liquors on the premises of such a licensee shall be
prima facie evidence of possession of intoxicating liquors for the purpose of
sale, and the serving of any liquid for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating
liquors shall be prima facie evidence that intoxicating liquor is being
permitted to be consumed or displayed contrary to this article.
         b.   Any peace officer may enter, inspect and search the premises of a
licensee during business hours without a search and seizure warrant and may
seize all intoxicating liquor found on the licensed premises in violation of
subsection F1a of this section.
      2.   No person shall consume or display any intoxicating liquor on the
premises of a licensee who is not also licensed to sell intoxicating liquors or
who does not hold a consumption and display permit.
   G.   Conduct; Responsibility Of Licensee: Every licensee shall be
responsible for the conduct of his place of business and shall maintain
conditions of sobriety and order. (Ord. 108, 6-14-1982; amd. Ord., 1-6-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 4-4-2B2 of this code.
2 2. See also subsection 4-4-2B1 of this code.
3 3. See also chapter 2, "Gambling", of this title.
2-1B-11: DAYS AND HOURS OF OPERATION 1 :
No sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor shall be made on any Sunday between the
hours of one minute past twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00)
noon, nor between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00)
P.M. on the day of any city, county, or statewide election. No sale shall be
made between the hours of one minute past twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. on any other day. (Ord. 108, 6-14-1982; amd. 2005 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 2-1A-11C of this chapter.
2-1B-12: MINORS 1 :
   A.   Age Misrepresentation: No minor shall misrepresent his age for the
purpose of obtaining 3.2 percent malt liquor.
   B.   Inducing Purchase: No person shall induce a minor to purchase or
procure 3.2 percent malt liquor.
   C.   Procurement: No person other than the parent or legal guardian shall
procure 3.2 percent malt liquor for any minor.
   D.   Possession: No minor shall have 3.2 percent malt liquor in his
possession with the intent to consume it at a place other than the household of
his parent or guardian.
   E.   Consumption: No minor shall consume 3.2 percent malt liquor unless in
the company of his parent or guardian. (Ord. 108, 6-14-1982; amd. 2005 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 4-4-2 of this code.
2-1B-13: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The city council may suspend or revoke any 3.2 percent malt liquor license
subject to the limitations and according to the procedure provided by law.
(2005 Code)
CHAPTER 2
GAMBLING
SECTION:
2-2-1: Purpose
2-2-2: Provisions Of State Law Adopted
2-2-3: Lawful Gambling
2-2-4: Gambling Prohibited; Exemptions; City Permit
2-2-5: Application; Reporting Regulations; Investigation
2-2-6: Additional Regulations
2-2-7: Permit Fees
2-2-8: Penalty
2-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to closely regulate and control the conduct of
gambling. (Ord. 4-19-11, 4-19-2011)
2-2-2: PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW ADOPTED:
The provisions of Minnesota statute chapter 349, as it may be amended from time
to time, with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation,
provision relating to sales, and all other matters pertaining to lawful
gambling is hereby adopted and made part of this chapter as if set out in full.
(Ord. 4-19-11, 4-19-2011)
2-2-3: LAWFUL GAMBLING:
There shall be no gambling in the city except as authorized pursuant to the
provisions of Minnesota statute chapter 349, and the rules adopted pursuant to
the authority contained in the statutes. Gambling shall be operated in
accordance with the terms and conditions specified in this chapter, other
applicable Sabin city ordinances and state and federal laws and regulations.
(Ord. 4-19-11, 4-19-2011)
2-2-4: GAMBLING PROHIBITED; EXEMPTIONS; CITY PERMIT:
   A.   No person, except an organization which is licensed by or has a valid
exemption permit from the state or has a permit from the city shall conduct
lawful gambling within the city. Such permit shall be obtained each time an
exemption permit is sought from the charitable gambling control board.
   B.   The following gambling activities exempt for licensure by Minnesota
statute chapter 349 shall require a permit from the city:
      1.   Bingo conducted in connection with a civic celebration and if it is
not conducted for more than twelve (12) consecutive days in a calendar year. A
"civic celebration" is an event which celebrates a recognized national holiday
or occasion celebrating an event proclaimed by the Sabin city council.
      2.   Bingo conducted by an organization which conducts four (4) or fewer
bingo occasions in a calendar year.
      3.   Bingo conducted within a nursing home, senior citizen housing
project or by a senior citizen organization if the prizes for a single game do
not exceed ten dollars ($10.00), total prizes awarded at a single occasion do
not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), no more than two (2) occasions are
held each week, only members or residents are allowed to play, no compensation
is paid for persons conducting the bingo, and a manager is appointed who must
first register with the board.
      4.   Raffles conducted by an organization and if the value of all raffle
prizes awarded in a calendar year does not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00), or if the raffle is conducted by a tax exempt health or social
service organization under contract to the state or a political subdivision if
the prizes awarded are real or personal property donated by an individual, firm
or other organization.
      5.   Lawful gambling may be conducted if the organization conducts
gambling on five (5) or fewer days in a calendar year and does not award more
than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in prizes. (Ord. 4-19-11, 4-19-2011)
2-2-5: APPLICATION; REPORTING REGULATIONS; INVESTIGATION:
   A.   Each organization that seeks to conduct lawful gambling in the city of
Sabin shall complete the city's application form, submit copies of all state or
city gambling application forms, all records and reports required to be filed
with the state gambling control board pursuant to Minnesota statutes chapter
349, and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, and submit any
additional information required by the city. (Ord. 4-19-11, 4-19-2011)
2-2-6: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
In addition to the requirements of Minnesota statutes section 349.11 through
349.22, inclusive, and rules adopted pursuant thereto, the following
regulations must be complied with:
   A.   An organization permitted to conduct lawful gambling within the city
shall expend eighty percent (80%) annually of its lawful purpose expenditures
on lawful purposes conducted or located within the city's trade area, which
shall include only the city of Sabin and any township with a boundary
contiguous to Sabin. Each such organization shall submit an annual report to
the city clerk, on forms provided by the city, and shall provide a copy of the
organization's annual audit, schedule C, and such additional reports, records,
and information as the clerk shall deem necessary to demonstrate compliance
with this subsection. Such report and supplementary information shall be
provided at the time of submission of an application for city approval of the
applicant's premises permit.
   B.   No establishment shall allow more than one organization to conduct
lawful gambling at one time on its premises or lease to more than one licensed
organization. (Ord. 4-19-11, 4-19-2011)
2-2-7: PERMIT FEES:
All organizations which are exempt from the state licensing requirement under
Minnesota statutes section 349.166, applying for a permit to conduct lawful
gambling in the city, must pay a permit fee in such amount as provided by
ordinance of the city council from time to time. (Ord. 4-19-11, 4-19-2011)
2-2-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as described in title 1, chapter
4 of this code. Prior violations of this chapter shall also be grounds, in the
discretion of the council, for refusal to approve a premises permit.
Additional, violation of this chapter shall be reported to the Minnesota
charitable gambling board and a recommendation shall be made for suspension,
revocation or cancellation of an organization's license. (Ord. 4-19-11, 4-19-
2011)
CHAPTER 3
PUBLIC DANCES
SECTION:
2-3-1: Definitions
2-3-2: Application For Public Dance
2-3-3: Transfer Of Application Or Permit
2-3-4: Certificate Of Insurance
2-3-5: Prohibited Hours
2-3-6: Prohibited Conduct
2-3-7: Security Officers
2-3-8: Revocation Of Application
2-3-9: Violation; Penalties
2-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
set out in this section unless the context specifically indicates otherwise:
GENERAL PUBLIC: Teenage persons, juveniles, adults, or any groups.
PUBLIC DANCE: Any dance wherein the general public may participate by payments,
directly or indirectly, of an admission fee or price for dancing or a fee for a
membership in a club, where such dances are conducted on a publicly owned
facility and where alcohol is served. (Ord. 222, 5-18-1999)
2-3-2: APPLICATION FOR PUBLIC DANCE:
An application for city council approval shall be completed and submitted to
the city clerk-treasurer for presentation to the city council at least in time
to present the application for city council approval at the council meeting
prior to the dance. The applications shall be available in the office of the
city clerk- treasurer. (Ord. 222, 5-18-1999)
2-3-3: TRANSFER OF APPLICATION OR PERMIT:
The application approved by the city council may not be assigned or transferred
without approval of the city council nor may the premises on which the dance is
to be held be sublet by applicant without approval of the city council. (Ord.
222, 5-18-1999; amd. 2005 Code)
2-3-4: CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE:
The applicant shall provide a certificate of insurance protecting the city to
the maximum limits from time to time required by the state. (Ord. 222, 5-18-
1999)
2-3-5: PROHIBITED HOURS:
No public dance may be held between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Monday through Saturday, and between the hours of
one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Sundays. (Ord. 222,
5-18-1999)
2-3-6: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
No person in a public dance shall be allowed to speak or act in a rude,
boisterous, obscene, or indecent manner. The applicant shall not permit an
intoxicated person, or other persons prohibited by law, to remain. (Ord. 222,
5-18-1999)
2-3-7: SECURITY OFFICERS:
Every public dance shall have at least one security officer on duty. At the
discretion of the city council, more than one security officer may be required.
All costs for security officers are to be paid by the applicant before the date
of the public dance. (Ord. 222, 5-18-1999)
2-3-8: REVOCATION OF APPLICATION:
The city council may revoke any public dance application for any violation of
this chapter or any ordinance of the city or the laws of the state. (Ord. 222,
5-18-1999)
2-3-9: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any portion of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon said conviction, shall be subject to penalty as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 222, 5-18-1999; amd. 2005 Code)
CHAPTER 4
CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS
SECTION:
2-4-1: Short Title
2-4-2: Definitions
2-4-3: Citizens' Advisory Cable Board
2-4-4: Grant Of Nonexclusive Franchise
2-4-5: Compliance With State And Federal Laws
2-4-6: Term Of Franchise
2-4-7: Jurisdiction
2-4-8: Credentials Of Franchisee
2-4-9: Liability And Indemnification
2-4-10: Transfer, Termination Or Abandonment Of Franchise
2-4-11: General System Specifications
2-4-12: Technical Standards
2-4-13: Construction Standards
2-4-14: Compliance With Applicable Codes
2-4-15: Lease Of City Property
2-4-16: Repairs And Complaints
2-4-17: Subscriber Privacy
2-4-18: Community Service
2-4-19: Emergency Use Of Facilities
2-4-20: Safety Requirements
2-4-21: Ownership And Removal Of Facilities
2-4-22: Erection, Removal And Common Use Of Poles
2-4-23: Rates And Charges
2-4-24: Access To Records
2-4-25: Modification Of Obligations
2-4-26: Municipal Right To Purchase System
2-4-27: Publication Costs
2-4-28: Severability
2-4-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the SABIN COMMUNITY ANTENNA
TELEVISION ORDINANCE. (Ord. 115, 4-10-1990)
2-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in
the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number
include the plural number.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE: The service tier which includes the retransmission of
local broadcast signals.
CABLE TELEVISION RECEPTION SERVICE: The delivery by the franchisee to
television receivers (or any other suitable type of electronic terminal or
receiver) of the electronic signals and other communications services carried
over said system.
CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM OR CABLE SYSTEM: A system utilizing certain electronic
and other components which deliver to subscribing members of the public various
communications services.
FCC: The federal communications commission of the United States.
FRANCHISEE: Cable Communications, Inc., or anyone who succeeds Cable
Communications, Inc., in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
FRANCHISOR OR CITY: The city of Sabin, Minnesota.
MAY: The word "may" is permissive.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or organization
of any kind and any other legally recognized entity.
SENIOR CITIZEN: A person over sixty five (65) years of age who is the owner of
a residence he resides in or the renter of the apartment unit he lives in.
SHALL, MUST: The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory.
SUBSCRIBERS: Those persons contracting to receive cable television reception
services furnished under this chapter by franchisee. (Ord. 115, 4-10-1990)
2-4-3: CITIZENS' ADVISORY CABLE BOARD:
The Sabin citizens' advisory cable TV board previously established is hereby
continued, and such board shall consist of five (5) persons from the city. Each
of these five (5) persons shall be appointed by the city council to staggered
two (2) year terms of office. It shall be the duty of this board to supervise
and enforce the provisions of this chapter and perform the other duties imposed
upon it by this chapter. (Ord. 115, 4-10-1990)
2-4-4: GRANT OF NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE:
   A.   Whereas:
      1.   The city of Sabin and Elmwood Township have entered into a joint
powers agreement dated June 8, 1982, for the purpose of jointly coordinating
and controlling a cable TV franchise; and
      2.   The city council of Sabin did on June 28, 1982, adopt a resolution
to remove itself with respect to cable television systems from the provisions
of Minnesota statutes chapter 238, as authorized by chapter 514, Minnesota laws
1982; and
      3.   The franchisor, after consideration, analysis and deliberation, has
approved and found sufficient the technical ability, financial condition, legal
qualification and character of said franchisee; and
      4.   The said franchisor has considered and analyzed the plans of the
franchisee for the operation of the cable communications system and found the
same to be adequate and feasible in view of the need and requirements of the
entire area to be served by the said system; and
      5.   To the knowledge and belief of the franchisor, this franchise and
the procedure used in formulating and awarding the same in all things and in
all ways complies with the laws of Minnesota.
   B.   Now, therefore, there is hereby granted by the city to the franchisee
and to its successors, assigns or designees the nonexclusive franchise and
right to erect, maintain and operate in, under, over, along, across and upon
the present and future streets, lanes, avenues, sidewalks, alleys, bridges,
highways, easements dedicated for compatible uses, and other public places in
the city and subsequent additions thereto, towers, poles, lines, cables, wires,
manholes and all other fixtures and equipment necessary for the maintenance and
operation in the city of a cable television system, for the purpose of
transmission and distribution of audio, visual, electronic and electric
impulses in order to furnish television and radio programs and various other
communications services to the public by what is commonly called a community
antenna television system, for a period ending June 1, 2000, commencing from
and after the effective date hereof; provided, however, that the franchise
shall be subject to the terms and conditions stated herein. (Ord. 115, 4-10-
1990)
2-4-5: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL LAWS:
The franchisee and the city shall conform to all state laws and rules regarding
cable communications not later than one year after they become effective,
unless otherwise stated, and to all federal laws and regulations regarding
cable communications as they become effective.The franchise shall comply with
Minnesota franchise standards contained in Minnesota statutes section 238.084.
(Ord. 115, 4-10-1990; amd. 2005 Code)
2-4-6: TERM OF FRANCHISE:
The rights granted to franchisee herein shall, except as provided in this
section, terminate on June 1, 2000; however, this chapter shall be subject to
renewal pursuant to the provisions of the cable communications policy act of
1984 applicable to new ordinances that are in the nature of a franchise for a
term not to exceed fifteen (15) years. Pending final completion of renewal
proceedings, this chapter shall remain in effect even if the original term has
expired. If this chapter is not renewed or if it is revoked for cause by the
city, the transfer of grantee's system shall be governed by section 627 of the
cable communications policy act of 1984. (Ord. 115, 4-10-1990)
2-4-7: JURISDICTION:
This chapter relates to the present territorial limits of the city and to any
area annexed thereto during the term of this franchise. Franchisee shall not be
required to service residents of newly annexed areas of the city or areas
within the city limits that are beyond four hundred feet (400') from existing
distribution lines except upon payment by such residents of the capital costs
incurred by the franchisee in bringing service to such residents. Franchisee
may, but shall not be required to, serve areas or individual homes adjoining
but outside the city limits that may be served from its existing facilities.
Franchisee may negotiate directly with such customers the amount to be charged
for the bringing of the service to the customer. (Ord. 115, 4-10-1990)
2-4-8: CREDENTIALS OF FRANCHISEE:
The franchisee's technical ability, financial condition and legal qualification
shall be considered and approved by the franchising authority in a full public
proceeding which affords reasonable notice and a reasonable opportunity to be
heard. (Ord. 115, 4-10-1990; amd. 2005 Code)
2-4-9: LIABILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION:
   A.   Franchisee shall, at all times, keep in effect the following types of
insurance coverage:
      1.   Workers' compensation upon its employees engaged in any manner in
the installation or servicing of its plant and equipment within the city.
      2.   Property damage liability insurance to the extent of two hundred
fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) as to each occurrence and two hundred
fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) aggregate, and personal injury liability
insurance to the extent of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) as to
each occurrence and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) aggregate;
excess bodily injury and property damage of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
each occurrence and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) aggregate; automobile
bodily injury and property damage liability combined one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) each occurrence.
   B.   Franchisee shall indemnify, protect, and save harmless the city from
and against losses and physical damage to property and bodily injury or death
to persons, including payments made under any workers' compensation law which
may arise out of the erection, maintenance, use or removal of attachments or
poles within the city, or by any other act of franchisee, its agents or
employees. Franchisee shall carry insurance in the above described amounts to
protect the parties hereto from and against all claims, demands, actions,
judgments, costs, expenses and liabilities which may arise or result, directly
or indirectly, from or by reason of such loss, injury or damage. Franchisee
shall also carry such insurance as it deems necessary to protect it from all
claims under the workers' compensation laws in effect that may be applicable to
franchisee. All insurance required shall be and remain in full force and effect
for the entire life of the rights granted hereunder. An insurance certificate
evidencing such liability insurance coverage shall be deposited with and kept
on file by the city. Such certificate shall provide that the coverage will not
be terminated unless the city shall first have been given ninety (90) days'
notice of intent to terminate.
   C.   The damages or penalties shall include, but shall not be limited to,
damages arising out of copyright, infringements, and all other damages arising
out of the installation, operation, or maintenance of the cable television
system authorized herein, whether or not any act or omission complained of is
authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter.
   D.   Nothing in this franchise shall relieve any person from liability
arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid injuring the
franchisee's facilities while performing any work connected with grading,
regrading or changing the line of any street or public place, or with the
construction or reconstruction of any sewer or water system. (Ord. 115, 4-10-
1990)
2-4-10: TRANSFER, TERMINATION OR ABANDONMENT OF FRANCHISE:
   A.   Transfer: The franchisee shall have the right to assign this franchise
to Midcontinent Cable Systems Co. of Minnesota ("Midcontinent"), but other than
that assignment, this franchise shall be deemed nontransferable; provided, that
any assignment or transfer of the same may take place with the consent of the
franchisor, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.
   B.   Termination:
      1.   Subject to the provisions of the cable communications policy act of
1984, the city shall have the right to terminate and cancel the franchise and
all rights and privileges of the franchise if the franchisee substantially
violates any provision of this chapter, attempts to evade any of the provisions
of this chapter, or practices any fraud or deceit upon the city. Conditions or
circumstances for the city's termination of the franchise shall include, but
not necessarily be limited to, the following:
         a.   If the franchisee should default in the performance of any of its
obligations under the franchise, and shall fail to act on the default within
thirty (30) days after receiving written notice of default.
         b.   If a petition is filed by the franchisee under the bankruptcy
act, or other insolvency or creditor's rights law, state or federal, or the
franchisee is adjudged bankrupt or insolvent under any insolvency or creditor's
rights law, state or federal.
      2.   The city shall provide the franchisee with a written notice of the
cause for termination and its intention to terminate the franchise and shall
allow the franchisee a minimum of thirty (30) days after service of the notice
in which to correct the violation. (Ord. 115, 4-10-1990)
      3.   The franchisee shall be provided with an opportunity to be heard at
a public hearing before the city council prior to the termination of the
franchise. In the event that the city determines to terminate the franchise,
the franchisee has thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of written notice
of termination within which to file an appeal to the district court for Clay
County, Minnesota. During the thirty (30) day period and until the courts
finally determine the appeal, the franchise remains in full force and effect,
unless the term of the franchise, as extended by the communications policy act
of 1984, ends sooner. (Ord. 115, 4-10-1990; amd. 2005 Code)
      4.   Upon final termination or forfeiture of the franchise, franchisee
shall, upon request of franchisor, remove its cable, wires, and all other
appliances relating to the cable communications system from the streets, alleys
and other public places within the franchise area, and in the event of failure
to do so, the franchisor may remove or have removed the cable, wires and all
other appliances relating to the cable communications system, the cost of such
removal to be charged to the franchisee. Franchisee shall also pay to
franchisor the cost of attorney fees incurred in the cost of the enforcement of
this subsection.
   C.   Abandonment: The franchisee may not abandon any portion of the cable
communications service provided hereunder without having given three (3)
months' prior written notice to the city. Franchisee may not abandon any cable
communications service or any portion thereof without compensating the city for
damages resulting thereto from such abandonment. (Ord. 115, 4-10-1990)
2-4-11: GENERAL SYSTEM SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   The franchisee shall construct a cable system with a channel capacity
available for immediate or potential use, equal to a minimum of three hundred
(300) MHz of bandwidth (the equivalent of 30 television broadcast channels).
   B.   The franchisee shall provide a cable communications system having the
technical capacity for the incorporation of nonvoice return communications
capability which for the purposes of this requirement shall mean the provision
of system design features suitable for subsequent insertion of necessary
nonvoice return communications components.
   C.   The system shall deliver to the subscriber's terminal a signal that is
capable of producing a black and white or colored picture without visual
material degradation in quality within the limitations imposed by the technical
state of the art.
   D.   The system shall transmit or distribute signals without causing
objectionable cross modulation in the cables or interfering with other
electrical or electronic networks or with the reception of other television or
radio receivers in the area not connected to the network. (Ord. 115, 4-10-1990)
2-4-12: TECHNICAL STANDARDS:
Franchisee shall be governed by the technical standards established by the FCC.
The results of any tests required by the FCC shall be filed with the city
within ten (10) days of the conduct of such tests. (Ord. 115, 4-10-1990)
2-4-13: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
The franchisee shall meet the following construction standards:
   A.   All construction and maintenance of the franchisee, including
installation, shall conform to the national electric safety code, national
electrical code, Bell System code of pole line construction, the statutes of
the state and ordinances of the city. The franchisee shall provide the city
with a map designating the location of cable television facilities, and said
map shall be available for public inspection.
   B.   All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment
erected by the franchisee within the city shall be so located as to cause
minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and other public
ways and places and to cause minimum interference with the right and reasonable
convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said streets, alleys or
other public ways and places. All cables and wires shall be installed, where
possible, parallel with electric and telephone wires. Unless engineering
considerations dictate to the contrary, multiple cable configurations shall be
arranged in parallel and bundled.
   C.   In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or any other
surfacing, franchisee shall, at its own cost and expense, and in a manner
approved by the city engineer, replace and restore all such disturbed areas in
as good a condition as before said work was commenced and shall exercise
reasonable care to maintain the same thereafter in good condition for a period
of one year. Franchisee shall not be required to pay a fee for street openings.
   D.   In the event that at any time during the period of this franchise the
city shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of any street, alley or
other public way, the franchisee, upon reasonable notice by the city, shall
remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes, and other fixtures at its own expense in locations to be approved by
the city engineer.
   E.   The franchisee shall, on the request of any person holding a building
moving permit issued by the city, or any person who wishes to remove trees or
structures from their property, temporarily raise or move its wires to permit
the moving of buildings or tree removal. The expense of same shall be paid by
the person requesting same, and the franchisee shall have authority to require
payment in advance and not less than forty eight (48) hours' notice in advance.
(Ord. 115, 4-10-1990)
   F.   The franchisee shall have the authority to trim trees upon and
overhanging the streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public places of the city so as
to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and
cable of the franchisee; all such trimming to be done with the approval of and
under the supervision of the city council and at the expense of the franchisee.
(Ord. 115, 4-10-1990; amd. 2005 Code)
   G.   In all sections of the city where the city designates an area where all
aboveground services are to be placed underground, the franchisee shall place
its wires underground on the same time schedule and on the same conditions that
are applicable to the providing of other aboveground services in the designated
areas. (Ord. 115, 4-10-1990)
2-4-14: COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE CODES:
All wires, conduits, cable and other property and facilities of the franchisee
shall be located, constructed, installed and maintained in compliance with
applicable codes. The franchisee shall keep and maintain all of its property so
as not to unnecessarily interfere with the usual and customary trade, traffic
and travel upon the streets and public places of the franchise area or endanger
the lives or property of any person. (Ord. 115, 4-10-1990)
2-4-15: LEASE OF CITY PROPERTY:
   A.   During the term of the franchise, the franchisee shall have the right
to construct and maintain, together with right of ingress and egress, a cable
communications head end site on the following described property: A tract of
land located in the Southeast Quarter (SE1/4) of Section 7, Township 138 North,
Range 47 West, of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Clay County, Minnesota,
described as follows:
Commencing at the southwest corner of Koehl's First Addition to the City of
Sabin, said point being also the southwest corner of Lot 12, Block 1 of said
Addition, said point being also 50 feet north of the south line of said Section
7, thence westerly and parallel to the south line of said Section 7 for a
distance of 75 feet to the point of beginning; thence continuing westerly and
parallel to the south line of said Section 7 for a distance of 25 feet; thence
northerly and parallel to the west line of said Addition for a distance of 25
feet; thence easterly and parallel to the south line of said Section 7 for a
distance of 25 feet; thence southerly parallel to the west line of said
Addition for a distance of 25 feet to the point of beginning.
   B.   No rent shall be charged by the city for the use of the property, and
upon termination of the franchise, franchisee shall have a reasonable time
within which to remove its property from the site. Franchisee shall restore the
premises to its former condition, reasonable wear and tear excepted. (Ord. 115,
4-10-1990)
2-4-16: REPAIRS AND COMPLAINTS:
   A.   Toll Free Telephone Number; Repair Service: The franchisee shall
provide a toll free telephone number for subscriber complaints and shall
maintain a repair service capable of responding to subscriber complaints or
requests for service within twenty four (24) hours after receipt of the
complaint or request.
   B.   Interruption Of Service: Whenever it is necessary to shut off or
interrupt services for the purpose of making repairs, adjustments or
installation, the franchisee shall do so during periods of minimum use by
subscribers. Unless such interruption is unforeseen, the franchisee shall give
reasonable notice thereof to the subscribers affected. All costs incurred in
making such repairs, adjustments, or installation shall be borne by the
franchisee unless otherwise provided for in this chapter or subscriber
contract.
   C.   Complaints: All complaints by the franchisor, subscribers, or other
citizens regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunction, billing
disputes, and any other matters relative to the cable television system shall
be investigated by the franchisee within twenty four (24) hours. The franchisee
shall rectify the cause of the complaint if reasonably possible. If a
subscriber or citizen complaint cannot be resolved within ten (10) days, the
complainant may then file the complaint with the city clerk-treasurer who shall
inform the Sabin citizens' advisory cable board that the franchisee and
complainant have been unable to resolve the complaint. The franchisor or
complainant may file a written complaint with the citizens' advisory cable
board. The Sabin citizens' advisory cable board will then schedule a date and
time for a hearing on said complaint and give the franchisor, the complainant
and the franchisee seven (7) days' written notice in advance of said hearing.
At said hearing, each party shall have a right to be heard and to be
represented by counsel. The decision of the citizens' advisory cable board may
be appealed to the city council, provided a written notice of appeal be filed
with the city clerk-treasurer within fifteen (15) days after the date of
receipt of written notice of the decision of the citizens' advisory cable
board. Consideration on appeal by the city council will be of the evidence and
records produced at the hearing before the citizens' advisory cable board and
will not be a hearing de novo. (Ord. 115, 4-10-1990)
2-4-17: SUBSCRIBER PRIVACY:
   A.   The provisions of section 631 of the cable communications policy act of
1984 shall govern the protection of subscriber privacy. Subject to the
foregoing, no signals of a class IV cable communications channel may be
transmitted from a subscriber terminal for purposes of monitoring individual
viewing patterns or practices without the express written permission of the
subscriber. The request for such permission shall be contained in a separate
document with a prominent statement that the subscriber is authorizing the
permission in full knowledge of its provisions. Such written permission shall
be for a limited period of time, not to exceed one year, which shall be renewed
at the option of the subscriber. No penalty shall be invoked for a subscriber's
failure to provide or renew such authorization. The authorization shall be
revocable at any time by the subscriber without penalty of any kind whatsoever.
Such permission shall be required for each type or classification of class IV
cable communications activity planned for the purpose.
   B.   For purposes of this section, a "class IV cable communications channel"
means a signaling path provided by a cable communications system to transmit
signals of any type from a subscriber terminal to another point in the
communications system. (Ord. 115, 4-10-1990)
2-4-18: COMMUNITY SERVICE:
   A.   Schools: The franchisee shall, subject to the line extension provisions
of section
2-4-7 of this chapter, provide basic cable service at no cost to public and
parochial elementary and secondary schools within the city, at one terminal
junction for educational purposes upon request of the school system.
   B.   City:
      1.   Franchisee shall, subject to the line extension provisions of
section
2-4-7 of this chapter, also provide to the city without charge, at one city
owned building other than a hospital, nursing home, apartment or building at
the airport, to be selected by the city council, one junction terminal to said
building and shall also furnish to the building, without charge, basic service
to all sets connected within such building to the terminal junction.
      2.   The franchisee shall allocate one channel to the city as a public,
educational or governmental access channel. Until such time as the city files a
written request with franchisee for full time use of the channel, franchisee
shall have the right to use that portion of the channel capacity that is not
being used by the city. Franchisee shall have a reasonable period of time after
notification to vacate its use of the channel. Franchisee shall assist the city
in obtaining the necessary licenses and frequency clearance to enable the city
to use said channel. (Ord. 115, 4-10-1990)
2-4-19: EMERGENCY USE OF FACILITIES:
In the case of any emergency or disaster, the franchisee shall, upon request of
the city council, make available its facilities to the city for emergency use
during the emergency or disaster. If the city wishes to operate a civil
emergency alert system on a plan that is mutually acceptable to the city and
franchisee and provides franchisee with the necessary equipment for such
system, franchisee will permit the system to be used on the cable system. (Ord.
115, 4-10-1990)
2-4-20: SAFETY REQUIREMENTS:
The franchisee shall keep and maintain all of its property in good condition,
order and repair so that the same shall not menace or endanger the life or
property of any person. The franchisor shall have the right to inspect and
examine at any reasonable time and upon reasonable notice the property owned or
used, in part or in whole, by the franchisee. (Ord. 115, 4-10-1990)
2-4-21: OWNERSHIP AND REMOVAL OF FACILITIES:
All cable and passive equipment for cable television reception service
installed by franchisee at a subscriber's location shall remain the property of
franchisee, and franchisee shall have the right to remove said cable and
equipment. Upon termination of service to any subscriber, the franchisee shall
promptly remove all its aboveground facilities and equipment from the premises
of such subscriber upon his request. (Ord. 115, 4-10-1990)
2-4-22: ERECTION, REMOVAL AND COMMON USE OF POLES:
   A.   No poles or other wire holding structures shall be erected by the
franchisee without prior approval of the designated representative of the city
council with regard to locations, height, type or any other pertinent aspect,
which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. However, no locations of any
pole or wire holding structure of the franchisee shall be a vested interest,
and such poles or structures shall be removed or modified by the franchisee at
its own expense whenever the city council or its designated representative
determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby.
   B.   Where poles or other wire holding structures already existing in use in
serving the city are available for use by franchisee, but the franchisee does
not make arrangements for such use, the city council may require the franchisee
to use such poles and structures if it determines that the public convenience
would be enhanced thereby and the terms of the use available to the franchisee
are just and reasonable.
   C.   Where the city or a public utility serving the city desires to make use
of poles or other wire holding structures of the franchisee but agreement
therefor with the franchisee cannot be reached, the city council may require
the franchisee to permit such use for such consideration as is just and
reasonable and upon such terms as the council determines the use would enhance
the public convenience and would not unduly interfere with the franchisee's
operations. (Ord. 115, 4-10-1990)
2-4-23: RATES AND CHARGES:
   A.   Schedule Of Rates And Charges: Franchisee shall at all times maintain
on file with the city clerk-treasurer a schedule setting forth all rates and
charges to be made to subscribers for basic cable service, including
installation charges. If residential subscriber contracts are used, a copy
showing the terms shall also be filed with the clerk-treasurer.
   B.   Regulation Of Rates And Charges; Procedure: During the term of the
franchise, the city may regulate rates only if authorized to do so by federal
communications commission regulations and then such regulation shall only be in
accordance with the provisions of such regulations. In the event that the city
has authority to regulate rates, the following procedures shall be used:
      1.   Before making any changes in the rates and charges to subscribers
for basic cable service, franchisee shall file in writing with the city clerk-
treasurer a new proposed rate change at least thirty (30) days in advance of
the proposed effective date for such rate change. If the city takes no action
to set the proposed rate change for hearing, said proposed rate change shall
become effective upon the expiration of the thirty (30) day notice period.
      2.   If the council wishes to hold a hearing on the proposed rate
increase, the hearing shall be held within forty five (45) days of the filing
of the proposed rate increase by franchisee. Following the hearing, the council
shall take final action on the proposed increase within thirty (30) days.
   C.   Increases: Any rate subject to regulation under the above provisions
may be increased without the approval of the city, at the discretion of
franchisee, by an amount not to exceed five percent (5%) per calendar year. In
addition, franchisee shall have the right to pass along to subscribers state
and local sales taxes, programming cost increases and copyright fee increases.
   D.   Rate Discrimination Prohibited: The franchisee shall not discriminate
in rates between customers of the same category except to the extent permitted
by the cable communications policy act of 1984 and federal communications
commission regulations.
   E.   Advance Payment: The monthly rate set forth in subsection A of this
section shall be payable in advance. (Ord. 115, 4-10-1990)
2-4-24: ACCESS TO RECORDS:
The city is granted the authority to audit, at its expense, the franchisee's
accounting and financial records pertaining to the Sabin cable system upon
reasonable notice. The franchisee shall file annually with the city reports of
gross basic subscriber revenues of the cable system and such other information
as the city deems reasonably appropriate. (Ord. 115, 4-10-1990)
2-4-25: MODIFICATION OF OBLIGATIONS:
In addition to any other remedies provided by law or regulations, franchisee's
obligations under this chapter may be modified, at its request, in accordance
with section 625 of the cable communications policy act of 1984 as it now
exists, or as hereafter amended. (Ord. 115, 4-10-1990)
2-4-26: MUNICIPAL RIGHT TO PURCHASE SYSTEM:
Subject to the provisions of the cable communications policy act of 1984, upon
the expiration of the franchise term or upon termination of the franchise, or
if the franchise or cable system is offered for sale, the city shall have the
nonexclusive right to purchase the system. (Ord. 115, 4-10-1990)
2-4-27: PUBLICATION COSTS:
The grantee shall assume the cost of any required publication of the franchise.
(Ord. 115, 4-10-1990; amd. 2005 Code)
2-4-28: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, or is superseded or preempted by federal communications
commission regulation, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof. (Ord. 115, 4-10-1990)
CHAPTER 5
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND VENDORS
SECTION:
2-5-1: Definitions
2-5-2: License Required; Exception
2-5-3: License Required For Each Company Or Individual
2-5-4: Application For License
2-5-5: License Fee; Issuance Or Denial
2-5-6: Terms Of License
2-5-7: Hours Of Sales
2-5-8: Peddling And Soliciting On Private Property; Placard
2-5-9: Vehicle Requirements
2-5-10: Stationary Sales Locations
2-5-11: Revocation Of License
2-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
PEDDLER: Any person with no fixed place of business, not including newspeople,
who go from house to house, carrying or transporting goods, wares or
merchandise and offering or exposing such merchandise for sale or making sales
and deliveries to purchasers of such merchandise.
SOLICITOR: Any person who goes from house to house, soliciting or taking or
attempting to take orders for the purchase of any goods, wares or merchandise,
including magazines, books, periodicals or personal property of any nature, for
delivery in the future.
TEMPORARY SALE: A sale conducted for a period of sixty (60) consecutive days or
less on a sidewalk, parking lot or open space by merchants who occupy principal
buildings adjacent to the area to be utilized for a temporary sale.
VENDOR: Any person who makes sales of goods, wares or merchandise from a stand
or vehicle located upon public property or a street right of way. (2005 Code)
2-5-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTION:
   A.   Peddlers, Solicitors And Vendors: It shall be unlawful for any peddler,
solicitor or vendor to sell or attempt to sell any product upon any public
property or road in any area within the city or to engage in door to door
solicitation or sales within such area without first having obtained a license
for this purpose from the city. Any peddler, solicitor or vendor who is subject
to regulation or licensing by agencies of the state or federal government, and
where such regulation or licensing preempts local regulations, shall be exempt
from the restrictions of this section.
   B.   Temporary Sales: It shall be unlawful to conduct a temporary sale
unless a license is obtained for this purpose from the city. Conducting
temporary sales for five (5) or fewer days or within fully enclosed shopping
malls or buildings shall not require a license. (2005 Code)
2-5-3: LICENSE REQUIRED FOR EACH COMPANY OR INDIVIDUAL:
A license shall be obtained by each company, vendor, solicitor or peddler. The
application shall indicate both the name of the individual vendor or solicitor
and the firm or corporation which the applicant represents, if any. (2005 Code)
2-5-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Contents Of Application:
      1.   The application for a license shall contain the following
information:
         a.   The applicant's name, permanent address and local address, if
any.
         b.   A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods
to be sold.
         c.   If the applicant is employed, the name and address of his/her
employer.
         d.   The names and addresses of the officers or directors of the firm
or organization by which the applicant is employed or which he/she is
representing.
         e.   The period of time within which the applicant intends to conduct
activities, which includes the dates and times of day.
         f.   The source of supply of the goods or property proposed to be sold
or, in the case of goods or property to be sold by solicitation of orders,
where such goods or products are located at the time the information is
submitted to the city clerk-treasurer and the proposed method of delivery.
         g.   If the applicant is a nonprofit, religious, charitable, patriotic
or philanthropic organization, a copy of the organization's tax exemption
status.
         h.   If the applicant is conducting a temporary sale on another's
property, written consent from the person who owns the area to be utilized for
the temporary sale.
         i.   A temporary scaled drawing of a temporary sale area, showing all
proposed temporary structures, such as tents, booths, buildings, signs and
lights, and other details as may be determined by the city.
      2.   If products are to be sold from a motor vehicle, the application
shall contain a description of the vehicle, including serial number, license
number, make and model, and shall also contain the name of the insurer
providing liability coverage on the vehicle.
   B.   Changes In Contents: Every license holder shall promptly submit to the
city any changes in the foregoing data. (2005 Code)
2-5-5: LICENSE FEE; ISSUANCE OR DENIAL:
   A.   License Fee; Issuance: Upon proper application and payment of a fee
established by city council resolution, the city, within ten (10) days of
application therefor, may issue licenses to vend products upon the public roads
in the areas designated in section
2-5-2 of this chapter, or to engage in door to door solicitation of sales
within such areas, as is deemed to be in the best interest of the inhabitants
and after a review and investigation regarding the contents of the application.
   B.   Notice Of Denial; Hearing: The applicant shall be notified within the
ten (10) day period of the decision to issue or deny such a license. The
applicant, if the license is denied, may request, within fourteen (14) days
after denial, a hearing before the city council to reconsider the application
at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
   C.   Exemption From Fee: Religious, charitable, patriotic or philanthropic
organizations shall be exempt from payment of the fee. Providing a copy of a
current tax exempt status for the applying organization shall be a prima facie
evidence of the exemption from the payment of the fee. (2005 Code)
2-5-6: TERMS OF LICENSE:
   A.   Peddler, Solicitor Or Vendor License: No license shall be issued to a
peddler, solicitor or vendor for any period of time in excess of one year.
   B.   Temporary Sales: A temporary sale may be conducted for a period not to
exceed sixty (60) days. (2005 Code)
2-5-7: HOURS OF SALES:
No peddler, solicitor or vendor shall engage in any peddling, soliciting or
vending within the city between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and ten
o'clock (10:00) A.M. No vendor shall sell or attempt to sell food products from
a motor vehicle in a residential zone between the hours of four o'clock (4:00)
P.M. and six thirty o'clock (6:30) P.M. (2005 Code)
2-5-8: PEDDLING AND SOLICITING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; PLACARD:
   A.   Contents Of Placard; Specifications: Any resident of the city who
wishes to exclude peddlers or solicitors from premises occupied by him/her may
place upon or near the usual entrance to such premises a printed placard or
sign bearing the following notice: "Peddlers and Solicitors Prohibited". Such
placard shall be at least three and three-fourths inches (33/4") long and three
and three-fourths inches (33/4") wide, and the printing thereon shall not be
smaller than 48-point type.
   B.   Display Of Placard; Peddling And Soliciting Prohibited: No peddler,
solicitor or vendor shall enter in or upon any premises or attempt to enter in
or upon any premises where such placard or sign is displayed.
   C.   Tampering With Placard: No person other than the person occupying such
premises shall remove, injure or deface such placard or sign. (2005 Code)
2-5-9: VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Insurance: Every applicant who intends to vend products from a motor
vehicle shall maintain liability insurance of a minimum of seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars ($750,000.00) combined single limit liability coverage for
injury to or death of any one person or persons or damages/destruction of
property in any one accident.
   B.   Parking: Vehicles must be parked at the curb while engaging in vending
operations, and vending shall be done only at the curbside of the vehicle.
   C.   Equipment: Each vehicle must be equipped with flashing lights on both
the front and rear of the vehicle, clearly visible to oncoming cars in full
daylight. (2005 Code)
2-5-10: STATIONARY SALES LOCATIONS:
No sales of goods, wares or merchandise may be made from a stationary location
stand or vehicle on public streets or public street rights of way. When
applicant intends to make sales from stationary locations within the city, the
license application shall contain a specific description of the proposed sales
location. No more than one license shall be issued for a single sales location.
(2005 Code)
2-5-11: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any license may be revoked by the city council when it shall appear that the
licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter or has engaged in
activities inimical to the best interests of the inhabitants of the city. (2005
Code)
CHAPTER 6
CANNABIS BUSINESS REGISTRATION
SECTION:
2-6-1: Administration
2-6-2: Definitions
2-6-3: Registration Of Cannabis Businesses
2-6-4: Renewal Of Registration
2-6-5: Suspension Of Registration
2-6-6: Limiting Of Registrations
2-6-7: Requirements For Cannabis Businesses
2-6-8: Temporary Cannabis Events
2-6-9: Lower-Potency Hemp Edibles
2-6-10: City Of Sabin Government As A Cannabis Retailer
2-6-1: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Findings and Purpose: The City of Sabin makes the following legislative
findings:
      1.   The purpose of this chapter is to implement the provisions of
Minnesota Statutes, chapter 342, which authorizes the City of Sabin to protect
the public health, safety, and welfare of the City of Sabin residents by
regulating cannabis businesses within the legal boundaries of the City of
Sabin.
      2.   The City of Sabin finds and concludes that the proposed provisions
are appropriate and lawful land use regulations for the City of Sabin, that the
proposed amendments will promote the community's interest in reasonable
stability in zoning for now and in the future, and that the proposed provisions
are in the public interest and for the public good.
   B.   Authority and Jurisdiction: The City of Sabin has the authority to
adopt this chapter pursuant to:
      1.   Minn. Stat. 342.13(c), regarding the authority of a local unit of
government to adopt reasonable restrictions upon the time, place, and manner of
the operation of a cannabis business, provided that such restrictions do not
prohibit the establishment or operation of cannabis businesses.
      2.   Minn. Stat. 342.22, regarding the local registration and enforcement
requirements of state-licensed cannabis retail businesses and lower-potency
hemp edible retail businesses.
      3.   Minn. Stat. 152.0263, Subd. 5, regarding the use of cannabis in
public places.
      4.   Minn. Stat. 462.357, regarding the authority of a local authority to
adopt zoning ordinances. This chapter shall be applicable within the legal
boundaries of the City of Sabin.
   C.   Severability: If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this
chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
   D.   Enforcement: The City Council for the City of Sabin is responsible for
the administration and enforcement of this chapter. Any violation of the
provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements
constitutes a misdemeanor and is punishable as defined by law. Violations of
this chapter can occur regardless of whether or not a permit is required for a
regulated activity listed in this chapter. (Ord. 9-16-25, 9-16-2025)
2-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise noted in this section, words and phrases contained in Minn.
Stat. 342.01 and the rules promulgated pursuant to any of these acts, shall
have the same meanings in this chapter.
CANNABIS CULTIVATION: A cannabis business licensed to grow cannabis plants
within the approved amount of space from seed or immature plant to mature
plant, harvest cannabis flower from mature plant, package and label immature
plants and seedlings and cannabis flower for sale to other cannabis businesses,
transport cannabis flower to a cannabis manufacturer located on the same
premises, and perform other actions approved by the office.
CANNABIS RETAIL BUSINESSES: A retail location and the retail location(s) of a
mezzobusinesses with a retail operations endorsement, microbusinesses with a
retail operations endorsement, medical combination businesses operating a
retail location, and lower-potency hemp edible retailers.
CANNABIS RETAILER: Any person, partnership, firm, corporation, or association,
foreign or domestic, selling cannabis product to a consumer and not for the
purpose of resale in any form.
DAYCARE: A location licensed with the Minnesota Department of Human Services to
provide the care of a child in a residence outside the child's own home for
gain or otherwise, on a regular basis, for any part of a twenty-four (24)-hour
day.
LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLE: As defined in Minn. Stat. 342.0.
OFFICE OF CANNABIS MANAGEMENT: Minnesota Office of Cannabis Management,
referred to as “OCM” or the “Office” in this chapter.
PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION: A business, accommodation, refreshment,
entertainment, recreation, or transportation facility of any kind, whether
licensed or not, whose goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages or
accommodations are extended, offered, sold, or otherwise made available to the
public.
PRELIMINARY LICENSE APPROVAL: OCM pre-approval for a cannabis business license
for applicants who qualify under Minn. Stat. 342.17.
PUBLIC PLACE: A public park or trail, public street or sidewalk; any enclosed,
indoor area used by the general public, including, but not limited to,
restaurants; bars; any other food or liquor establishment; hospitals; nursing
homes; auditoriums; arenas; gyms; meeting rooms; common areas of rental
apartment buildings, and other places of public accommodation.
RESIDENTIAL TREATMENT FACILITY: As defined in Minn. Stat. 245.462.
RETAIL REGISTRATION: An approved registration issued by the City of Sabin to a
state-licensed cannabis retail business.
SCHOOL: A public school as defined under Minn. Stat. 120A.05 or a nonpublic
school that must meet the reporting requirements under Minn. Stat. 120A.24.
STATE LICENSE: An approved license issued by the State of Minnesota’s Office of
Cannabis Management to a cannabis retail business. (Ord. 9-16-25, 9-16-2025)
2-6-3: REGISTRATION OF CANNABIS BUSINESSES:
   A.   Consent to Registering of Cannabis Businesses:
      1.   No individual or entity may operate a state-licensed cannabis retail
business within the City of Sabin without first registering with the City of
Sabin.
      2.   Any state-licensed cannabis retail business that sells to a
customer, consumer or patient without valid retail registration shall incur a
civil penalty not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each
violation.
   B.   Compliance Checks Prior to Retail Registration.
      1.   Prior to issuance of a cannabis retail business registration, the
City of Sabin shall conduct a preliminary compliance check to ensure compliance
with local ordinances.
      2.   Pursuant to Minn. Stat. 342, within thirty (30) days of receiving a
copy of a state license application from OCM, the City of Sabin shall certify
on a form provided by OCM whether a proposed cannabis retail business complies
with local zoning ordinances and, if applicable, whether the proposed business
complies with the state fire code and building code.
   C.   Registration and Application Procedure.
      1.   Fees:
         a.   A registration fee shall be charged to applicants depending on
the type of retail business license applied for.
         b.   An initial retail registration fee shall not exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or half the amount of an initial state license fee under
Minn. Stat. 342.11, whichever is less. The initial registration fee shall
include the initial retail registration fee and the first annual renewal fee.
         c.   Any renewal retail registration fee imposed by the City of Sabin
shall be charged at the time of the second renewal and each subsequent renewal
thereafter.
         d.   A renewal retail registration fee shall not exceed one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) or half the amount of a renewal state license fee under
Minn. Stat. 342.11, whichever is less.
         e.   A medical combination business operating an adult-use retail
location may only be charged a single registration fee, not to exceed the
lesser of a single retail registration fee, defined under this section, of the
adult-use retail business.
      2.   Registration Submittal: The City of Sabin shall issue a retail
registration to a state-licensed cannabis retail business that adheres to the
requirements of Minn. Stat. 342.22.
         a.   An applicant for a retail registration shall fill out the
Minnesota Office of Cannabis Management Retail Registration Form and Checklist,
as provided by the City of Sabin. Said form shall include, but is not limited
to:
            (1)   Full name of applicant;
            (2)   The address for the property which the retail registration is
sought;
            (3)   Verification that property taxes re paid in full;
            (4)   Certification that the applicant complies with the
requirements of local ordinances established pursuant to Minn. Stat. 342.13.
         b.   The applicant shall include with the form:
            (1)   The registration fee as required;
            (2)   A copy of a valid state license or written notice of OCM
license preapproval;
            (3)   A map showing that the retail store is one thousand feet
(1,000') or more from any school; five hundred feet (500') or more from any
daycare; five hundred feet (500') or more from any public park, playground,
athletic field or residence; five hundred feet (500') or more from any
residential treatment facility and five hundred feet (500') or more from any
other cannabis retail business.
         c.   Once an application is considered complete, the City Clerk shall
inform the applicant as such, process the application, and forward the
application to the City Council for approval or denial.
         d.   The registration fee shall be non-refundable.
   C.   Application Approval:
      1.   A state-licensed cannabis retail business registration shall not be
approved if the cannabis retail business would exceed the maximum number of
registered cannabis retail businesses permitted under Section 2-6-3 F.
      2.   A state-licensed cannabis retail business registration shall not be
approved or renewed if the applicant is unable to meet the requirements of this
chapter.
      3.   A state-licensed cannabis retail business registration that meets
the requirements of this chapter shall be approved.
   D.   Annual Compliance Checks: Any failures under this section must be
reported to the Office of Cannabis Management.
      1.   A local unit of government shall conduct compliance checks of every
cannabis business and hemp business with a retail registration issued by the
local unit of government. The checks shall assess compliance with age
verification requirements and with any applicable local ordinance.
      2.   The local unit of government must conduct unannounced age
verification compliance checks at least once each calendar year. Age
verification compliance checks must involve persons at least seventeen (17)
years of age but under the age of twenty-one (21) who, with the prior written
consent of a parent or guardian if the person is under the age of eighteen
(18), attempt to purchase adult-use cannabis flower, adult-use cannabis
products, lower-potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products under
the direct supervision of a law enforcement officer or an employee of the local
unit of government.
   E.   Location Change: A state-licensed cannabis retail business shall be
required to submit a new application for registration under Section 2-6-3 C.2.
if it seeks to move to a new location that is within the legal boundaries of
the City of Sabin. (Ord. 9-16-25, 9-16-2025)
2-6-4: RENEWAL OF REGISTRATION:
The City of Sabin shall renew an annual registration of a state-licensed
cannabis retail business at the same time OCM renews the cannabis retail
business’ license. A state-licensed cannabis retail business shall apply to
renew registration on Minnesota Office of Cannabis Management Retail
Registration Form and Checklist. A cannabis retail registration issued under
this chapter shall not be transferred.
   A.   Renewal Fees. The City of Sabin may charge a renewal fee for the
registration starting at the second renewal, shall not exceed one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) or half the amount of a renewal state license fee under
Minn. Stat. 342.11, whichever is less.
   B.   Renewal Application. The application for renewal of a retail
registration shall include, but is not limited to the Items required under
Section
2-6-3 C.2. (Ord. 9-16-25, 9-16-2025)
2-6-5: SUSPENSION OF REGISTRATION:
   A.   When Suspension is Warranted: The City of Sabin may suspend a cannabis
retail business’s registration if it violates the ordinance of the City of
Sabin or poses an immediate threat to the health or safety of the public. The
City of Sabin shall immediately notify the cannabis retail business in writing
the grounds for the suspension.
   B.   Notification to OCM. The City of Sabin shall immediately notify the OCM
in writing the grounds for the suspension. OCM will provide City of Sabin and
cannabis business retailer a response to the complaint within seven (7)
calendar days and perform any necessary inspections within thirty (30) calendar
days.
   C.   Length of Suspension.
      1.   The suspension of a cannabis retail business registration may be for
up to thirty (30) calendar days, unless OCM suspends the license for a longer
period. The business may not make sales to customers if their registration is
suspended.
      2.   The City of Sabin may reinstate a registration if it determines that
the violations have been resolved.
      3.   The City of Sabin shall reinstate a registration if OCM determines
that the violation(s) have been resolved.
   D.   Civil Penalties: Subject to Minn. Stat. 342.22, subd. 5(e) the City of
Sabin may impose a civil penalty, as specified in the City of Sabin. For a
first violation, a civil penalty of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00)
shall be imposed. For a second violation, a civil penalty of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) shall be imposed. For a third violation, a civil penalty of
seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00) shall be imposed. Payment of civil
penalties may be enforced by Civil Action. (Ord. 9-16-25, 9-16-2025)
2-6-6: LIMITING OF REGISTRATIONS:
The City of Sabin may limit the number of cannabis retail businesses within
City of Sabin by Zoning and Land use restrictions and minimum buffer
requirements. (Ord. 9-16-25, 9-16-2025)
2-6-7: REQUIREMENTS FOR CANNABIS BUSINESSES:
   A.   Minimum Buffer Requirements.
      1.   The City of Sabin shall prohibit the operation of a cannabis
business within one thousand feet (1,000') of a school.
      2.   The City of Sabin shall prohibit the operation of a cannabis
business within five hundred feet (500') of a church, daycare, library or a
residence.
      3.   The City of Sabin shall prohibit the operation of a cannabis
business within five hundred feet (500') of a residential treatment facility.
      4.   The City of Sabin shall prohibit the operation of a cannabis
business within five hundred feet (500') of an attraction within a public park
that is regularly used by minors, including a playground or athletic field.
      5.   The City of Sabin shall prohibit the operation of a cannabis retail
business within five hundred feet (500') of another cannabis retail business.
      6.   Nothing in Section
2-6-4 A. shall prohibit an active cannabis business or a cannabis business
seeking renewal of its registration from continuing operation at the same site
if a (school/daycare/residential treatment facility/attraction within a public
park that is regularly used by minors) moves within the minimum buffer zone
after the business is established.
      7.   Lower potency hemp edible retailers are exempt from these buffer
requirements.
   B.   Zoning and Land Use.
      1.   Cultivation.
         a.   Indoor Cultivation of cannabis by Cannabis businesses licensed or
endorsed for cultivation is a conditional use, by a conditional use permit, and
only in the commercial zoning district.
         b.   Outdoor Cultivation of cannabis by Cannabis businesses licensed
or endorsed for cultivation is a conditional use, by a conditional use permit,
and only in the commercial zoning district:.
      2.   Cannabis Manufacturer. Manufacture of cannabis products by Cannabis
businesses licensed or endorsed for cannabis manufacturer is a conditional use,
by a conditional use permit, and only in the commercial zoning district.
      3.   Hemp Manufacturer. Manufacture of low-potency hemp edible products
by Businesses licensed or endorsed for low-potency hemp edible manufacturer is
a conditional use, by a conditional use permit, and only in the commercial
zoning district.
      4.   Wholesale. Wholesale of products authorized by Minn. Stat. Section
342.34 by Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for wholesale is a
conditional use, by a conditional use permit, and only in the commercial zoning
district.
      5.   Cannabis Retail. Retail sale of cannabis flower or cannabis products
and other products authorized by Minn. Stat. Section 342.27 by Cannabis
businesses licensed or endorsed for cannabis retail is a conditional use, by a
conditional use permit, and only in the commercial zoning district.
   C.   Hours of Operation. Cannabis businesses are limited to retail sale of
cannabis, cannabis flower, and cannabis products between the hours of 10:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m. (Ord. 9-16-25, 9-16-2025)
2-6-8: TEMPORARY CANNABIS EVENTS:
   A.   License or Permit Required for Temporary Cannabis Events.
      1.   A cannabis event organizer license entitles the license holder to
organize a temporary cannabis event lasting no more than four (4) days.
      2.   A license or permit is required to be issued and approved by the
City of Sabin prior to holding a Temporary Cannabis Event.
   B.   Registration and Application Procedure.
      1.   Fees. A registration fee, as established in the City of Sabin fee
schedule, shall be charged to applicants for Temporary Cannabis Events.
      2.   Application Submittal and Review. The City of Sabin shall require an
application for Temporary Cannabis Events.
         a.   An applicant for a temporary cannabis event shall fill out an
application form, as provided by the City of Sabin. Said form shall include,
but is not limited to:
            (1)   Full name of the property owner and applicant;
            (2)   Address, email address, and telephone number of the
applicant;
            (3)   Address of the event location;
            (4)   Description of the event including dates and hours.
         b.   The applicant shall include with the form:
            (1)   The application fee as required by Subd. B.1.;
            (2)   A copy of the OCM cannabis event license application,
submitted pursuant to Minn. Stat. Section 342.39 subd. 2.
         c.   The application shall be submitted to the City Clerk, or other
designee for review. If the designee determines that a submitted application is
incomplete, they shall return the application to the applicant with the notice
of deficiencies.
         d.   Once an application is considered complete, the City Clerk shall
inform the applicant as such, process the application fees, and forward the
application to the City Council for approval or denial.
         e.   The application fee is non-refundable.
   3.   Application Approval. The application for a license for a Temporary
Cannabis Event shall meet the following standards:
         a.   No on-site consumption of cannabis products is allowed;
         b.   No more than twenty-five (25) people can attend the temporary
cannabis event at the same time;
         c.   A temporary cannabis event shall only be held indoors at a
licensed cannabis retail business;
         d.   A temporary cannabis event cannot last more than four (4) days;
         e.   A temporary cannabis event can only be held between the hours of
ten o’clock (10:00) a.m. and nine o’clock (9:00) p.m.
   4.   A request for a Temporary Cannabis Event that meets the requirements of
this Section shall be approved.
   5.   A request for a Temporary Cannabis Event that does not meet the
requirements of this Section shall be denied. The City of Sabin shall notify
the applicant of the standards not met and basis for denial. (Ord. 9-16-25, 9-
16-2025)
2-6-9: LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLES:
   A,   Sale of Low-Potency Hemp Edibles: The sale of Low-Potency Hemp Edibles
is permitted by registered lower potency hemp edible retailers in the
commercial district only.
   B.   Zoning Districts. Low-Potency Edibles business is a conditional use, by
a conditional use permit, and only in a commercial zoning district in the
commercial district only.
   C.   Sales within a Municipal Liquor Store. The sale of Low-Potency Edibles
is permitted in a Municipal Liquor Store. (Ord. 9-16-25, 9-16-2025)
2-6-10: CITY OF SABIN GOVERNMENT AS A CANNABIS RETAILER:
   A.   The City of Sabin may establish, own, and operate one municipal
cannabis retail business, subject to the restrictions in this chapter.
   B.   The municipal cannabis retail store shall not be included in any
limitation of the number of registered cannabis retail businesses under Section
2-6-3 F.
   C.   The City of Sabin shall be subject to all same retail license
requirements and procedures applicable to all other applicants. (Ord. 9-16-25,
9-16-2025)
TITLE 3
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
SECTION:
3-1-1: Definitions
3-1-2: Garbage Disposal Required; Frequency; Use Of City System
3-1-3: Container Specifications
3-1-4: Use Of Containers; Preparation And Placement For Pick Up
3-1-5: Collection Of Garbage And Refuse
3-1-6: Notice To Commence Or Discontinue Service
3-1-7: Fees For Collection And Disposal; Bills For Service; Delinquencies
3-1-8: Maintenance Of Sanitary Conditions
3-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
GARBAGE: Waste foodstuffs or table wastes of vegetable or animal origin,
together with other incidental admixtures.
REFUSE: Shall include all inorganic matter such as tin cans, glass, paper,
ashes, sweepings, leaves, grass, etc. Stones, sod, earth, concrete,
contractors' building materials, large automobile parts, large appliances,
inflammable liquids, tree trunk sections over four inches (4") in diameter,
animal wastes, except when adequately wrapped, or articles so heavy or bulky
that they cannot be easily lifted by one person shall not be considered
"refuse". (Ord. 18, 5-16-1972; amd. 2005 Code)
3-1-2: GARBAGE DISPOSAL REQUIRED; FREQUENCY; USE OF CITY SYSTEM:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation not to dispose of
garbage and refuse which accumulates upon their property at least once a week.
Every householder, occupant and owner of any dwelling, boarding house,
apartment building, or any other structure utilized for dwelling purposes shall
use the garbage and refuse collection system as provided by the city. (Ord. 18,
5-16-1972)
3-1-3: CONTAINER SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Every householder, occupant and owner of any dwelling, boarding house,
apartment building, or any other structure utilized for dwelling purposes, and
any restaurant, industrial or commercial establishment that accumulates garbage
shall provide one or more flytight metal garbage containers of thirty (30) or
thirty two (32) gallons' capacity to contain all garbage which accumulates
between collections. Metal garbage containers of less capacity now in use may
continue to be used until they become unserviceable. Also, plastic bags of
sufficient strength to prevent tearing of the bag or loss of the garbage or
refuse therefrom may be used. No such container shall weigh in excess of
seventy five (75) pounds when full.
   B.   All apartment buildings containing four (4) or more units, and each
commercial establishment, industrial establishment, or restaurant where garbage
accumulates and the volume exceeds four (4) 30-gallon or 32-gallon containers
per week shall use vat service with pick up of no less than once per week. The
actual size of the vat and frequency of service is to be based on need as
determined by the city code enforcement officer. Vats shall be of no less than
one cubic yard capacity and designed with the proper attachments for lifting
into refuse trucks. (Ord. 18, 5-16-1972)
3-1-4: USE OF CONTAINERS; PREPARATION AND PLACEMENT FOR PICK UP:
All accumulations of garbage must be put in the containers as provided herein.
Tree limbs under four inches (4") in diameter and in three foot (3') lengths,
tied in bundles, leaves, grass, or other refuse in waterproof bags, magazines
tied securely and weighing less than twenty (20) pounds, and Christmas trees up
to six feet (6') in length shall be placed on pick up day next to the alley or
at the curb line. (Ord. 18, 5-16-1972)
3-1-5: COLLECTION OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE:
All garbage and refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and
disposed of under supervision of the city council. The council shall have the
authority to make rules and regulations concerning days of collection, type and
location of waste containers and such other matters as deemed necessary;
provided, that such are not contrary to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
18, 5-16-1972)
3-1-6: NOTICE TO COMMENCE OR DISCONTINUE SERVICE:
It shall be the responsibility of every resident to notify the city at least
one week in advance of starting or discontinuing service. (Ord. 18, 5-16-1972)
3-1-7: FEES FOR COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL; BILLS FOR SERVICE; DELINQUENCIES:
   A.   Composition Of Fees; Bills; Delinquencies: The fees for collection and
disposal of garbage and refuse for all residential users shall be as determined
by contract with the city, plus a reasonable amount for administrative expense.
The city shall compute the amount due the city for garbage and refuse
collection and render a statement thereof to each residential user. All amounts
due hereunder shall be payable at the office of the city clerk-treasurer on the
tenth of the month in which the statement is presented. A penalty of ten
percent (10%) shall be added to all bills not paid by the date fixed for final
payment, and collection may be stopped without notice. (Ord. 18, 5-16-1972)
   B.   Fees Established: Garbage and refuse collection fees shall be
established by resolution of the city council. (2005 Code)
3-1-8: MAINTENANCE OF SANITARY CONDITIONS:
Persons accumulating garbage or refuse shall comply with the following
requirements:
   A.   Unlawful Disposal: No person shall place any garbage or refuse in any
street, alley or other public place, or upon any private property, whether
owned by such person or not, unless it be in proper containers for collection
or under express approval granted by the council; nor shall any person throw or
deposit any refuse in any stream or other body of water.
   B.   Scattering Of Garbage And Refuse: No person shall cast, place, sweep or
deposit any garbage or refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or
deposited by the elements off his property within the city.
   C.   Burning Or Burying Garbage And Refuse:
      1.   No person shall bury or burn any garbage or refuse in the city
except in accordance with regulations established by the state pollution
control agency. (Ord. 18, 5-16-1972; amd. 2005 Code)
      2.   All burning within the city limits requires a permit. The permit can
be obtained from the Sabin-Elmwood fire department. All stipulations on said
permit will be adhered to, or the homeowner will be assessed for a fire call.
(Ord., 8-2002)
   D.   Placement Of Containers: Garbage and refuse containers shall be placed
on the day of collection at ground level on the property and adjacent to the
alley or street. They must be removed no later than eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
on the day of collection. (Ord. 18, 5-16-1972)
   E.   Contagious Disease Refuse: The removal of wearing apparel, bedding or
other refuse from homes or places where highly infectious or contagious
diseases have prevailed shall be performed under the supervision and direction
of the county health officer. Such refuse shall not be placed in containers for
regular collections. (Ord. 18, 5-16-1972; amd. 2005 Code)
   F.   Inflammable Or Explosive Refuse: Highly inflammable or explosive
materials shall not be placed in containers for regular collection but shall be
disposed of as directed by the fire chief at the expense of the owner or
possessor thereof. (Ord. 18, 5-16-1972)
CHAPTER 2
NOISE CONTROL
SECTION:
3-2-1: Short Title
3-2-2: Noisy Conditions
3-2-3: Responsibility Of Parent Or Guardian
3-2-4: Penalties
3-2-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the SABIN NOISE CONTROL ORDINANCE. (Ord. 204,
11-12-1996)
3-2-2: NOISY CONDITIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue to cause to be made or
continue any loud, unnecessary, prolonged or unusual noise which disturbs the
peace of others, including, but not limited to, the following:
   A.   Parties: Any parties or gatherings of people giving rise to noise and
disturbing the peace, quiet or repose of another person within the city.
   B.   Radios, Televisions, Electrical Equipment: Loud noises from radios,
etc., and includes persons owning, operating or having charge of any building
or premises, or any part thereof, which cause or allow any loud, excessive or
unusual noise in the operation or use of any radio, television, phonograph or
other mechanical or electrical sound making or reproducing device, instrument
or machine, which loud, excessive or unusual noise shall disturb the comfort,
quiet or repose of any person. (Ord. 204, 11-12-1996)
   C.   Use Of Amplifiers: Such use includes the operation of such device in
any public street or place, or from any aircraft, or in front of or outside of
any building, place or premises, or in or through any window, doorway or
opening of such building, place or premises, abutting on or adjacent to any
public street or place, and the use of any device, apparatus or instrument for
the amplification of the human voice or any sound or noise or other sound
making or sound reproducing device without a permit granted by the city. (Ord.
204, 11-12-1996; amd. 2005 Code)
3-2-3: RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENT OR GUARDIAN:
It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly permit
a minor to violate any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 204, 11-12-1996)
3-2-4: PENALTIES:
   A.   Upon a finding of guilty for violation of this chapter, there shall be
imposed a penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   B.   Upon a finding that a juvenile has violated this chapter, there shall
be imposed penalties in accordance with Minnesota statutes section 260B.235.
(Ord. 204, 11-12-1996; amd. 2005 Code)
CHAPTER 3
NUISANCES
SECTION:
3-3-1: Policy And Purpose
3-3-2: Public Nuisances Enumerated
3-3-3: Hearing Examiner
3-3-4: Inspections And Investigations
3-3-5: Abatement Procedures
3-3-6: Interference With Enforcement Officials Prohibited
3-3-7: Violation; Penalty
3-3-1: POLICY AND PURPOSE:
The city council has determined that health, safety, good order, general
welfare, and convenience of the public is threatened by certain public
nuisances on property within the city limits. It is declared to be the
intention of the council to abate these nuisances, and this chapter is enacted
for that purpose. (2005 Code)
3-3-2: PUBLIC NUISANCES ENUMERATED:
Whoever, by his act or failure to perform a legal duty, intentionally does any
of the following, is guilty of maintaining a public nuisance and may be ordered
to abate the nuisance as provided herein, charged with a misdemeanor, or both:
   A.   Dangerous Conditions: Maintains or permits a condition which
unreasonably annoys, injures, or endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort
or repose of any considerable number of members of the public.
   B.   Obstructing Public Ways And Waterways: Interferes with, obstructs, or
renders dangerous for passage any public highway or right of way, or waters
used by the public.
   C.   Interference With Health Officials: Wilfully opposes or obstructs a
health officer or physician charged with the enforcement of the health laws in
performing any legal duties.
   D.   Deposits Of Used Tires: Deposits or allows depositing of used or waste
tires upon public or private property which is not an approved tire recycling,
processing or receiving site by the city.
   E.   Other Conditions: Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by
state law or city ordinance to be a public nuisance. (2005 Code)
3-3-3: HEARING EXAMINER:
   A.   Position Created: The position of hearing examiner is hereby created.
The city council may contract with third parties for the furnishing of all
services of the hearing examiner as contained in this chapter and set the rate
of compensation therefor.
   B.   Duties: The hearing examiner shall have the following duties:
      1.   Set dates and hear all contested cases following appeals or orders
of the enforcement officer.
      2.   Take testimony from all interested parties.
      3.   Make a complete record of all proceedings.
      4.   Affirm, repeal or modify the order of the enforcement officer and
prepare written findings of fact. (2005 Code)
3-3-4: INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS:
   A.   Periodic Inspections; Investigations: The enforcement officer shall
cause to be inspected all public and private places within the city which might
contain a public nuisance as defined in this code as often as practicable to
determine whether any such conditions exist. The enforcement officer shall also
investigate all reports of public nuisances located within the city.
   B.   Entry Powers: The enforcement officer may enter upon all public and
private places at any reasonable time for the purpose of inspecting those
places for public nuisances. (2005 Code)
3-3-5: ABATEMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Abatement Required: Upon a determination by the enforcement officer
that a public nuisance exists on any public or private property within the
city, the enforcement officer shall order the public nuisance to be abated in a
manner consistent with the city ordinances and state law.
   B.   Notice To Abate: Whenever the enforcement officer finds with reasonable
certainty that a public nuisance exists on any public or private property in
the city, he shall notify the affected property owner by personal service or by
certified mail that the nuisance must be abated within a reasonable time, not
less than twenty (20) days from the date of service of the notice. Service by
certified mail shall be deemed complete upon mailing.
      1.   The order shall state with specificity the nature of the violations
and the requirements for compliance.
      2.   The order shall also state that the property owner may, within
twenty (20) days of the date of the order, request a hearing before the hearing
examiner and shall set out the procedure by which that hearing may be
requested.
      3.   The order shall also state that failure to abate the nuisance or
request a hearing within the applicable time periods will result in summary
abatement procedures, and that the cost of abatement will be assessed against
the subject property.
   C.   Abatement By City: Upon expiration of the time required by the notice,
the enforcement officer may abate the nuisance unless a request for a hearing
has been timely filed.
   D.   Grievances; Hearing; Decisions:
      1.   Any property owner who feels aggrieved by an order of the
enforcement officer issued pursuant to this chapter may request a hearing
before the hearing examiner. Such request shall be filed in writing with the
office of the city clerk-treasurer within twenty (20) days after service of the
notice by the enforcement officer.
      2.   The city clerk-treasurer shall notify the hearing examiner who shall
notify the property owner of the date, time and place of the hearing.
      3.   The hearing shall be conducted no more than ten (10) days after the
hearing examiner received notice of the request, unless a later date is
mutually agreed to by the hearing examiner, the property owner and the city.
      4.   Both the property owner and the city may appear at the hearing with
counsel and may call such witnesses and present such evidence as is determined
by the hearing examiner to be relevant.
      5.   Within ten (10) days after such hearing, the hearing examiner shall
affirm, repeal or modify the order of the enforcement officer. The hearing
examiner's order shall be accompanied by written findings of fact.
   E.   Appeals:
      1.   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the hearing examiner may
appeal that decision to the city council by filing notice of such appeal with
the office of the city clerk-treasurer.
      2.   At its next available regular meeting, following the filing of a
notice of appeal, the council shall review the decision and findings of fact of
the hearing examiner and shall affirm, repeal or modify that decision.
   F.   Stay Of Proceedings: The city shall take no action to abate any
nuisance while the matter is pending before the hearing examiner or the city
council.
   G.   Costs:
      1.   Records Of Costs: The enforcement officer shall keep a record of the
costs of abatements done under this chapter and shall report monthly to the
city clerk-treasurer all work done for which assessments are to be made,
stating and certifying the description of the land, lots or parcels involved
and the amount assessable to each.
      2.   Unpaid Costs: On or before September 1 of each year, the city clerk-
treasurer shall list the total unpaid charges for each abatement against each
separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this chapter. The
council may then spread the charges or any portion thereof against the property
involved as a special assessment under pertinent statutes, for certification to
the county auditor and collection the following year along with current taxes.
Such assessment shall be payable in no more than ten (10) equal annual
installments, pursuant to Minnesota statutes section 429.061, subdivision 2.
(2005 Code)
3-3-6: INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS PROHIBITED:
No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with the enforcement officer while
he is engaged in the performance of duties set forth in this chapter. (2005
Code)
3-3-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (2005 Code)
CHAPTER 4
OUTDOOR FIRE BOILERS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Purpose
3-4-2: Applicability
3-4-3: Definitions
3-4-4: Permit Required
3-4-5: Other Requirements Upon The Effective Date Hereof
3-4-6: Liability
3-4-7: Penalty
3-4-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is intended to promote the public health, safety and welfare and
to safeguard the health, comfort, living conditions, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the city of Sabin by regulating the air pollution and fire hazards
of outdoor fire boilers. (Ord. 09/16/08-01, 9-16-2008)
3-4-2: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter applies to all outdoor fire boilers within the city of Sabin.
   A.   This chapter does not apply to grilling or cooking food using charcoal,
wood, propane or natural gas in cooking or grilling appliances.
   B.   This chapter does not apply to burning for the purpose of generating
heat in a stove, furnace, fireplace or other heating device within a building
used for human or animal habitation.
   C.   This chapter does not apply to the use of propane, acetylene, natural
gas, gasoline or kerosene in a device intended for heating, construction or
maintenance activities.
   D.   This chapter does not apply to campfires; a small outdoor fire intended
for recreation or cooking but not including a fire intended for disposal of
waste wood or refuse. (Ord. 09/16/08-01, 9-16-2008)
3-4-3: DEFINITIONS:
EXTERNAL SOLID FUEL FIRED HEATING DEVICE: A device designed for external solid
fuel combustion so that usable heat is derived for the interior of a building
and includes solid fuel fired stove, solid fuel fired cooking stoves, and
combination fuel furnaces or boiler which burn solid fuel. Solid fuel fired
heating devices do not include natural gas fired fireplace logs or wood burning
fireplaces or wood stoves in the interior of a dwelling.
PERSON: An individual, partnership, corporation, company or other association.
REFUSE OR GARBAGE: Any waste material except trees, logs, brush, stumps,
leaves, grass clippings, and other vegetative matter. This would include, but
not be limited to, food wastes, food wraps, packaging, newsprint, cardboard or
any paper or paper product with ink or dye, animal carcasses, paint or painted
materials, furniture, composite shingles, construction or demolition debris or
other household or business wastes; asphalt and products containing asphalt;
treated or painted wood including, but not limited to, plywood, composite wood
products or other wood products that are painted, varnished or treated with
preservatives; any plastic material including, but not limited to, nylon, PVC,
ABS, polystyrene or urethane foam and synthetic fabrics, plastic films and
plastic containers; rubber including tires and synthetic rubberlike products.
STACKS OR CHIMNEYS: Any vertical structure incorporated into a building and
enclosing a flue or flues that carry off smoke or exhaust from a solid fuel
fired heating device, especially the part of such a structure extending above a
roof. (Ord. 09/16/08-01, 9-16-2008)
3-4-4: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   The city of Sabin requires any person to obtain a building permit for
any external solid fuel fired heating device or external storage unit that is
sold, purchased or installed after this chapter becomes effective.
   B.   Installation should be made and inspected by a reputable contractor who
is knowledgeable about the type of system being installed. (Ord. 09/16/08-01,
9-16-2008)
3-4-5: OTHER REQUIREMENTS UPON THE EFFECTIVE DATE HEREOF:
   A.   All external solid fuel fired heating devices, used, installed or
purchased within the city limits of Sabin, Minnesota, are required to meet
emission standards currently required by the environmental protection agency
(EPA) and Underwriters Laboratories (UL) listing. No person shall use an
external solid fuel fired heating device in violation of this subsection.
   B.   All outdoor external solid fuel fired heating devices and storage units
are subject to public nuisance as described in ordinance 60.
   C.   Any dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders, in
unreasonable quantities, or any use of an external solid fuel fired heating
device to burn solid fuels other than those solid fuels for which the external
solid fuel fired heating device was designed, is declared a public nuisance.
   D.   The outdoor external solid fuel fired heating devices shall not be
located less than fifty feet (50') from any combustible or structures.
Clearance may be reduced to twenty feet (20') provided that the unit is
enclosed in a noncombustible building (steel or concrete). The outdoor external
solid fuel fired heating device shall be located at least twenty five feet
(25') from any property line unit. Persons should check with their individual
insurance carrier for any required limits that do not comply with this
subsection and inform the city clerk's office of individual policy
requirements.
   E.   All stacks or chimneys must be so constructed to withstand high winds
or other related elements and according to the specifications of the
manufacturer of the external solid fuel fired heating device. The stack height
shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') (maximum 40 feet) above ground level,
but shall also extend two feet (2') higher than the height of the roofs of
residents within one hundred feet (100'). All stacks or chimneys must be of
masonry or insulated metal with a minimum six inch (6") flue. A factory built
or masonry chimney with a spark arrester screen is also required. No person
shall use an external solid fuel fired heating device in violation of this
subsection.
   F.   Only fuels designed for burning in an external solid fuel fired heating
device may be burned. No garbage or refuse may be burned in an external solid
fuel fired heating device. No person shall use an external solid fuel fired
heating device in violation of this subsection.
   G.   Ashes removed from a wood heating appliance may contain hot (live)
embers which remain live for days. Ashes must be placed in a metal container
equipped with a lid or cover.
   H.   Wood/fuel must be stored at least forty eight inches (48") away from
the external solid fuel fired heating device. The areas surrounding said unit
must be kept clear of combustibles or wood chips, bark and debris.
   I.   No person may use an external solid fuel fired heating device in the
city of Sabin during the months of May, June, July, August, September and
October. (Ord. 09/16/08-01, 9-16-2008)
3-4-6: LIABILITY:
A person utilizing or maintaining an outdoor fire boiler shall be responsible
for all fire suppression costs and any other liability resulting from damage
caused by the fire. (Ord. 09/16/08-01, 9-16-2008)
3-4-7: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of violating a provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished by fine of at least one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) per occurrence plus the costs of prosecution in any case. (Ord. 09/
16/08-01, 9-16-2008)
TITLE 4
POLICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
4-1-1: Department Established; Composition
4-1-2: Qualifications Of Members
4-1-3: Elections And Appointments; Removals, Resignations And Loss Of
Membership
4-1-4: Organization
4-1-5: Duties Of Chief
4-1-6: Assistant Chief
4-1-7: Command At Fires
4-1-8: Practice Drills
4-1-9: Equipment
4-1-10: Charges For Fire Calls Within City
4-1-11: Records Kept
4-1-12: False Alarms, Interference With Department Prohibited
4-1-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED; COMPOSITION:
There is hereby established in the city a volunteer fire department consisting
of a chief, assistant chief, secretary/treasurer, training officer, and safety
officer, but not less than fifteen (15) nor more than twenty four (24)
firefighters. (Ord., 4-27-1993)
4-1-2: QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS:
The chief, assistant chief and firefighters shall not be less than twenty one
(21) years of age, and they must be physically able to perform all the duties
of a firefighter. All firefighters will have eighteen (18) months to achieve
the minimum basic firefighting skill requirements determined by the fire
department officers. (Ord., 4-27-1993)
4-1-3: ELECTIONS AND APPOINTMENTS; REMOVALS, RESIGNATIONS AND LOSS OF
MEMBERSHIP:
   A.   Election Of Chief And Assistant Chief: The chief of the fire department
shall be elected in odd numbered years. The assistant chief of the fire
department shall be elected in even numbered years. Each shall hold office for
two (2) years, and until his successor has been duly elected; except, that he
may be removed by the council for cause and after a public hearing.
   B.   Appointment And Removal Of Firefighters: Firefighters shall be
appointed by the members of the department subject to confirmation by the city
council. Firefighters may be removed by the city council for cause and after a
public hearing.
   C.   Resignations: All resignations from the department shall be presented
to the membership at a regular meeting.
   D.   Loss Of Membership:
      1.   Any member of the department moving from the fire protection area
shall forfeit membership in the fire department.
      2.   Firefighters absent from a combination of three (3) monthly meetings
or practice drills annually, unless excused by the chief, shall forfeit
membership in the department. (Ord., 4-27-1993)
4-1-4: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Bylaws: The volunteer fire department membership is hereby authorized
and required to adopt a code of bylaws for the management and government of the
department, which code of bylaws shall not become effective until presented to
and approved by the membership of the fire department and the city council.
   B.   Firefighters' Relief Association: The members and officers of the
volunteer fire department may organize themselves into a firefighters' relief
association. (Ord., 4-27-1993)
4-1-5: DUTIES OF CHIEF:
The chief:
   A.   Shall have control over all firefighting apparatus and shall be
responsible for its care and condition;
   B.   Shall make a report to the city council at its regular monthly meeting
as to the condition of the equipment and needs of the fire department;
   C.   Shall report on recommendations for each suspension of a member of the
fire department at the next regular meeting of the city council;
   D.   Shall be responsible for the proper training and discipline of the
members of the fire department; and
   E.   May suspend any member of the fire department for refusal or neglect to
obey orders pending final action by the council on his discharge or retention.
(Ord., 4-27-1993)
4-1-6: ASSISTANT CHIEF:
In the absence or the disability of the chief, the assistant chief shall
perform all the functions and exercise all the authority of the chief. (Ord.,
4-27-1993)
4-1-7: COMMAND AT FIRES:
The chief and his assistants are officers in command at any fire and are hereby
vested with full and complete police authority at any fire. They are hereby
authorized and directed to require and secure the removal of all obstructions
in front of and around fire hydrants and, for that purpose, are hereby
authorized to call upon the head of any municipal department for aid in
securing the removal of such objects. (Ord., 4-27-1993)
4-1-8: PRACTICE DRILLS:
It shall be the duty of the officers of the fire department, when the weather
permits, to hold a monthly practice drill of at least one hour's duration and
to give the firefighters instructions in approved methods of firefighting and
fire prevention. (Ord., 4-27-1993)
4-1-9: EQUIPMENT:
All budget requirements must be submitted to the city council in August of the
current year and approved at the December city council meeting. Requisitions
for additional equipment are to be submitted to the city council for approval
before purchasing the same. Emergency repairs are hereby authorized in the
event that if any fire apparatus shall become so disabled that immediate
repairs are necessary, these repairs shall be authorized by the chief of the
department. (Ord., 4-27-1993; amd. 2005 Code)
4-1-10: CHARGES FOR FIRE CALLS WITHIN CITY:
The Sabin area fire district is hereby authorized and empowered to bill the
appropriate entity, be it an individual, corporation or otherwise, for
responding to fire calls within the city. The amount of said bill shall be in
accordance with the schedule of charges established by the Sabin area fire
district from time to time. (Ord. 1994-1, 8-9-1994)
4-1-11: RECORDS KEPT:
The department shall keep in convenient form a complete record of all fires.
Such records shall include the time of the alarm, location of the fire, cause
of the fire (if known), type of structure, name of owner and tenant, purpose
for which occupied, value of building and contents, members responding to the
alarm, and such information as may be required from time to time by the council
or the state insurance department. (Ord., 4-27-1993)
4-1-12: FALSE ALARMS, INTERFERENCE WITH DEPARTMENT PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to give or make, or cause to be given or
made, an alarm of fire without probable cause, or to neglect or refuse to obey
any order of the chief at a fire, or to interfere with the fire department in
its discharge of duties. (Ord., 4-27-1993)
CHAPTER 2
VOLUNTEER EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE (EMS) - MOBILE HEALTH SERVICE (MHS)
SECTION:
4-2-1: EMS-MHS Established
4-2-2: Qualifications Of Members; Training
4-2-3: Officers; Appointments; Removals; Resignations; Loss Of Membership
4-2-4: Organization
4-2-5: Duties Of Officers
4-2-6: Command At Scene
4-2-7: In-Service
4-2-8: Equipment
4-2-9: Service To Other Areas; Joint Powers Agreement
4-2-10: Records Kept
4-2-1: EMS-MHS ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a first responder "Volunteer Emergency Medical
Service - Mobile Health Service" (to be referred to in this chapter as "EMS-
MHS") to service the city. There shall be not less than ten (10) volunteer
members of the EMS-MHS. (Ord. 210A, 6-1999)
4-2-2: QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS; TRAINING:
All EMS-MHS members shall be of legal age and shall have, at a minimum, current
"certification for first responders" issued by the state EMRSB. All members of
the EMS-MHS are required to have a valid Minnesota driver's license which the
EMS-MHS officers shall verify annually. Member payment of training will be made
by the city after successful completion of class and qualifying grants are
received. (Ord. 210A, 6-1999)
4-2-3: OFFICERS; APPOINTMENTS; REMOVALS; RESIGNATIONS; LOSS OF MEMBERSHIP:
   A.   Officers; Appointments; Vacancies: The officers of the EMS-MHS shall
consist of a president, vice president, secretary- treasurer, and training
officer. The appointment of EMS-MHS officers will be made annually by the city
council after consideration of an advisory vote of the EMS-MHS members. If a
vacancy occurs in the office of the president during the president's term, the
vice president shall serve as EMS-MHS president until the city council appoints
a president. All EMS-MHS officers shall serve at the discretion of the city
council.
   B.   Removals: Any EMS-MHS officers or members may be removed by the city
council with or without cause at any time, although the city council will
consult with the EMS-MHS before removal of any officers or members of the EMS-
MHS, but the council decision is final.
   C.   Resignations: All officer or membership resignations for the EMS-MHS
shall be presented in writing to the membership at a regular meeting and then
to the city council.
   D.   Loss Of Membership:
      1.   If any EMS-MHS member moves his or her residence from the area to
which EMS-MHS services are then being provided by the Sabin EMS-MHS, that
member's membership in the Sabin EMS-MHS shall then terminate. (Ord. 210A, 6-
1999)
      2.   The EMS-MHS memberships of EMS-MHS members who are absent from a
combination of four (4) monthly meetings and in-service meetings annually,
unless excused by the officers, and who are not up to date on required
training, shall be terminated by the city council. (Ord. 210, 7-28-1998)
   E.   Changes To Service Area: If there are any changes to the service area
through the signing of joint powers agreements, current members of the EMS-MHS
in the affected areas shall be grandfathered in and shall retain their
volunteer status. (Ord. 210A, 6-1999)
4-2-4: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Operating Policies: The officers of the EMS-MHS are hereby authorized
and required to adopt standard operating policies (SOPs) for the management and
the government of the EMS-MHS, which SOPs shall not become effective until
presented to and approved by the members of the EMS-MHS and the city council.
   B.   EMS-MHS Relief Association: The members and officers of the EMS-MHS may
organize themselves into an EMS-MHS relief association, if available. (Ord.
210A, 6-1999)
4-2-5: DUTIES OF OFFICERS:
The EMS-MHS officers shall:
   A.   Have control over all EMS-MHS equipment and shall be responsible for
its care and condition; a report of such will be made to the city council at
each of its regular monthly meetings.
   B.   Report on recommendations for suspension of any member of the EMS-MHS
at the next regular meeting of the city council.
   C.   Be responsible for the proper training and discipline of the members of
the EMS-MHS, and may suspend any member for refusal or neglect to obey orders
pending final action by the council on the discharge or retention. (Ord. 210,
7-28-1998)
4-2-6: COMMAND AT SCENE:
The first EMS-MHS member on the scene shall be in charge until another EMS-MHS
member or officer more qualified arrives and assumes control. (Ord. 210, 7-28-
1998)
4-2-7: IN-SERVICE:
It shall be the duty of the officers of the EMS-MHS to hold monthly in-service
training sessions to meet the state requirement for members. (Ord. 210A, 6-
1999)
4-2-8: EQUIPMENT:
All budget requirements must be submitted to the city council in August of each
year for the following calendar year and be approved at the city council budget
meeting. Requests for additional equipment are to be submitted to the city
council for approval before purchasing the same. Emergency repairs or supplies
are hereby authorized in the event that if any equipment becomes so disabled
that immediate repairs or purchases are necessary. However, any such repairs
shall be first authorized by an EMS-MHS officer. (Ord. 210, 7-28-1998)
4-2-9: SERVICE TO OTHER AREAS; JOINT POWERS AGREEMENT:
Any townships which desire the services of the EMS-MHS shall enter into a joint
powers agreement with the city pursuant to Minnesota statutes section 471.59.
(Ord. 210A, 6-1999)
4-2-10: RECORDS KEPT:
The officers shall keep a complete record of all EMS-MHS calls. Such records
shall include the time of the call, response time to the call, location of the
call, type of call, members responding to the call, and such information as may
be required from time to time by the city council or the state. (Ord. 210, 7-
28-1998)
CHAPTER 3
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
4-3-1: Definitions
4-3-2: Licensing Of Dogs And Cats
4-3-3: Dogs And Cats At Large
4-3-4: Impoundment And Redemption Of Dogs And Cats
4-3-5: Pet Nuisances
4-3-6: Confinement Of Certain Pets
4-3-7: Destruction Of Certain Pets
4-3-8: Animal Pound
4-3-9: Violation; Penalty
4-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
AT LARGE: Off the premises of the owner and not under the control of an
accompanying person by leash.
BITE: To seize or cut with the teeth.
CAT: Any feline animal, male or female, whole, neutered or spayed, over six (6)
months of age.
DOG: Any canine animal, male or female, whole, neutered or spayed, over six (6)
months of age.
OWNER: Any person possessing, harboring, keeping, having an interest in or
having care, custody or control of a pet.
VICIOUS PET: Any pet that has, without provocation, attacked a human being or
other animal, or a vicious pet that, by its behavior or physical condition,
constitutes an immediate and serious physical or health threat to human beings
or animals, or any vicious pet which has previously attacked or bitten any
human being or other animal on two (2) or more reported occasions. (2005 Code)
4-3-2: LICENSING OF DOGS AND CATS:
   A.   License Required; Records Kept: No person shall keep any dog or cat
over the age of six (6) months within the city without securing an annual
license therefor from the clerk-treasurer, who shall keep a record of all
licenses issued and shall issue a metal tag for each license.
   B.   License Fees: The annual license fee shall be five dollars ($5.00) for
each neutered, spayed or desexed dog or cat or ten dollars ($10.00) for each
dog or cat which is not neutered, spayed or desexed.
   C.   Rabies Vaccination Required: All dogs must be inoculated against rabies
every two (2) years and cats every twelve (12) months. Veterinarian
certificates will be required for rabies inoculation and to prove the desexing
of animals.
   D.   License And Inoculation Tags: Animals must wear license and rabies
inoculation tags at all times. The owner shall permanently affix the tag to the
collar of the dog or cat so licensed in such a manner that the tag may be
easily seen. The owner shall see that the tag is constantly worn by the dog or
cat. (Ord. 116, 9-12-1995)
4-3-3: DOGS AND CATS AT LARGE:
No dog or cat shall be permitted to run at large within the limits of the city.
This restriction does not prohibit the appearance of any dog or cat upon the
streets or public property when the dog or cat is on a leash and is kept under
the control of the person charged with its care. A leash must not exceed six
feet (6') in length if off the owner's property. (Ord. 116, 9-12-1995)
4-3-4: IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION OF DOGS AND CATS:
   A.   Impoundment; Notice: Any dog or cat found unlicensed or running at
large contrary to the provisions of this chapter may be impounded by any law
enforcement officer or member of the city council or the council's designated
person who shall give notice of the impounding to the owner of such dog or cat
if known. If the owner is unknown, a notice shall be posted at the city hall
that if the dog or cat is not claimed within five (5) days of the posting of
the notice, it will be disposed of.
   B.   Redemption; Fees: Any dog or cat may be redeemed from the pound by the
owner within the time stated in the notice by the payment to the clerk-
treasurer of the license fee for the current year, if unpaid, together with an
impounding fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) and a charge for all costs
incurred by the city in connection with impounding the dog or cat and caring
for it until redemption. The twenty five dollar ($25.00) fine shall double for
a second violation within a calendar year and each subsequent violation within
a calendar year shall double the previous fine. (Ord. 116, 9-12-1995)
   C.   Disposition Of Unclaimed Dogs Or Cats: Any dog or cat which is not
redeemed within the time specified in subsection A of this section may be sold
for not less than the amount provided in subsection B of this section to anyone
desiring to purchase the dog or cat if it is not requested by a licensed
education or scientific institution under Minnesota statutes section 35.71. All
sums received in addition to the fees fixed by subsection B of this section
shall be paid to the owner if he makes a claim within one year of the sale and
furnishes satisfactory proof of ownership. Any dog or cat which is not claimed
by the owner or sold shall be painlessly destroyed and buried at the owner's
expense. (Ord. 116, 9-12-1995; amd. 2005 Code)
4-3-5: PET NUISANCES:
The owner or custodian of any pet shall prevent the pet from committing in the
city any act which constitutes a nuisance. It is a nuisance for any animal to
habitually or frequently bark or cry at night, to frequent school grounds or
parks, to chase vehicles, to molest or annoy any person away from the property
of his owner or custodian, or to damage, defile or destroy public or private
property. Failure of the owner or custodian of a pet to prevent the pet from
committing such a nuisance is a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 116, 9-12-
1995)
4-3-6: CONFINEMENT OF CERTAIN PETS:
Any pet which bites a person shall be quarantined for such time as may be
directed by the mayor or the city council. During the quarantine, the animal
shall be securely confined and kept from contact with any other animal or any
person. At the discretion of the mayor or the city council, the quarantine may
be on the premises of the owner; however, if the mayor or the city council
requires other confinement, the owner shall surrender the animal for the
quarantine period to an animal shelter or shall, at his own expense, place it
in a veterinary hospital. (Ord. 116, 9-12-1995; amd. 2005 Code)
4-3-7: DESTRUCTION OF CERTAIN PETS:
   A.   Upon sworn complaint to the district court that any one of the
following exists:
      1.   That any animal at any time has destroyed property or habitually
trespasses in a damaging manner on the property of persons other than the
owner;
      2.   That any pet at any time has attacked or bitten a person outside the
owner's or custodian's premises;
      3.   That any pet is vicious or shows vicious habits or molests
pedestrians or interferes with vehicles on the public streets; or
      4.   That any pet is a public nuisance as heretofore defined; the judge
shall issue a summons directed to the owner of the pet commanding him to appear
before the court to show cause why the pet should not be seized by any law
enforcement officer or other person designated by the mayor or the city council
or otherwise disposed of in the manner authorized in this section. Such a
summons shall be returnable not less than two (2) nor more than six (6) days
from the date thereof and shall be served at least two (2) days before the time
of the scheduled appearance.
   B.   Upon such hearing and finding the facts true as complained of, the
court may either order the pet destroyed or order the owner or custodian to
remove it from the city, or may order the owner or custodian to keep it
confined to a designated place. If the owner or custodian violates such order,
any police officer may impound the pet described in such order.
   C.   Costs of the proceedings specified by this section shall be assessed
against the owner or custodian of the pet, if the facts in the complaint are
found to be true; or against the complainant, if the facts are found to be
untrue. (Ord. 116, 9-12-1995)
4-3-8: ANIMAL POUND:
The pound shall be either: a) provided by the city within the city limits; or
b) contracted for by the city with any other facility capable of providing
pound services. (Ord. 116, 9-12-1995)
4-3-9: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating the terms of this chapter is guilty of a petty misdemeanor
and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than three hundred
dollars ($300.00). (Ord. 116, 9-12-1995; amd. 2005 Code)
CHAPTER 4
MINORS
SECTION:
4-4-1: Curfew
4-4-2: Alcoholic Beverages
4-4-1: CURFEW:
   A.   Definitions:
   CURFEW HOURS: Eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. until six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
every day of the week.
   EMERGENCY: An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state
that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a
fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
   ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit
to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of
amusement or entertainment.
   GUARDIAN: 1. Any person to whom custody of a minor has been given by a court
order; or
      2.   Any public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court.
   MINOR: Any person under sixteen (16) years of age.
   OPERATOR: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation
operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
   PARENT: A person who is the natural or adoptive parent of a person. As used
herein, "parent" shall also include a court appointed guardian or other person
sixteen (16) years of age or older, authorized by the parent, by a court order,
or by the court appointed guardian to have the care and custody of a person.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, and shops.
   REMAIN: 1. To linger or stay; or
      2.   To fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police
officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises.
   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY: Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
   B.   Offenses:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any minor to remain in any public place or
on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian of a minor to
knowingly permit the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of
any establishment within the city during curfew hours.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, or any employee of an
establishment to knowingly allow a minor to remain upon the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours.
   C.   Defenses: It is a defense to prosecution under subsection B of this
section that:
      1.   The minor was accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian, or
accompanied by another adult approved by the parents;
      2.   The minor was on an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or
guardian, without any detour or stop;
      3.   The minor was engaged in lawful employment or volunteer work at a
recognized charity institution or was going to or coming from such activity
without detour or stop;
      4.   The minor was involved in an emergency;
      5.   The minor was on the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or
abutting the residence of a next door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain
to the sheriff's department about the minor's presence;
      6.   The minor was attending an official school, religious, or other
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a governmental
agency, a civic organization, or similar entity that takes responsibility for
the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an
official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults
and sponsored by a governmental organization, a civic organization or another
similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;
      7.   The minor was married or had been married; or
      8.   The minor was present on the premises of an establishment during
curfew hours, was told to leave and refused to leave and that the owner,
operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the sheriff's
department of the minor's presence. This is a defense for the owner or operator
of the establishment, not the minor.
   D.   Enforcement: Before taking any enforcement action, a deputy shall ask
the apparent offender's age and reason for being in a public place. The deputy
shall issue a citation or make an arrest only in situations where the deputy
has probable cause to believe that an offense has occurred and that, based on
any response and other circumstances, no defense in subsection C of this
section is present.
   E.   Penalties:
      1.   A person who violates a provision of this section is guilty of a
separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is
committed, continued or permitted. (Ord. 201, 11-12-1996)
      2.   Any person who is convicted of a violation of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
      3.   Any juvenile who is convicted of a violation of this section will
receive a penalty in accordance with Minnesota statutes section 260B.235. (Ord.
201, 11-12-1996; amd. 2005 Code)
4-4-2: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 1 :
   A.   Short Title: This section shall be known as the CITY OF SABIN ALCOHOL
CONTROL ORDINANCE.
   B.   Prohibited Use Or Possession:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21)
to purchase, obtain, possess or consume any alcoholic beverage in the city.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to provide or give a person
under the age of twenty one (21) any alcoholic beverage in the city.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any parent or legal guardian to knowingly
permit his or her child or a minor under his or her custody, supervision and
control to violate any provisions of this section.
      4.   It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any premises
located within the city to knowingly allow any person under the age of twenty
one (21) years to remain on such premises while in the possession of alcoholic
liquor or while consuming alcoholic liquor in violation of this section.
   C.   Responsibility Of Parent Or Guardian Regarding Driving: Parents or
legal guardians who know or, in the exercise of ordinary care, should know, of
a substantial probability that their minor child has consumed or will consume
alcoholic liquor, whether in violation of this section or other law, shall
restrain or prevent his or her minor child from driving, operating, or being in
physical control of a motor vehicle in the city. (Ord. 200, 11-12-1996)
   D.   Penalties:
      1.   Upon a finding of guilty for violation of this section, there shall
be imposed a penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
      2.   Upon a juvenile being found guilty for violating this section, there
shall be imposed the penalties under the Minnesota statutes section 260B.235.
(Ord. 200, 11-12-1996; amd. 2005 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsections 2-1A-10E and 2-1B-10A and B and section 2-1B-12 of
  this code.
CHAPTER 5
GANG GRAFFITI
SECTION:
4-5-1: Short Title
4-5-2: Definition
4-5-3: Graffiti Prohibitions
4-5-4: Nuisance Declared; Abatement Procedures
4-5-5: Vandalism And Graffiti Detection; Reward
4-5-6: Affirmative Defense
4-5-7: Penalties
4-5-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the CITY OF SABIN GANG GRAFFITI ORDINANCE. (Ord.
203, 11-12-1996)
4-5-2: DEFINITION:
For the proposes of this chapter, "graffiti" shall be defined as any sign,
symbol, marking, drawing, name, initial, word, diagram, sketch, picture, letter
or any other inscription or drawing applied to any surface so as to be seen by
the public including, but not limited to, the identification of a gang or gang
activity. (Ord. 203, 11-12-1996)
4-5-3: GRAFFITI PROHIBITIONS:
It is unlawful:
   A.   For any person to place graffiti upon the surface of any structure or
wall that is publicly or privately owned without the permission of the owner of
the property.
   B.   For any parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly permit a minor to
violate any provision of this chapter.
   C.   For any owner of property to place or give permission to place on any
property, real or personal, which is in public view, any graffiti which incites
violence by reference to gang or criminal activity, depicts or expresses
obscenity by referring to sexual activity or contains defamatory material about
a public or private person or which marks out gang jurisdiction for purposes of
designating territorial rights of gangs for criminal activity.
   D.   For any owner of property to fail to remove graffiti that has been
placed on the owner's property or fail to assign his obligation to remove
graffiti to the sheriff's office within three (3) days from the date of the
receipt of the written notice provided by the sheriff's office. (Ord. 203, 11-
12-1996)
4-5-4: NUISANCE DECLARED; ABATEMENT PROCEDURES:
The city hereby declares graffiti to be a nuisance, which adversely affects the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the community and reduces
property value. Such nuisance conditions are subject to abatement as provided
herein:
   A.   Owner Obligation To Remove: Upon written notification by the sheriff's
office, the owner of the property upon which graffiti has been placed shall
remove the graffiti within three (3) days from the date of the receipt of the
notice. The county sheriff's office may grant an owner an additional ten (10)
days to remove the graffiti if the owner presents sufficient evidence of one of
the following conditions:
      1.   Weather conditions make removal impossible or a substantial burden
to the owner;
      2.   Necessary chemicals for removal are not readily available;
      3.   The physical condition of the owner makes immediate removal
impossible or a substantial burden to the owner; or
      4.   Such other condition which makes immediate removal impossible or an
undue hardship to the owner.
   B.   Owner Assignment Of Obligation: The owner of the property may assign
his obligation to remove the graffiti to the sheriff's office. The assignment
must be done within three (3) days from the date of the receipt of the written
notification. The assignment must be in writing on a form provided by the
sheriff's office. The assignment will be effective only if the owner signs a
statement authorizing removal by the county and holding the county and city
harmless from any claims of suits brought for damages resulting from any
chemicals or from any actions taken by the county or its employees to remove
the graffiti.
   C.   Removal By County: The county sheriff's office shall remove graffiti
from the exterior of private property if an owner fails to remove the graffiti
or fails to assign the obligation to remove the graffiti to the sheriff's
office. (Ord. 203, 11-12-1996)
4-5-5: VANDALISM AND GRAFFITI DETECTION; REWARD:
   A.   The county does hereby offer a reward of twenty five dollars ($25.00)
to any person who does not have an affirmative duty, yet supplies information
leading to the arrest and conviction of any person for violating this chapter.
The reward shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) per incident. In the
event of multiple contributors of information, the reward amount shall be
divided by the county attorney's office in the manner it shall deem
appropriate.
   B.   Claims for rewards under this chapter shall be filed with the county
treasurer. Each claim shall:
      1.   Specifically identify the date, location and kind of property
damaged or destroyed;
      2.   Identify by name the person who was convicted; and
      3.   Identify the court and date upon which the conviction occurred.
   C.   All claims for rewards must be approved by the county attorney's office
after a thorough investigation of the claim. (Ord. 203, 11-12-1996)
4-5-6: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE:
It shall be an affirmative defense to the alleged violation of any provision of
this chapter if such activity was undertaken with the prior written consent of
the owner of the property, demonstrating that the owner was aware of the
content and method of the graffiti to be placed on the structure or wall. (Ord.
203, 11-12-1996)
4-5-7: PENALTIES:
Upon a finding of guilty for violation of this chapter, there shall be imposed
a penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Upon a finding of guilty upon a juvenile violating this
chapter, the penalty imposed shall be in accordance with Minnesota statutes
sections 206B.193 and 260C.193 or section 260B.235. In addition to any fines,
the court may require that a party: (Ord. 203, 11-12-1996; amd. 2005 Code)
   A.   Make full and complete restitution to the county and the owner of the
damaged property for expenses incurred in the removal of the graffiti and
restoration of the property to its previous condition;
   B.   Reimburse the county for any reward or reimbursements paid in
connection with the violation; and
   C.   Participate in community service, including, but not limited to, time
spent in cleaning property that has been defaced by graffiti at any location in
the county. (Ord. 203, 11-12-1996)
CHAPTER 6
OFFENSES RELATING TO DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
SECTION:
4-6-1: Use Or Possession
4-6-2: Delivery Or Manufacturing
4-6-3: Definitions
4-6-4: Drug Paraphernalia Guidelines
4-6-5: Forfeiture
4-6-1: USE OR POSSESSION:
It is unlawful for any person knowingly or intentionally to use or possess drug
paraphernalia. Any violation of this section is a petty misdemeanor. (Ord. 3-
20-12, 3-20-2012)
4-6-2: DELIVERY OR MANUFACTURING:
A person may not deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with
intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia, if that person knows or should
reasonably know that the drug paraphernalia will be used to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, enhance, convert, produce,
process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject,
ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance in violation of Minnesota statutes chapter 152. Any violation of this
section is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 3-20-12, 3-20-2012)
4-6-3: DEFINITIONS:
Drug paraphernalia shall be as defined under Minnesota statutes section 152.01,
subdivision 18. (Ord. 3-20-12, 3-20-2012)
4-6-4: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA GUIDELINES:
In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other
authority shall consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors:
   A.   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning
its use.
   B.   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or anyone in control of the
object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substance.
   C.   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation
of this chapter.
   D.   The proximity of the object to controlled substances.
   E.   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object.
   F.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of any
person in control of the object, to deliver the object to another person whom
the owner or person in control of the object knows, or should reasonably know,
intends to use the object to facilitate a violation of this chapter. The
innocence of an owner, or of any person in control of the object, as to a
direct violation of this chapter may not prevent a finding that the object is
intended or designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
   G.   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning the
object's use.
   H.   Descriptive materials accompanying the object, which explain or depict
the object's use.
   I.   National and local advertising concerning the object's use.
   J.   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
   K.   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate
supplier of the like or related items to the community, for example, a licensed
distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
   L.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object
or objects to the total sales of the business enterprise.
   M.   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community.
   N.   Expert testimony concerning the object's use.
   O.   The actual or constructive possession by the owner or by a person in
control of the object or the presence in a vehicle or structure where the
object is located of written instructions, directions, or recipes to be used,
or intended or designed to be used, in manufacturing, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, or analyzing a controlled substance. (Ord. 3-20-12, 3-20-
2012)
4-6-5: FORFEITURE:
All drug paraphernalia as defined in this chapter are subject to forfeiture
under Minnesota statutes sections 609.531 to 609.5318. All drug paraphernalia
possessed, transferred, sold, or offered for sale, in violation of this chapter
are hereby defined as contraband for purposes of Minnesota statutes section
609.5316, subdivision 1. (Ord. 3-20-12, 3-20-2012)
TITLE 5
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY; TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
SECTION:
5-1-1: Speed Limits
5-1-2: Driving Under Influence; Careless, Reckless Driving
5-1-3: Winter Parking
5-1-1: SPEED LIMITS:
   A.   Highway 52: No motor vehicle will exceed the speed limit of thirty (30)
miles per hour on Highway 52 within the limits of the city.
   B.   Other City Streets: No vehicle shall exceed the speed of twenty (20)
miles per hour on all side streets in the city limits.
   C.   Violation: Any person violating this section will be subject to arrest
and prosecuted by law. (Ord. 4, 5-13-1952)
5-1-2: DRIVING UNDER INFLUENCE; CARELESS, RECKLESS DRIVING:
No person shall operate a motor driven vehicle while under the influence of
intoxicants or in a careless or reckless manner. Any person violating this
section will be subject to arrest and prosecuted by law. (Ord. 4, 5-13-1952;
amd. 2005 Code)
5-1-3: WINTER PARKING:
   A.   Days And Hours Restricted: It shall be unlawful for any person,
company, or corporation to park any kind of vehicle or object upon any streets
of the city between the dates of November 1 and April 15, between the hours of
one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
   B.   Impoundment, Redemption And Disposition Of Vehicles: After an attempt
has been made to contact the owner of the vehicle or object, Clay County law
enforcement personnel or the mayor of the city (or in the mayor's absence, the
acting mayor) may have vehicles or objects removed from a street to a place of
safety when the vehicle or object is parked in violation of this section. Such
vehicle or object shall not be released until towing and storage fees are paid
in addition to any fine imposed for violation of this section. Prior to the
release of any vehicle or object impounded pursuant to this section, the person
seeking the release thereof shall furnish evidence of ownership sufficient to
indicate that he or she has the right to possession of the vehicle or object.
Vehicles or objects which are not redeemed within fifteen (15) days will be
considered abandoned and shall be disposed of in accordance with Minnesota
statutes sections 168B.01 through 168B.11.
   C.   Prima Facie Evidence: The presence of any motor vehicle or object on
any street when standing or parked in violation of this section is prima facie
evidence that the registered owner of the vehicle or object committed or
authorized the commission of the violation.
   D.   Violation; Penalty: A violation of this section is a petty misdemeanor
unless it is committed in a manner and under circumstances so as to endanger
any person or property, and in that event, it shall be a misdemeanor.
Punishment shall be as prescribed by the statutes of the state for a petty
misdemeanor or misdemeanor, as the case may be. (Ord. 225, 12-19-2000)
TITLE 6
WATER AND SEWER
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL WATER AND SEWER PROVISIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Use Of Water Or Sewer System Restricted; Compliance With Provisions
6-1-2: Application For Service
6-1-3: Permit To Connect; Fees And Charges
6-1-4: Building Sewers, Water Lines And Connections
6-1-5: Accounting, Billing And Collecting
6-1-1: USE OF WATER OR SEWER SYSTEM RESTRICTED; COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
No person shall make or use any water or sewer service installation connected
to the city water or sewer system except pursuant to application and permit as
provided in this chapter. No person shall make or use any such installation
contrary to the regulatory provisions of this title. (Ord. 106, 5-12-1981)
6-1-2: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE:
   A.   Application for a water or sewer service installation and for water
service shall be made to the city clerk-treasurer on forms prescribed by the
city council and furnished by the city. By his signature, the applicant shall
agree to conform to this title and to rules and regulations that may be
established by the city as conditions for the use of water.
   B.   Application for a service installation shall be made by the owner of
the property to be served or by his agent. The applicant shall, at the time of
making application, pay to the city the amount of the fees or deposit required
for the installation of the service connection as provided in this chapter.
When a water service connection has been installed, application for water
service may be made either by the owner or his agent or by the tenant or
occupant of the premises. (Ord. 106, 5-12-1981)
6-1-3: PERMIT TO CONNECT; FEES AND CHARGES:
   A.   Permit Required; Fees: No connection shall be made to the city water or
sanitary sewer system without a permit received from the city clerk-treasurer.
The fee for each such permit shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) for a water main
connection permit and fifteen dollars ($15.00) for a sewer connection permit.
These fees shall be in addition to any fees required under subsections B, C and
D of this section.
   B.   Connection Fees: When a connection requires installation of a service
line from the main to the property line, the applicant for a permit shall pay
to the city an amount not less than the cost of making the necessary
connections, taps, and installation of pipe and appurtenances to provide
service to the property and the necessary street repairs.
   C.   Certification Of Payment: No permit shall be issued to connect with any
water or sanitary sewer main unless the owner certifies to the truth of one of
the following or the payment required under subsection D of this section is
made:
      1.   That the lot or tract to be served has been assessed for the cost of
construction of the main with which the connection is made or that proceedings
for levying such assessment have been or will be commenced in due course; or
      2.   That the cost of construction of the main has been paid by the
developer or builder platting the lot or tract; or
      3.   That, if neither of the foregoing is true, a sum equal to the
portion of the cost of constructing the main which would be assessable against
the lot or parcel has been paid to the city.
   D.   Additional Connection Fee: If no such certificate can be issued, the
applicant shall pay an additional connection fee equal to the portion of the
cost of construction of the main attributable to the property upon the same
basis as any assessment previously levied against other property for the main.
The determination shall be made by the city clerk-treasurer. If no such
assessment has been levied, the assessable cost shall be determined upon the
basis of the uniform charge which may have been or will be charged for similar
connection with the main. In no event shall the connection charge made under
this subsection exceed the increase in value of the property attributable to
the main.
   E.   Notice And Hearing:
      1.   Before the city clerk-treasurer makes a final determination of the
additional connection fee under subsection D of this section, he shall submit a
written notice to the applicant stating the amount of the proposed connection
fee and the basis of its calculation. The notice shall also state that the
applicant may, within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice, demand a hearing
on the matter.
      2.   If the applicant requests a hearing within that time, a hearing
shall be held on the matter by the council at least one week after the date on
which the request is made.
      3.   If, as a result of the hearing, the council finds that the proposed
connection fee complies with the requirements of subsection D of this section,
it shall so determine. If it determines that the proposed fee is in excess of
the amount that would have been assessed had the property been assessed for the
main or in excess of the increase in market value attributable to construction
of the main, it shall make a determination of the proper amount of the fee
within the limits specified in subsection D of this section.
      4.   No connection shall be made without payment of the connection fee
determined after the hearing or determined after the expiration of ten (10)
days from receipt of the notice when there has been no request within that time
for a hearing. (Ord. 106, 5-12-1981)
6-1-4: BUILDING SEWERS, WATER LINES AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Construction And Connection Permit Application By Master Plumber Only:
A permit for construction and connection of the extension between building
sewer pipes and the sewer main or stub, herein called the "building sewer
pipes", or between the building water pipes and a water main or stub, herein
called "water service line", shall be issued only upon application by a plumber
holding a master plumber's license issued by the Minnesota state commissioner
of health.
   B.   Liability Insurance: Before undertaking the construction work
authorized by the permit, the plumber shall secure and maintain a policy of
insurance against damages to property or injury or death to persons. The policy
shall indemnify and save harmless the city and its personnel against any claim,
damage, or cause of action arising out of the work and from any expenses of
defending the same. The property damage insurance coverage and the public
liability damage for injury or death shall be in the amount of at least one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per claimant and three hundred thousand
dollars ($300,000.00) for any number of claims per occurrence. Proof of such
insurance shall be filed with the city prior to construction work, and such
policy shall provide that the city shall be notified immediately of any
termination or modification of such insurance. If the insurance coverage is
inadequate in amount, the master plumber shall indemnify and save harmless the
city and its personnel in like manner.
   C.   Apportionment Of Costs; Nonliability Of City: The owner shall bear the
costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the sewer
service line or the water service line to private property. He shall indemnify
the city for any loss or damage directly or indirectly caused by its
installation and connection. To the extent it deems necessary, the council
shall establish rules and regulations for the proper implementation of these
requirements, which shall govern the installation and connection of the sewer
service line and of the water service to private property. (Ord. 106, 5-12-
1981)
6-1-5: ACCOUNTING, BILLING AND COLLECTING:
   A.   Accounts In Name Of Owner; Liability: All accounts shall be carried in
the name of the owner of the property being served. The owner shall be liable
for water supplied to owner's property, for sewer service, garbage pick up, and
any other public utilities (utilities), whether owner is occupying the property
or not, and any charges unpaid shall be a lien upon the property.
   B.   Bills For Service: Utility charges shall be billed together. Bills
shall be mailed to the property occupants (the "customer") in advance of or
near the beginning of the month for which the service is to be provided and
shall specify all charges in accordance with the current rates of the city.
   C.   Delinquent Accounts: All charges for utilities shall be due on the
twenty fifth day of the month as stated on the bill and shall be delinquent
thereafter. An administrative charge and/or penalty will be assessed on all
delinquent accounts. The city council shall set amount of the administrative
charge and/or penalty by resolution. The city shall endeavor to collect
delinquent accounts promptly. In any case, where satisfactory arrangements for
payment have not been made, the council may, after the procedural requirements
of subsection D of this section have been complied with, discontinue service to
the delinquent customer by shutting off the water service to that customer at
the stop box. When water service to any premises has been discontinued, service
shall not be restored except upon the payment of all delinquent bills and a fee
of fifty dollars ($50.00). Any extraordinary costs, as determined by the
council in disconnecting or reconnecting any service will also be charged to
the property owner. Delinquent accounts shall be certified to the city clerk-
treasurer who shall prepare an assessment roll each year providing for
assessment of the delinquent amounts against the respective properties served.
The assessment roll shall be delivered to the council for adoption on or before
October 1 of each year for certification to the county auditor for collection
along with taxes. Such action is optional and may be subsequent to taking legal
action to collect delinquent accounts.
   D.   Discontinuance Of Service; Procedure: If an account is past due, a
notice (the "past due notice") shall be mailed to the delinquent account
customer by first class United States mail, or it may be personally served, and
shall state that payment is past due, stating the amount due and notifying the
customer that the customer has ten (10) days from the date of the notice in
which to pay the amount due in order to continue service. If the past due
amount has not been paid within ten (10) days following the date of the past
due notice, a second notice (the "cutoff notice") shall be given the delinquent
account customer. The cutoff notice shall be mailed to the delinquent account
customer by first class United States mail, or it may be personally served, and
shall state that if payment is not made within seven (7) days following the
date of the cutoff notice, the water supply to the customer's premises will be
shut off. If payment of the delinquent account is not made within the time
specified in the cutoff notice, the water supply of the delinquent customer may
be shut off. (Ord. 01-15-13/01, 1-15-2013)
CHAPTER 2
WATER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
6-2-1: Authority To Turn On Water, Tap Mains
6-2-2: Separate Connections And Accounts
6-2-3: Permitting Use By Others Restricted; Hydrant Use
6-2-4: Service Pipe Installation And Specifications
6-2-5: Rates And Charges
6-2-6: Maintenance And Repair
6-2-7: Use Of Hydrants; Interference With System
6-2-8: Cross Connection Control
6-2-9: Water Shortages
6-2-10: Interruption, Discontinuance Of Service
6-2-1: AUTHORITY TO TURN ON WATER, TAP MAINS:
No person except authorized city personnel shall turn on any water supply at
the stop box or tap any distributing main or pipe of the water supply system or
insert a stopcock or other appurtenance therein without a city permit. (Ord.
106, 5-12-1981)
6-2-2: SEPARATE CONNECTIONS AND ACCOUNTS:
No more than one customer, house or building shall be supplied from one service
connection except by special permission of the council. Whenever two (2) or
more parties are supplied from one pipe connecting with a service main, each
building or part of building separately supplied shall have a separate stop box
and shall be billed as a separate account. (Ord. 106, 5-12-1981)
6-2-3: PERMITTING USE BY OTHERS RESTRICTED; HYDRANT USE:
No person shall permit city water to be used for any purpose except upon his
own premises, except in an emergency, and then only if written permission is
first obtained from the council. Anyone wishing to obtain water from a hydrant
for construction purposes shall make application to the council for such
services 1 . (Ord. 106, 5-12-1981)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  6-2-7 of this chapter.
6-2-4: SERVICE PIPE INSTALLATION AND SPECIFICATIONS:
Every service pipe shall be laid with sufficient slack to allow not less than
one foot (1') of extra length and in such manner as to prevent rupture by
settlement. The service pipe shall be placed not less than seven feet (7')
below the final surface grade and be so arranged as to prevent rupture by
freezing. A shutoff or other stop cock with waste valve of the size and
strength required shall be placed close to the inside wall of the building and
be well protected from freezing. Copper tubing shall be used for all services
of two inches (2") or less. Joints on copper tubing shall be as few as
possible, and not more than one joint shall be used for a service up to seventy
feet (70') in length. Each joint shall be left uncovered until inspected by the
city. Every service over two inches (2") shall be cast iron or polyvinyl
chloride (PVC). Connections with the mains for domestic supply shall be at
least three-fourths inch (3/4"). (Ord. 106, 5-12-1981)
6-2-5: RATES AND CHARGES:
The service charges for water service may be established by resolution of the
city council. (Ord. 106-3, 2-13-1996; amd. 2005 Code)
6-2-6: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR:
The property owner shall be responsible for maintaining the service pipe on the
owner's side of the curb stop to the house or other structure. The owner will
also be responsible to maintain the stop box at grade or above. If he fails to
repair any leak in such service pipe within twenty four (24) hours after notice
by the city, the city may turn the water off. The water shall not then be
turned on again until the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) has been paid to the
city. When the waste of water is great or damage is likely to result from the
leak, the city shall turn the water off immediately upon the giving of notice
if repair is not commenced immediately. (Ord. 01-15-13/02, 1-15-2013)
6-2-7: USE OF HYDRANTS; INTERFERENCE WITH SYSTEM 1 :
No person other than authorized city personnel shall operate a fire hydrant or
interfere in any way with the city water system without first obtaining
authority to do so from the council. (Ord. 106, 5-12-1981)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 6-2-3 of this chapter.
6-2-8: CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL:
No water pipe of the city water supply system shall be connected with any pump,
well, or tank that is connected with any other source of water supply. When any
such connection is found, the council shall notify the owner to sever the
connection, and if this is not done immediately, the city shall turn off the
water supply forthwith. Before any new connection to the city system is
permitted, the council shall ascertain that no cross connection will exist when
the new connection is made. (Ord. 106, 5-12-1981)
6-2-9: WATER SHORTAGES:
Whenever the council determines that a shortage of water supply threatens the
city, it may, by resolution, limit the times and hours during which city water
may be used for sprinkling, irrigation, car washing, air conditioning, or other
specified uses. After publication of the resolution or two (2) days after the
mailing of the resolution to each customer, no person shall use or permit water
to be used in violation of the resolution, and any customer who does so shall
be charged ten dollars ($10.00) for each day or part of a day of violation, and
the charge shall be added to his next water bill. If the emergency requires
immediate compliance with terms of the resolution, the council may provide for
the delivery of a copy of the resolution to the premises of each customer, and
any customer who has received such notice and thereafter uses or permits water
to be used in violation of the resolution shall be subject to the charge
provided above. Continued violation shall be cause for discontinuance of water
service. (Ord. 106, 5-12-1981)
6-2-10: INTERRUPTION, DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
The city may discontinue service to any water consumer without notice for
necessary repairs or, upon notice as provided in subsection 6-1-5D of this
title, for nonpayment of charges, or for violation of rules and regulations
affecting utility service. (Ord. 106, 5-12-1981)
CHAPTER 3
SEWER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
6-3-1: Use Of Public Sewers Required
6-3-2: Separate Sewers Required; Exception
6-3-3: Service Line Installation And Specifications
6-3-4: Prohibited Discharges; Industrial Wastes
6-3-5: Discharge Of Unpolluted Waters
6-3-6: Rates And Charges
6-3-1: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
   A.   Connection To Public System Required:
      1.   When property abuts upon any public street or alley along which
water and sewer mains have been constructed, the owner of any dwelling or
commercial establishment on the property shall install suitable toilet
facilities therein and connect them with the sanitary sewer in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter within ninety (90) days after the date of
mailing or delivering official notice to do so. The notice shall be given to
the owner or occupant in writing by the city clerk-treasurer on order of the
council. (Ord. 106, 5-12-1981)
      2.   Within a period of twelve (12) months from the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this subsection A2, no cesspool, catch basin, septic
tank, privy, outhouse or other means of private sewage disposal shall be used
for the disposal of sewage. (Ord. 8, 12-15-1960)
   B.   Failure To Connect; Connection By City: Whenever any owner or occupant
fails to comply with such written notice, the council shall, by resolution,
direct that a toilet be installed and connection made with the water and sewer
system and that the cost of the installation be assessed against the property
benefited. (Ord. 106, 5-12-1981; amd. 2005 Code)
   C.   Costs Assessed: After the installation and connection have been
completed pursuant to council resolution, the clerk- treasurer shall serve a
written notice of the assessment upon the owner or his representative directing
him to pay the assessment to the clerk-treasurer within ten (10) days after the
service of the notice. If the assessment is not paid within ten (10) days, the
clerk-treasurer shall certify the amount to the county auditor for collection
in the same manner as other special assessments. The council may, by
resolution, spread the assessment over a three (3) year period. (Ord. 106, 5-
12-1981)
6-3-2: SEPARATE SEWERS REQUIRED; EXCEPTION:
A separate and independent sewer shall be provided for every building connected
to the sewer system; except, that the council may waive this requirement where
it finds that a separate sewer for a building is impractical. (Ord. 106, 5-12-
1981)
6-3-3: SERVICE LINE INSTALLATION AND SPECIFICATIONS:
Sewer service line construction shall meet the requirements of the Minnesota
plumbing code. The applicant for a sewer service line permit shall notify the
building inspector when the sewer service line and connection are ready for
inspection. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the building
inspector or his representative. No backfill shall be placed until the work has
been inspected and approved. (Ord. 106, 5-12-1981)
6-3-4: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES; INDUSTRIAL WASTES:
   A.   Prohibited Discharges: No person shall discharge or permit to be
discharged into any public sewer any of the following wastes:
      1.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature in excess of one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F). (Ord. 106, 5-12-1981)
      2.   Any water or waste having a five (5) day biochemical oxygen demand
exceeding one thousand (1,000) parts per million by weight as averaged during
any twelve (12) month period. (Ord. 106, 5-12-1981; amd. 2005 Code)
      3.   Any gasoline, benzine, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
      4.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
      5.   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, manure, grit, brick, cement, carbide, or other
matter that may interfere with the proper operation of the sewers or sewage
treatment facility.
      6.   Any water or waste having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, or personnel of the sewage works.
      7.   Any water or waste containing a toxic or poisonous substance in
sufficient quantities to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, injure or
interfere with sewage treatment, or create any hazard in the receiving waters
of the sewage treatment plant.
      8.   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance.
   B.   Interceptors: Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when
they are necessary for the proper handling of any liquid waste containing
grease in excessive amounts or any flammable waste, sand or other harmful
ingredients; but such interceptors shall not be required for private living
quarters or dwelling units. Interceptors shall be located so as to be easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection.
   C.   Control Manhole: The owner of any property served by a building sewer
carrying industrial waste shall install a suitable control manhole in the sewer
service line to facilitate observation and sampling of the waste. The manhole
shall be constructed by the owner in accordance with plans approved by the
city. The owner shall maintain the manhole so as to be safe and accessible at
all times. (Ord. 106, 5-12-1981)
6-3-5: DISCHARGE OF UNPOLLUTED WATERS:
   A.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following words and
terms shall have the meanings set out below, unless the context specifically
indicates otherwise:
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation,
municipal corporation, governmental unit, or group.
   SANITARY SEWER: A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface,
and ground water are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE: The water carried waste products from residences, public buildings,
institutions, industrial establishments, or other sources including, but not
limited to, excrement or other discharges from the bodies of human beings or
animals.
   SEWER: A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage, industrial wastes or other
waste liquids.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER: Clean water, uncontaminated by sewage, industrial wastes,
or other wastes, or any substance which renders such water unclean or noxious
or impure so as to be actually or potentially harmful or detrimental or
injurious to public health, safety or welfare; to domestic, commercial,
industrial or recreational uses; or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or
other aquatic life.
   B.   Application Of Provisions: This section pertains to all users of the
city sanitary sewer system, inside or outside the city limits.
   C.   Prohibited Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged, directly or indirectly, any storm water, ground water, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, sump pump water, waste from on site disposal systems,
footing tile water, swimming pool water or unpolluted water to any sanitary
sewer, except as expressly permitted by the city through written contract,
agreement, or permit.
   D.   Existing Users: Before April 15, 1998, any person discharging or
causing to be discharged directly or indirectly any storm water, ground water,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, sump pump water, waste from on site disposal
systems, footing tile water, swimming pool water or unpolluted water into any
sanitary sewer, except as expressly permitted by the city through written
contract, agreement, or permit, shall cease such discharge and disconnect and/
or remove the source of such discharge from the sanitary sewer. Any disconnects
or openings in any sanitary sewer shall be closed or repaired in a workmanlike
manner, as approved by the city or its designated agent after inspection.
   E.   Fees To Discharge Unpolluted Waters: The city may establish appropriate
fees for discharge of storm water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, sump pump water, waste from on site disposal systems, footing tile
water, swimming pool water, or unpolluted water into any sanitary sewer by
written contract, agreement, or permit.
   F.   Refusal Of Inspections; Surcharge: Any person refusing to allow his or
her property to be inspected by an authorized representative of the city for
connections violating this section shall, beginning April 1, 1998, be assessed
a surcharge of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per month until said property is
inspected. Said surcharge shall be assessed on the owner's water, sewer, and
garbage bill and is due and payable at the time that the water, sewer, and
garbage bill is due. The city council may waive this surcharge for cause. It is
the responsibility of each property owner to contact the office of the city
clerk-treasurer, prior to April 1, 1998, to arrange for an inspection of his or
her connections to the city's sanitary sewer system.
   G.   Noncompliance; Surcharge: Beginning on April 15, 1998, a surcharge of
fifteen dollars ($15.00) per month is hereby imposed on each property for each
month (or part thereof) the property is not in compliance with this section.
This surcharge is in addition to the other charges for sewer service provided
to the property. (Ord. 206, 11-18-1997)
   H.   Violation; Penalties: Upon discovery of a violation of this section,
the city shall issue the owner of the land from which a prohibited discharge is
or has been occurring an order to cease. The order to cease shall be served in
the manner required for the service of process under the Minnesota rules of
civil procedure. Any person violating the terms of this section for a period
continuing more than thirty (30) days following the service of the order to
cease upon that person shall, upon conviction, be subject to a penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, plus the cost of prosecution may be added. (Ord. 206, 11-
18-1997; amd. 2005 Code)
6-3-6: RATES AND CHARGES:
   A.   Established: The service charges for sewer system service may be
established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 106-3, 2-13-1996; amd.
2005 Code)
   B.   Special Cases: In the case of an industrial user contributing wastes to
the sewage disposal system in disproportionate amounts or concentrations, the
council shall make an individual study of the particular use and fix an
individual charge that is commensurate with the burden placed by the wastes
upon the city sewage system.
   C.   Required Information: The owner, occupant, or person in charge of any
premises shall supply the city with such information as it may reasonably
require relating to use of water, use of sewer, or sewer rates. Wilful failure
to provide such information, wilful falsification of such information, or
wilful failure to comply with any requirement or order issued pursuant to this
section constitutes a violation of this section. (Ord. 106, 5-12-1981)
TITLE 7
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Purpose
7-1-2: State Building Code
7-1-3: Application, Administration And Enforcement
7-1-4: Permits And Fees
7-1-5: Violations And Penalties
7-1-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter:
   A.   Provides for the application, administration and enforcement of the
Minnesota state building code by regulating the erection, construction,
enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion,
occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings and/or
structures in the city of Sabin;
   B.   Provides for the issuance of permits and collections of fees thereof;
and
   C.   Provides penalties for violation thereof. (Ord. 11-20-12, 11-20-2012,
eff. 11-20-2012)
7-1-2: STATE BUILDING CODE:
The Minnesota state building code, established pursuant to Minnesota statutes
326B is hereby adopted as the building code for the city of Sabin. The building
code is hereby incorporated in this chapter as if fully set out herein. (Ord.
11-20-12, 11-20-2012, eff. 11-20-2012)
7-1-3: APPLICATION, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The application, administration and enforcement of the building code
shall be in accordance with Minnesota rule chapter 1300. The building code
shall be enforced within the extraterritorial limits permitted by Minnesota
statutes 326B.121, subdivision 2(d), when so established by this chapter.
   B.   The code enforcement agency of the city shall be the Sabin city
council.
   C.   This building code shall be enforced by the Minnesota certified
building official designated by the city to administer the building code in
accordance with Minnesota statutes 326B.133, subdivision 1. (Ord. 11-20-12, 11-
20-2012, eff. 11-20-2012)
7-1-4: PERMITS AND FEES:
The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be authorized in
Minnesota rules, chapter 1300. Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed
by this building code in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the city.
In addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits issued for work
governed by this building code in accordance with Minnesota statutes 326B.148.
(Ord. 11-20-12, 11-20-2012, eff. 11-20-2012)
7-1-5: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
A violation of the building code is a misdemeanor (Minnesota statutes 326B.082,
subdivision 16) and Minnesota rules, chapter 1300. (Ord. 11-20-12, 11-20-2012,
eff. 11-20-2012)
CHAPTER 2
PLUMBING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Interpretation
7-2-2: Permit Requirements
7-2-3: Inspections
7-2-4: Licensing And Bonding Of Plumbers
7-2-5: Enforcement
7-2-6: Violation; Penalty
7-2-7: Effective Dates
7-2-1: INTERPRETATION:
The Minnesota plumbing code, also identified as MHD (Minnesota health
department) 120 through 135, along with appendix chapters B, C, and D, being
duly adopted by the city shall be referred to in this chapter as "the code" or
"this code". (Ord. 101)
7-2-2: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: No plumbing work shall be undertaken prior to the
approval of the proposed work and issuance of a permit by the codes
administrator or his authorized staff, except for minor maintenance. Permits
shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the job site.
   B.   Issuance To Master Plumber; Exception: Plumbing permits shall be issued
only to a master plumber, licensed under the laws of the state, except as
provided in this subsection. Anyone not so licensed may be issued a permit to
do plumbing work which complies with the provisions of this code, provided the
person is the bona fide owner of such dwelling and that the same will be
occupied by said owner, including the usual accessory buildings and quarters in
connection with such building.
   C.   Application For Permit: Applications for permits shall be made on
suitable forms provided by the county. Plans and specifications of proposed
plumbing work shall be submitted to the codes administrator when required, in a
form of clarity adequate to be checked for compliance with the provisions of
this code before a permit can be issued. If, in the course of the work, it is
found necessary to make any change from the plans and specifications on which a
permit has been issued, amended plans and specifications documenting changes
shall be submitted to the codes administrator for approval. (Ord. 101)
7-2-3: INSPECTIONS:
All inspections and tests shall be done in accordance with the provisions of
this code, procedures for which are specifically set forth in MHD 134
(Minnesota health department). It shall be the duty of the plumbing contractor
to notify the proper authority orally, by telephone, or in writing, not less
than eight (8) working hours between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and
four o'clock (4:00) P.M., before the work is to be inspected and tested. (Ord.
101)
7-2-4: LICENSING AND BONDING OF PLUMBERS:
   A.   Definitions: As per Minnesota statutes section 326.01, the following
terms are defined:
   JOURNEYMAN PLUMBER: Any person, other than a master plumber, who, as his
principal occupation, is engaged as an employee of, or otherwise working under
the direction of, a master plumber in the practical installation of plumbing.
   MASTER PLUMBER: Any person skilled in the planning, superintending, and the
practical installation of plumbing and otherwise lawfully qualified to contract
for plumbing and installations and to conduct the business of plumbing and who
is familiar with the laws, rules, and regulations governing the same.
   PLUMBER'S APPRENTICE: Any person, other than a journeyman or master plumber,
who, as his principal occupation, is engaged in working as an employee of a
master plumber under the immediate and personal supervision of either a master
or journeyman plumber in learning and assisting in the installation of
plumbing.
   B.   Licensing Requirements:
      1.   License Required:
         a.   Master Plumber: No person, firm or corporation shall engage in
the business of plumbing installations in the city, unless licensed by the
state as a master plumber, and no individual, firm, or corporation shall engage
in the business of installing, repairing, or altering plumbing unless the
plumbing work performed in the course of such business is under the direct
supervision of a licensed master plumber.
         b.   Journeyman Plumber: No person, other than a master plumber or an
individual duly classified as an apprentice, shall perform plumbing
installations or alterations (other than minor maintenance) in the city unless
licensed by the state as a journeyman plumber and who is in the employ of a
person, firm or corporation duly licensed as a master plumber in the state.
      2.   Examination And Licensing Of Plumbers: The procedures for
examinations and licensing of plumbers shall be in accordance with the state
board of health rules and regulations.
      3.   Address Of Licensee: Every person, firm or corporation licensed as a
master plumber or journeyman plumber, performing work in the city, shall notify
and maintain the current address of the business or individual in the office of
the county auditor at all times.
      4.   Use Of Licensee's Name By Another: No person, firm, or corporation
duly licensed by the state as a master or journeyman plumber shall allow his
name to be used by another person, firm or corporation for the purpose of
obtaining permits, for doing business, or for doing work under that license,
and no one is permitted to use a licensee's name for stated purposes.
   C.   Master Plumber's Bond: A person who has been issued a master plumber's
license shall execute and deposit with the county auditor a bond in the sum of
two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), such bond to be conditioned that all plumbing
work performed by the licensee or under his supervision shall be performed in
accordance with the provisions of this code and that he will pay all fines and
penalties properly imposed upon him for violation of the provisions of this
code. A master plumber's license shall not be valid unless a bond is executed
and deposited as herein provided. (Ord. 101)
7-2-5: ENFORCEMENT:
The enforcement of this chapter shall be by the department responsible for the
enforcement of the state building code unless otherwise designated by the
appointing authority. (Ord. 101)
7-2-6: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove or convert or demolish, equip,
use, occupy or maintain any buildings or structures in the city, or cause the
same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any provision of this chapter
or the codes adopted by reference in this chapter. Any person, firm or
corporation violating this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense
for each day or portion thereof during which any such violation is committed,
continued, or permitted and, upon conviction of any such violation, such
person, firm or corporation shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
three hundred dollars ($300.00) (petty misdemeanor), plus costs that may be
assessed. (Ord. 101; amd. 2005 Code)
7-2-7: EFFECTIVE DATES:
The effective date of this chapter shall be July 1, 1978, except for the
requirement for licensed master and journeyman plumbers, which will become
effective July 1, 1979. (Ord. 101)
CHAPTER 3
HEATING, VENTILATING AND AIR CONDITIONING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-3-1: Interpretation
7-3-2: Compliance With Provisions
7-3-3: Permit Requirements
7-3-4: Inspections
7-3-5: Licensing And Bonding Of HVAC Contractors
7-3-6: Enforcement
7-3-7: Violation; Penalty
7-3-8: Effective Dates
7-3-1: INTERPRETATION:
The Minnesota heating, ventilating, air conditioning and refrigeration code,
also identified as SBC (state building code) chapters 7101 through 8508, and
identified by the prefix (HVAC), being duly adopted by the city, shall be
referred to in this chapter as "this code" or "the code". (Ord. 101; amd. 2005
Code)
7-3-2: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
No person, firm, corporation or agent shall hereafter install, alter, repair or
service heating or cooling equipment within the city without conforming to the
provisions contained herein. (Ord. 101)
7-3-3: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Approval And Permit Required; Permit To Be Posted: No HVAC work shall
be undertaken prior to the approval of the proposed work and issuance of a
permit by the codes administrator or his authorized staff except for minor
routine maintenance. Permits shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the job
site.
   B.   Issuance To Master HVAC Contractor; Exception: A permit shall be issued
to a licensed master heating contractor only, except as provided in this
subsection. Any permit required by this code may be issued to any person to do
any work regulated by this code in a one- or two-family dwelling, including the
usual accessory buildings and quarters in connection with such building,
provided the person is a bona fide owner of such dwelling and that the same
will be occupied by said owner and that the said owner shall personally perform
all labor in connection therewith.
   C.   Application For Permit: Applications for permits shall be made on
suitable forms provided by the county. Plans and specifications of proposed
work shall be submitted to the codes administrator, when required, in a form of
clarity adequate to be checked for compliance with the provisions of this code
before a permit can be issued. If, in the course of the work, it is found
necessary to make any change from the plans and specifications on which a
permit has been issued, amended plans and specifications documenting changes
shall be submitted to the codes administrator for approval. (Ord. 101)
7-3-4: INSPECTIONS:
All inspections and tests shall be done in accordance with the provisions of
this code. It shall be the duty of the HVAC contractor or his agent to notify
the proper authority orally, by telephone, or in writing for the rough-in
inspection and the final inspection not less than eight (8) working hours,
between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M.,
before the work is to be inspected. (Ord. 101)
7-3-5: LICENSING AND BONDING OF HVAC CONTRACTORS:
   A.   Definitions:
   JOURNEYMAN HEATING MECHANIC: A person duly authorized by a journeyman's
license to construct, install, alter, maintain and repair heating and air
conditioning and combustion units while under the supervision of or in the
employ of a master heating contractor.
   MASTER HEATING CONTRACTOR: A person, firm, or corporation duly authorized by
a master's license to conduct the business of constructing, installing,
altering, maintaining and repairing heating, air conditioning, and combustion
units within the city. (Ord. 101)
   B.   License Required: No person, firm, or corporation shall engage in the
business of altering, soliciting, repairing, or servicing of heating or cooling
appliances without first securing a master heating installer's license from the
city permitting him to engage in such business.
   C.   Issuance To Master HVAC Contractor: All licenses relating to work upon
heating and air conditioning units shall be issued only to master heating
contractors, and any person who is employed upon such work must be at least a
journeyman heating mechanic. (Ord. 101; amd. 2005 Code)
   D.   Application For License: Any applicant for a license shall state in the
application whether it is for a master's or journeyman's license. The
application shall show the full name, general nature of license requested,
place of residence, proposed or actual place of business and name of licensee.
   E.   License Fees; Termination Of Licenses:
      1.   Master Heating License: The fee for a master heating license shall
be fixed at one hundred dollars ($100.00), and each license shall terminate on
December 31 of each year. Renewal fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per
annum.
      2.   Journeyman Heating License: The fee for a journeyman heating license
shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per annum, and each license shall terminate on
December 31 of each year.
      3.   Double Fees: A doubled license fee shall be required when the
renewal fee is received thirty (30) days after the expiration date. (Ord. 101)
   F.   Address Of Licensee: Every person, firm or corporation licensed as a
master or journeyman installer shall notify and maintain the current address of
the business or individual in the office of the county auditor at all times.
   G.   Use Of Licensee's Name By Another: No person, firm or corporation duly
licensed as a master or journeyman heating installer shall allow his name to be
used by another person, firm or corporation for the purpose of obtaining
permits, for doing business, or for doing work under that license, and no one
is permitted to use a licensee's name for such stated purposes.
   H.   Master Heating Installer's Bond: A person who has been issued a master
heating installer's license shall execute and deposit with the county auditor a
bond in the sum of at least five thousand dollars ($5,000.00); such bond to be
conditioned that all work performed by the licensee or under his supervision
shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of this code and that he
will pay all fines and penalties properly imposed upon him for violation of the
provisions of this code. A master heating installer's license shall not be
valid unless a bond is executed and deposited as herein provided. (Ord. 101;
amd. 2005 Code)
7-3-6: ENFORCEMENT:
The enforcement of this chapter shall be by the department responsible for the
enforcement of the state building code unless otherwise designated by the
appointing authority. (Ord. 101)
7-3-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove or convert or demolish, equip,
use, occupy or maintain any buildings or structures in the city, or cause the
same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any provision of this chapter
or the codes adopted by reference in this chapter. Any person, firm or
corporation violating this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense
for each day or portion thereof during which any such violation is committed,
continued, or permitted and, upon conviction of any such violation, such
person, firm or corporation shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
three hundred dollars ($300.00) (petty misdemeanor), plus costs that may be
assessed. (Ord. 101; amd. 2005 Code)
7-3-8: EFFECTIVE DATES:
The effective date of this chapter shall be July 1, 1978, except for the
requirement for licensed master and journeyman HVAC installers, which will
become effective July 1, 1979. (Ord. 101)
TITLE 8
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Definitions
8-1-2: Interpretation And Exceptions
8-1-3: Compliance With Provisions
8-1-4: Zoning Districts Established; Zoning Map; Annexations
8-1-5: Joint Use Of Open Space Prohibited
8-1-6: Yard Drainage
8-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, the terms defined in this section have the
meanings given them:
BLOCK: That property abutting on one side of a street and lying between the two
(2) nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, and railroad right of way of
unsubdivided acreage.
COURT: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building or buildings
and which is bounded on two (2) or more sides by such building or buildings,
including the open space in a house court or court apartment providing access
to the units thereof.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any occupation or profession engaged in by the occupant of a
residential dwelling unit which is clearly incidental and secondary to the
residential use of the premises and does not change the character of said
premises.
LOT: Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings,
or by a dwelling group and its accessory buildings, together with such open
spaces as are required under the provisions of this title, having not less than
the minimum area required by this title for a building site in the district in
which such is situated, and having its principal frontage on a street.
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) or more streets, or
bounded on two (2) or more adjacent sides by street lines.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT, KEY: The first lot to the rear of a corner lot, the front line of which is
a continuation of the side line of the corner lot, exclusive of the width of
any alley, and fronting on the street which intersects or intercepts the street
on which the corner lot fronts.
USE: The purpose for which land or premises or a building thereon is designed,
arranged or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
YARD: An open space, other than a court, on the same lot with a building, which
open space is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as
otherwise provided in subsection 8-1-2A of this chapter. In measuring a "yard",
as hereinafter provided, the "line of a building" means a line parallel to the
nearest lot line drawn through the point of a building or the point of a
dwelling group nearest to such lot line, exclusive of the respective
architectural features enumerated in subsection
8-1-2A of this chapter as not to be considered in measuring yard dimensions or
as being permitted to extend into any front, side or rear yard, respectively;
and the measurement shall be taken from the line of the building to the nearest
lot line; except, that if any future width line has been established from the
street on which the lot faces, the measurement shall be taken from such future
width line.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the front of the lot between the inner
side yard lines and lying between the front line of the lot and the nearest
line of the building.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between
the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the building.
YARD, SIDE: A yard between the side line of the lot and the nearest line of the
building and extending from the front line of the lot to the rear yard. (Ord.
16, 10-23-1970; amd. 2005 Code)
8-1-2: INTERPRETATION AND EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   The regulations specified in this title shall be subject to the
following interpretations and exceptions regarding use:
      1.   Nothing in this title shall be deemed to prohibit the construction
or maintenance of any stand or shelter for the sale of agricultural products
produced on the premises.
      2.   No filling station, public garage, or gasoline distributing station
shall be located within three hundred feet (300') of a school, church,
hospital, or public meeting place having a seating capacity of more than fifty
(50) persons.
   B.   Nothing contained in this title repeals or amends any ordinance
requiring a permit or license to engage in any business or occupation. (Ord.
16, 10-23-1970)
8-1-3: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
   A.   Except as provided in chapter 6 of this title, in each district, land
and structures shall be used only for purposes listed in this title as
permitted in the district.
   B.   In each district, every building hereafter erected or structurally
altered shall be provided with the yards specified, shall be on a lot of the
area and width specified, and shall not exceed the height specified in this
title for the district. (Ord. 16, 10-23-1970)
8-1-4: ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED; ZONING MAP; ANNEXATIONS:
For the purpose of this title, the city is divided into three (3) use
districts, residential, commercial and industrial, as shown on the map
entitled, "Zoning Map Of Sabin, Minnesota", which map is hereby made a part of
this title. Any land annexed to the city in the future shall be placed in the
residential district until placed in another district by action of the city
council. (Ord. 16, 10-23-1970)
8-1-5: JOINT USE OF OPEN SPACE PROHIBITED:
No open space or lot required for a building shall, during its existence, be
occupied by, or counted as open space for another building. (Ord. 16, 10-23-
1970)
8-1-6: YARD DRAINAGE:
   A.   Regulations Adopted: Section 6, "Municipal Drainage", of the rules and
regulations set forth by the Buffalo-Red River watershed district is hereby
adopted by reference. Said regulations are attached to ordinance 16-B. (Ord.
16-B, 7-18-2000; amd. 2005 Code)
   B.   Yard Grading Plan: No person shall construct or grade a yard within the
city without first submitting his plan to the city council. The city engineer
may be consulted to establish the necessary grades so as to provide adequate
drainage.
   C.   Permission To Grade Required; Regrading: If any person hereafter
constructs or grades or regrades his yard without first having obtained
permission from the city council, such person shall be obligated to regrade the
lot in accordance with the grade established by the city engineer.
   D.   Rainwater And Sump Pump Flows: No person shall divert rainwater from
his property in such a manner as to cause it to flow into an adjacent property.
Sump pump discharge water shall be directed into normal drainage flows.
   E.   Drainage Problems; Petition For Corrective Action: In residential areas
where drainage problems exist, a majority of the affected property owners may
petition the city council for corrective action. Upon receipt of said petition,
the city engineer shall make a survey and prepare a plan cost estimate and
submit it to the council. If the council determines that the plan is feasible,
it shall order the project completed and the entire cost, including engineering
and administrative costs, assessed against the properties in accordance with
Minnesota state law and the ordinances and regulations of the city. (Ord. 16-B,
7-18-2000)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
8-2-1: Enforcement Officials
8-2-2: Zoning Permit
8-2-3: Amendments
8-2-4: Violation; Penalties
8-2-1: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS:
The city council shall enforce this title through the proper legal channels.
(Ord. 16, 10-23-1970)
8-2-2: ZONING PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required; Exemptions: Hereafter, no person shall erect, alter,
wreck, or move any building or part thereof without first securing a zoning
permit therefor; except, that no permit shall be necessary for the
construction, reconstruction, or alteration of a building not used or to a
building to be used for commercial or industrial purposes where the cost of
such work does not exceed fifty dollars ($50.00).
   B.   Application For Permit: Application for a zoning permit shall be made
to the city council on blank forms to be furnished by the city. Each
application for a permit to construct or alter a building shall be accompanied
by a plan, drawn to scale, showing the dimensions of the lot to be built upon
and the size and location of the building and accessory buildings to be
erected. Applications for zoning permits shall contain such other information
as may be deemed necessary for the proper enforcement of this title. (Ord. 16,
10-23-1970; amd. Ord. 16-B, 7-18-2000)
   C.   Permit Fee: The fee for zoning permits shall be as established by the
city council. (Ord. 16, 10-23-1970; amd. Ord. 16-B, 7-18-2000; 2005 Code)
   D.   Issuance Of Permit: The city council shall issue the zoning permit only
after determining that the building plans, together with the application,
comply with the terms of this title. (Ord. 16, 10-23-1970; amd. Ord. 16-B, 7-
18-2000)
8-2-3: AMENDMENTS:
This title may be amended whenever the public necessity and convenience and the
general welfare require such amendment by following the procedure:
   A.   Initiation Of Amendment: An amendment may be initiated by the city
council, or by the verified petition of not less than fifty percent (50%) of
the property owners affected by the proposed amendment and fifty percent (50%)
of those property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed
change.
   B.   Public Hearing; Notice Requirements: Before any amendment is adopted,
the council shall hold at least one public hearing thereon after a notice of
the hearing has been published in the official newspaper at least ten (10) days
before the hearing. When an amendment involves changes in district boundaries
affecting an area of five (5) acres or less, similar notice shall be mailed at
least ten (10) days before the day of the hearing to each owner of affected
property situated wholly or partly within two hundred feet (200') of the
property to which the amendment relates. (Ord. 16, 10-23-1970)
   C.   Adoption Of Amendment: After the conclusion of the hearings, the
council may adopt the amendment or any part thereof in such form as it deems
advisable. The amendment shall not be acted upon until sixty (60) days shall
have elapsed from the date of reference of the amendment. The amendment shall
be effective only if two-thirds (2/3) of all the members of the council concur
in its passage. (Ord. 16, 10-23-1970; amd. 2005 Code)
8-2-4: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day that the violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 16, 10-23-1970; amd. 2005 Code)
ARTICLE A. BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEAL
SECTION:
8-2A-1: Council Serve As Board
8-2A-2: Powers And Duties
8-2A-3: Decision Procedure
8-2A-4: Record Of Proceedings
8-2A-1: COUNCIL SERVE AS BOARD:
The city council will act as the board of adjustment and appeal. (Ord. 16-B, 7-
18-2000)
8-2A-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The board shall have the power and duty of hearing and deciding appeals or
requests in the following cases:
   A.   Appeals: Appeals, where it is alleged that there is an error in any
order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative
officer in the enforcement of this title.
   B.   Variances: Requests for variances from the literal provisions of this
title in instances where their strict enforcement would cause undue hardship
because of circumstances unique to the individual property under consideration.
"Undue hardship", as used in connection with the granting of a variance, means
the property in question cannot be put to a reasonable use if used under
conditions allowed by the official controls, the plight of the landowner is due
to circumstances unique to the property not created by the landowner, and the
variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality.
Economic hardship alone shall not constitute an undue hardship if reasonable
uses exist for the property under this title. In granting a variance, the board
may impose conditions to ensure compliance and to protect adjacent properties.
The board may not permit as a variance any use that is not permitted under this
title for the property in the zone where the affected person's land is located.
(Ord. 16, 10-23-1970; amd. 2005 Code)
8-2A-3: DECISION PROCEDURE:
   A.   Hearing And Notice: Within sixty (60) days after filing a request for
variance or an appeal from an administrative order or determination, the board
of adjustment and appeal shall set a date for hearing thereon, and shall hear
such persons as wish to be heard, either in person or by agent or attorney.
Notice of any such hearing shall be mailed not less than ten (10) days before
the date of hearing to the person or persons who filed the appeal or request
and, in the case of a request for a variance, to each owner of property
situated wholly or partly within two hundred feet (200') of the property to
which the variance relates, insofar as the names and addresses of such owners
can be determined by the clerk-treasurer from records available to the public.
   B.   Decision: Within a reasonable time after the hearing, the board shall
make its order deciding the matter and serve a copy of such order upon the
appellant or the petitioner by mail. (Ord. 16, 10-23-1970)
   C.   Review Of Action: Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the
board of adjustment and appeal may have such decision or order reviewed by an
appropriate remedy in the district court, subject to the provisions of state
law. (Ord. 16, 10-23-1970; amd. 2005 Code)
8-2A-4: RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS:
The board of adjustment and appeal shall provide for a record of its
proceedings, which shall include the minutes of its meetings, its findings, and
the action taken on each matter heard by it, including its final order. (Ord.
16, 10-23-1970; amd. 2005 Code)
CHAPTER 3
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
8-3-1: Use Regulations
8-3-2: Building Height
8-3-3: Building Site
8-3-4: Yards
8-3-1: USE REGULATIONS:
In the residential district, unless otherwise provided in this title, no
building or land shall be used and no building shall hereafter be erected or
structurally altered except for one or more of the following uses:
Churches, libraries, museums, schools, memorial buildings, including nameplates
and bulletin boards placed in back of the prescribed setback lines.
Clubs, lodges, fraternities and sorority houses without services to the public
customarily carried on as a business.
Home occupations.
One- or two-family dwellings and their accessory buildings. Homes must be
erected on a contiguous permanent perimeter foundation of Concrete Block,
Placed Concrete or Engineered Wood with a depth of 5'-0" or greater, must be
not less than twenty six feet (26') in width and forty feet (40') in length,
not less than one thousand forty (1,040) square feet of full livable space, and
a roof slope of no less than 6/12.
When circumstances exist that otherwise prohibit the construction of a
dwelling, a Conditional Use Permit may be granted for the construction of an
alternate primary structure, such as a garage or storage building, not to be
used for commercial purposes. If granted, the city may impose conditions
related to that use, such as, but not limited to type of construction, external
appearance, size, height, number of levels, etc.
Plant nurseries or greenhouses; farms or truck gardens, but no retail stand for
the display or sale of agricultural products or any other commercial structure
shall be located thereon without a special use permit.
Public parks and playgrounds; golf courses or clubs.
The following uses, but only upon securing variance as provided in chapter 2,
article A of this title:
Automobile courts and mobile home parking.
Hospitals, clinics and other buildings used for the treatment of human
ailments.
Hotels, when located within five hundred feet (500') of a commercial or
industrial district, or when located on a lot facing on a public park
playground, school ground or other public institution, college, church or other
semipublic institution; but no business shall be conducted therein unless it is
incidental and only for guests and can be entered only from the inside of the
building.
Philanthropic and charitable institutions. (Ord. 16, 10-23-1970; amd. Ord. 16-
A, 5-18-1998; Ord. 8-18-2020; Ord. 4-20-2021)
8-3-2: BUILDING HEIGHT:
In the residential district, no building shall hereafter be erected or
structurally altered to exceed thirty five feet (35') or two and one-half (21/
2) stories in height, whichever is less. (Ord. 16, 10-23-1970; amd. 2005 Code)
8-3-3: BUILDING SITE:
In the residential district, every building designed for the housing of one or
two (2) families, together with its accessory buildings, shall be located on a
building site in one ownership having an area of not less than six thousand
(6,000) square feet. (Ord. 16, 10-23-1970)
8-3-4: YARDS:
   A.   Front Yard: Each lot in the residential district shall have a front
yard of not less than twenty five feet (25').
   B.   Side Yards: Each lot in the residential district shall have two (2)
side yards, one on each side of the building. For every dwelling hereafter
erected or structurally altered which does not exceed one and one-half (11/2)
stories, each side yard shall have a width of not less than five feet (5'). For
every dwelling which has two (2) stories, each side yard shall have a width of
not less than eight feet (8'). For every dwelling of two and one-half (21/2)
stories, each side yard shall have a width of at least ten feet (10'). The
foregoing requirements for side yards shall be subject to the following
modifications:
      1.   The width of each side yard may be reduced to ten percent (10%) of
the width of any of the following parcels, but in no case shall the width of
any such yard be less than four feet (4'):
         a.   Any parcel of an average width of less than forty feet (40'),
which parcel was under one ownership at the effective date hereof when the
owner owns no adjoining land.
         b.   Any parcel which includes not less than one entire lot as shown
on any subdivision plat recorded in the office of the register of deeds prior
to the effective date hereof.
         c.   Any parcel shown as a lot on any subdivision plat recorded in the
office of the register of deeds after approval by the city council in
accordance with law.
      2.   On a corner lot adjacent to a key lot, the side yard on the street
side of such corner lot shall have a width in addition to that hereinbefore
specified so that the total width of such side yard shall be equal to not less
than fifty percent (50%) of the front yard depth required for the lots to the
rear of such corner lot, to a maximum width required of twelve feet (12') for
such side yards; but this regulation shall not be so applied as to reduce the
buildable width after providing the required interior side yard of any such
corner lot to less than twenty feet (20').
      3.   In case a dwelling is so located on a lot that its front or rear
faces any side lot line, the dwelling shall be not less than twenty five feet
(25') from the lot line.
      4.   A church, library, museum, school, or memorial building shall have a
side yard of twenty five feet (25') on each side adjoining a dwelling or vacant
land.
   C.   Rear Yard: Each lot in the residential district shall have a rear yard
of a depth equal to twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot to a maximum
required depth of twenty five feet (25') for such yard. (Ord. 16, 10-23-1970)
CHAPTER 4
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
8-4-1: Use Regulations
8-4-2: Building Height
8-4-3: Yards
8-4-1: USE REGULATIONS:
In the commercial district, unless otherwise provided in this title, no
building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected or structurally
altered except for one or more of the following uses:
All uses permitted in the residential district (section
8-3-1 of this title), but no special use permit need be secured for any use
which is permitted in the residential district.
Apartments, flats, boarding houses and lodging houses.
Automobile stations for the sale of gasoline, oil and accessories; public
garages.
Cannabis Cultivation, Cannabis Manufacturer, Hemp Manufacturer, Whole Sale of
Cannabis and Hemp Products, and Retail Cannabis and Hemp Products are all
allowed as conditional uses.
Carpenter, furniture repairing or upholstery shops; book binding shops;
dressmaking shops; shoe repairing or dyeing shops; newspaper or job printing
establishments; electrical, tinsmithing, plumbing, water, gas or steam fitting
shops; paint or paper hanging shops.
Retail stores and shops.
Self-service laundries.
Theaters, financial institutions, telecommunications offices, messenger
offices, professional offices.
Other business uses which, in the opinion of the city council, are of the same
general character as the uses enumerated in this section and will not be
obnoxious or detrimental to the district.
The following uses, but only upon the securing of a special permit as provided
in chapter 2, article A of this title:
Any drive-in business where people are served in automobiles; mobile home
parking.
Outdoor advertising signs and structures.
Undertaking establishments. (Ord. 16, 10-23-1970; amd. 2005 Code; Ord. 9-16-25,
9-16-2025)
8-4-2: BUILDING HEIGHT:
In the commercial district, no building shall be erected or structurally
altered to exceed sixty feet (60') in height. (Ord. 16, 10-23-1970)
8-4-3: YARDS:
   A.   Side Yards: In the commercial district, no side yard shall be required
except as follows:
      1.   Dwellings shall comply with the side yard regulations of the
residential district (subsection
8-3-4B of this title). (Ord. 16, 10-23-1970)
      2.   On a corner lot adjacent to a key lot in the commercial district,
there shall be a side yard adjacent to the street of a width equal to not less
than one-half (1/2) the depth required for front yards on the lots to the rear
of such corner lots. (Ord. 16, 10-23-1970; amd. 2005 Code)
      3.   Along that side of every lot in the commercial district bordering
upon property in the residential district, there shall be a side yard of a
width not less than the width of a side yard required in the residential
district (subsection
8-3-4B of this title).
   B.   Rear Yard: In the commercial district, no rear yard shall be required
except as follows:
      1.   Buildings erected or used for dwelling purposes exclusively shall
comply with the rear yard regulations of the residential district (subsection
8-3-4C of this title).
      2.   On every lot in the commercial district, the rear of which borders
on property in the residential district, there shall be a rear yard of a depth
equal to not less than twice the width of a side yard required in the
residential district (subsection
8-3-4B of this title). (Ord. 16, 10-23-1970)
CHAPTER 5
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
8-5-1: Use Regulations
8-5-2: Building Height And Area Regulations
8-5-1: USE REGULATIONS:
No industrial district is provided for on the present zoning map. Upon the
creation in the city of such industrial district, uses permitted will be those
uses as may be allowed by amendment to this title. (Ord. 16, 10-23-1970)
8-5-2: BUILDING HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS:
In the industrial district, height and area regulations shall be the same as
those prescribed by this title for commercial districts (sections
8-4-2 and
8-4-3 of this title). (Ord. 16, 10-23-1970)
CHAPTER 6
NONCONFORMING USES
SECTION:
8-6-1: Continuance Of Use; Restrictions
8-6-2: Restrictions On Specific Nonconforming Uses
8-6-1: CONTINUANCE OF USE; RESTRICTIONS:
Any nonconforming use other than a use specified in subsections
8-6-2A and B of this chapter may be continued until expiration of the time
fixed by subsection
8-6-2C of this chapter; except, that any nonconforming use or building may not
be: (Ord. 16, 10-23-1970)
   A.   Changed to another nonconforming use.
   B.   Reestablished after discontinuance for one year.
   C.   Extended.
   D.   Rebuilt after damage exceeding fifty percent (50%) of its market value,
and no building permit has been applied for within one hundred eighty (180)
days of when the property is damaged. (Ord. 16, 10-23-1970; amd. 2005 Code)
8-6-2: RESTRICTIONS ON SPECIFIC NONCONFORMING USES:
   A.   Junkyards: No junkyard may continue as a nonconforming use for more
than one year after the effective date hereof; except, that a junkyard may
continue as a nonconforming use in a commercial or industrial district if,
within that period, it is completely enclosed within a building or within a
continuous solid fence of such height, not less than eight feet (8') in any
case, as to screen completely the operations of the junkyard. Plans of such
building or fence shall be approved by the city council before it is erected.
(Ord. 16, 10-23-1970; amd. 2005 Code)
   B.   Outdoor Advertising Structures: No outdoor advertising structure may
continue as a nonconforming use for more than six (6) months after the
effective date hereof.
   C.   Nonconforming Use Of Building: No nonconforming use of a building may
be continued for more than ten (10) years after the effective date hereof or,
if later, beyond the end of a reasonable period for amortization of the
building. In no event shall the amortization period, commencing with the
completion of erection of the building, be more than:
      1.   Thirty (30) years for buildings of ordinary wood frame construction.
      2.   Forty (40) years for buildings of wood and masonry construction.
      3.   Fifty (50) years for buildings of other construction. (Ord. 16, 10-
23-1970)
