SANDSTONE, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-2 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 20250618-01, passed 6-18-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
General Provisions
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Rules of interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Official time
   
10.11   Reasonable time
   
10.12   Ordinances repealed
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
   
10.18   Copies of code and ordinances
   
10.19   Adoption of statutes and rules and supplements by reference
   
10.20   Enforcement
Administrative Citations
   
10.35   Purpose
   
10.36   Definition
   
10.37   Procedure
   
10.38   Payment
   
10.39   Contesting administrative citations
   
10.40   Disposition of penalties
   
10.41   Penalties cumulative
 
   
10.99   General penalty
   
Appendix A:   Notice of Code Violation
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city, as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapter, and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“Sandstone City Code”, for which designation “code of ordinances”, “codified
ordinances” or “code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter and section
headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to the
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “Traffic Code”. Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§
10.01”. Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of
state law.
   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances
of the city shall be by the following rules, unless that construction is
plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of
the same ordinance.
      (1)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or”, whenever the context requires.
      (2)   Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions or ordinance
requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as
the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the
act by an authorized agent or deputy.
      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
      (4)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ADMINISTRATOR. The Sandstone City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer.
      CITY. The City of Sandstone, Minnesota. The term CITY, when used in this
code, may also be used to refer to the City Council and its authorized
representatives.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This city code as modified by
amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or sections.
      COUNTY. Pine County, Minnesota.
      HEALTH AUTHORITY. The Health Officer or the Public Health Sanitarian.
      LOCAL NON-PROFIT/CIVIC ORGANIZATION.
         (a)   A non-profit corporation located in the city and qualified under
I.R.C. § 501(c)(3);
         (b)   A club as defined in M.S. § 340A.101, subd. 7, as it may be
amended from time to time, located in the city;
         (c)   The city;
         (d)   The Sandstone Volunteer Fire Department Relief Association;
         (e)   Independent School District 576; or
         (f)   A volunteer committee organized for the sole purpose of
sponsoring or assisting in the conduct of a civic celebration officially
recognized by the city.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath and, in those cases, the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED. All terms shall mean a pledge
taken by the person and administered by an individual authorized by state law.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of the city unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      OWNER. In the case of personal property, a person, other than a lien
holder, having the property in of to title to personal property. In the case of
real property, the term means the fee owner of land, or the beneficial owner of
land whose interest is primarily one of possession and enjoyment in
contemplation of ultimate ownership. The term includes, but is not limited to,
vendees under a contract for deed and mortgagors.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as
applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Minnesota.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
(Prior Code, § 105.01)
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of
any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the
word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published.
   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.10 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city
business.
§ 10.11 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
§ 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or section of
this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and a new
chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its place.
Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new chapter or
section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this code, the
proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this indication as may
appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title shall be shown
in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.17 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred
or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities,
proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or forfeitures
shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In
particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-way,
contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or
vacation of any highway and the election of corporate officers shall remain
valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.18 COPIES OF CODE.
   The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer is responsible for the safe and
orderly keeping of ordinances in a manner directed by the Council. Any
ordinance not included in this code by Council direction is a special
ordinance. The Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer must maintain an up-to-date,
indexed record of special ordinances. The Council may direct that special
ordinances and others be included in appendices to this code.
(Prior Code, § 110.09)
§ 10.19 ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES AND SUPPLEMENTS BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   It is the intention of the City Council that all future amendments to
any state or federal rules and statutes adopted by reference in this code or
referenced in this code are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if
they had been in existence at the time this code was adopted, unless there is
clear intention expressed in the code to the contrary.
   (B)   It is the intention of the City Council that all future supplements
are hereby adopted as if they had been in existence at the time this code was
enacted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the code to the contrary.
§ 10.20 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any licensed peace officer of the city’s Police Department, or the
County Sheriff, or any Deputy Sheriff shall have the authority to enforce any
provision of this code.
   (B)   (1)   As permitted by M.S. § 626.862, as it may be amended from time
to time, the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall have the authority to
administer and enforce this code.
      (2)   In addition, under that statutory authority, certain individuals
designated within the code or by the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer or City
Council shall have the authority to administer and enforce the provisions
specified. All and any person or persons designated may issue a citation in
lieu of arrest or continued detention to enforce any provision of the code.
   (C)   The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer and any city official or
employee designated by this code who has the responsibility to perform a duty
under this code may with the permission of a licensee of a business or owner of
any property or resident of a dwelling, or other person in control of any
premises, inspect or otherwise enter any property to enforce compliance with
this code.
   (D)   (1)   If the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of a
premises objects to the inspection of or entrance to the property, the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, peace officer or any employee or official
charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon a
showing that probable cause exists for the issuance of a valid search warrant
from a court of competent jurisdiction, petition and obtain a search warrant
before conducting the inspection or otherwise entering the property.
      (2)   This warrant shall be only to determine whether the provisions of
this code enacted to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people are
being complied with and to enforce these provisions only, and no criminal
charges shall be made as a result of the warrant.
      (3)   No warrant shall be issued unless there be probable cause to issue
the warrant. Probable cause occurs if the search is reasonable. Probable cause
does not depend on specific knowledge of the condition of a particular
property.
   (E)   (1)   Every licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of
property within the city shall permit at reasonable times inspections of or
entrance to the property by the City Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer or any
other authorized city officer or employee only to determine whether the
provisions of this code enacted to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the people are being complied with and to enforce these provisions.
      (2)   Unreasonable refusal to permit the inspection of or entrance to the
property shall be grounds for termination of any and all permits, licenses or
city service to the property. Mailed notice shall be given to the licensee,
owner, resident or other person in control of the property, stating the grounds
for the termination, and the licensee, owner, resident or other person in
control of the property shall be given an opportunity to appear before the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer to object to the termination before it occurs,
subject to appeal of the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer’s decision to the City
Council at a regularly scheduled or special meeting.
   (F)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of
the city to enter private property in urgent emergency situations where there
is an imminent danger in order to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
§ 10.35 PURPOSE.
   The City Council finds that there is a need for additional alternative
methods of enforcing the city code. While criminal fines and penalties have
been the most frequent enforcement mechanism, the administrative enforcement of
the city code will increase compliance with the code, will encourage citizens
to become more receptive to enforcement efforts, will be more informal and
cost-effective, and will keep many violations out of the criminal court system.
Accordingly, the City Council finds that the use of administrative citations is
a legitimate alternative method of enforcement of the city code that is also an
effective way to promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens. This
method of enforcement shall be in addition to and not exclusive of any other
legal remedy, including, without limitation, the filing of criminal charges or
other civil remedies for city code violations.
(Prior Code, § 117.01) (Ord. 20200415-01, passed 4-15-2020)
§ 10.36 DEFINITION.
   ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSE means any violation of a provision of the city code
or any violation of a condition or requirement of a city-issued permit or
license, and such violations may be subject to the administrative citation
process set forth herein. Each day a violation exists constitutes a separate
administrative offense.
(Prior Code, § 117.03) (Ord. 20200415-01, passed 4-15-2020)
§ 10.37 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Authority to issue notices.
      (1)   The following representatives of the city shall have the authority
to issue notices for city code administrative offenses:
         (a)   Fire Chief;
         (b)   Assistant Fire Chief;
         (c)   Building Official;
         (d)   Safety/Rental Inspector;
         (e)   City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer; or
         (f)   Deputy Clerk.
      (2)   All notices and citations will be administered through the City
Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer’s office to ensure proper tracking and record
keeping activities are in place.
   (B)   Administrative notice.
      (1)   Upon determining that an administrative offense has occurred, the
city may issue an administrative notice to the violator, either in person or by
regular mail. In the case of a vehicular violation, the administrative notice
may be attached to the vehicle. The notice will state the date, time and nature
of the administrative offense, the action necessary to remedy the
administrative offense and the name of the official issuing the notice.
      (2)   If the violator is making a good faith attempt to remedy the
administrative offense, the city may grant an extension, the length of which
must be agreed upon in writing between the city and the violator.
   (C)   Administrative citation. If the violator fails to correct the
administrative offense within the time period provided in an administrative
notice, the representative listed in division (B)(1) above may issue an
administrative citation. The citation must be issued to the violator in person
or by regular mail. In the case of a vehicular violation, the citation may be
attached to the vehicle. The citation must state the date, time and nature of
the administrative offense, the action necessary to remedy the administrative
offense, the name of the representative issuing the citation, the amount of the
scheduled fine and the manner for paying the fine.
(Prior Code, § 117.05) (Ord. 20200415-01, passed 4-15-2020)
§ 10.38 PAYMENT.
   (A)   Amount. The amount payable for administrative citations shall be
established by §
36.02 of this code of ordinances, as adopted by the City Council. In the event
that a violator is issued a subsequent administrative citation for the same or
substantially similar offense within a 12-month period, the subsequent fee
shall be increased by 50% above the previously charged fee.
   (B)   Effect of payment. Payment of an administrative citation to the city
within ten days of the notice will preclude the city from bringing criminal
charges for the specific violation cited, but will not act to prevent or affect
criminal or petty misdemeanor charges that may result from any ongoing conduct
of the violator, including any and all city code violations that occur after
the issuance of the original administrative citation.
   (C)   Failure to pay.
      (1)   If the violator fails to pay the fee for the violation in the
amount of time specified in the administrative citation, the city may suspend
or revoke any city-issued license that is associated with the administrative
offense and charge the violator criminally for the cited offense. Additionally,
any unpaid fee shall constitute:
         (a)   A lien upon the real property upon which the violation occurred
if the property or improvements on the property was the subject of the
violation and the property owner was found responsible for that violation; or
         (b)   A personal obligation of the violator in all other situations.
      (2)   A lien may be assessed against the property and collected in the
same manner as taxes. A lien may be collected as a special charge, as
authorized by M.S. §§ 366.011 and 366.012, as well as M.S. § 415.01, subd. 2,
as they may be amended from time to time. A personal obligation may be
collected by any appropriate legal means.
(Prior Code, § 117.07) (Ord. 20200415-01, passed 4-15-2020)
§ 10.39 CONTESTING ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS.
   (A)   Any person issued an administrative citation under this subchapter
shall have the right to appeal the citation by filing a written notice of
appeal with the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer within seven days of the
date of the citation. Upon receipt of the written notice, the City
Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer shall schedule the appeal hearing before the
City Council within 30 days from the date of the notice.
   (B)   The appeal will be heard by the City Council. At the hearing, the
parties will have an opportunity to present testimony and documentary evidence
and question witnesses, but strict compliance with Minnesota Rules of Evidence
will not be required. The City Council may impose limitations on the scope of
evidence to be allowed, as well as time limits which may apply to the appeal
hearings, and any other substantive or procedural elements which the City
Council deems appropriate.
   (C)   The City Council shall issue its findings of fact and conclusions, in
writing, within 30 days following the hearing. The City Council, upon finding
that an administrative citation was justified, may uphold the citation as
issued, or may amend the penalties pursuant to those available in §
36.02 of this code of ordinances. If the City Council finds that the
administrative citation was not justified, it may overturn the citation and
take any other action it deems reasonably necessary.
   (D)   (1)   The city may suspend or revoke a city-issued license, permit or
other approval associated with the violation, subject to any applicable
procedural requirements contained in the city code. Suspension or revocation of
a license, permit or other approval is authorized regardless of whether
additional penalties (such as administrative fines) are imposed for the
violation.
      (2)   A hearing on appeal of a citation will meet any hearing requirement
for the suspension or revocation of the license, permit or other approval as
long as notice of the hearing includes notice that suspension or revocation
will also be considered and no additional hearing will be required.
   (E)   Failure to attend the appeal hearing constitutes a waiver of the
violator’s rights to a hearing and an admission of the violation. The City
Council may waive this result upon a showing of good cause. Examples of “good
cause” are: death or incapacitating illness of the accused; a court order
requiring the accused to appear for another hearing at the same time; and lack
of proper service of the citation or notice of the hearing. “Good cause” does
not include forgetfulness and intentional delay.
   (F)   An aggrieved party may obtain judicial review of the decision of the
City Council according to any applicable law.
(Prior Code, § 117.09) (Ord. 20200415-01, passed 4-15-2020)
§ 10.40 DISPOSITION OF PENALTIES.
   All penalties collected pursuant to this subchapter shall be paid to the
city and deposited into the city’s General Fund.
(Prior Code, § 117.11) (Ord. 20200415-01, passed 4-15-2020)
§ 10.41 PENALTIES CUMULATIVE.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall prevent the city from taking such other
actions as are permitted under law, and the penalties provided herein shall be
cumulative.
(Prior Code, § 117.13) (Ord. 20200415-01, passed 4-15-2020)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for
any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota Statutes
specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90
days, or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
   (C)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time, in
either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
   (D) The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
   (E)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if any
person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this code,
the City Council or any city official designated by it may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
(Prior Code, § 115.09)
APPENDIX A: NOTICE OF CODE VIOLATION
 
To:      (Name and address of person who is alleged to have violated the code)
From:   (Name and title of city official giving the notice)
Re:      Alleged violation of Section of the City Code, relating to (give title of section)
 
 
Date: (Date of notice)
 
I hereby allege that on (date of violation) you violated §                  of the City Code relating to                                                                                                                                      .
 
The City Council has by resolution established an administrative penalty in the amount of $         for this violation.
 
Payment of this administrative penalty is voluntary, but if you do not pay it the city may initiate criminal proceedings for this alleged violation.
 
Payment is due within 14 days of the date of this notice. Before the due date, you may request an additional 14-day extension of the time to pay the administrative penalty.
 
As an alternative to the payment of this administrative penalty, if the situation that gave rise to this alleged violation is corrected by                         (establish date), then the payment of the administrative penalty will be waived.
 
Even if the administrative penalty is paid, the city reserves the right to institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the violation.
 
Before the due date, you may request to appear before the City Council to contest the request for payment of the penalty. After a hearing before the Council, the Council may determine to withdraw the request for payment or to renew the request for payment. Because the
payment of the administrative penalty is voluntary, there shall be no appeal from the decision of the Council.
 
If you pay the administrative penalty, the city will not initiate criminal proceedings for this alleged violation. However, the Council, or any city official designated by it, may institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
 
Payment of the administrative penalty may be made by check, cash or money order to the City Treasurer.
 
Signed:                                                               
      (Name and Title of Person Giving Notice)
 
 
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   CITY COUNCIL
      
31.   OFFICIALS AND ORGANIZATIONS
      
32.   ELECTIONS
      
33.   CIVIL DEFENSE; EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
      
34.   GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES
      
35.   LICENSING AND PERMITTING PROCEDURES
      
36.   FINANCE AND REVENUE; FEE SCHEDULE
CHAPTER 30: CITY COUNCIL
Section
   
30.01   Regular and special meetings
   
30.02   Quorum
   
30.03   Presiding officer and secretary
   
30.04   First meeting
   
30.05   Council rules; presiding officer
   
30.06   Motions reduced to writing
   
30.07   Signing and publishing of ordinances
   
30.08   Salaries of Mayor and Council members
   
30.09   Application of state laws
§ 30.01 REGULAR AND SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings of the Council are held on the third Wednesday of
each month in the Council Chambers of the City Hall at 6:00 p.m., unless
otherwise specified by Council resolution.
   (B)   Meetings may be adjourned from time to time to a specified date or
subject to the call of the Mayor or any two members of the Council upon at
least 24 hours’ notice to each member of the Council and such other notice
required by law.
   (C)   Meetings of the Council must be open to the public, unless otherwise
authorized to be closed by M.S. Chapter 13D, as it may be amended from time to
time.
(Prior Code, § 200.01) (Ord. 2017-01, passed 1-4-2017; Ord. 20190220-01, passed
2-20-2019)
§ 30.02 QUORUM.
   A majority of Council members elected constitutes a quorum, but a smaller
number may adjourn from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 200.03)
§ 30.03 PRESIDING OFFICER AND SECRETARY.
   (A)   The Mayor presides at meetings of the Council.
   (B)   The Council must choose from its members an acting Mayor. The Deputy
Clerk is the secretary of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 200.05)
§ 30.04 FIRST MEETING.
   At the first regular meeting of the Council in each year, the Council must
designate an official newspaper and depositories for official funds. The
Council may appoint committees as it deems necessary.
(Prior Code, § 200.07)
§ 30.05 COUNCIL RULES; PRESIDING OFFICER.
   The presiding officer must preserve order and decorum, decide questions of
order and conduct meetings in accordance with these rules. The City Council is
governed in its procedure by the provisions of Robert’s Rules of Order (Newly
Revised Edition), except where otherwise provided by law or by this chapter.
The Council may make and change its own rules from time to time by resolution
duly adopted and any changes supersede Robert’s Rules of Order (Newly Revised
Edition). The presiding officer may speak on any question being considered, and
has the rights, privileges and duties of any other member of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 200.09)
§ 30.06 MOTIONS REDUCED TO WRITING.
   A motion must be reduced to writing at the request of any member present.
Ordinances and resolutions must be presented in writing.
(Prior Code, § 200.11)
§ 30.07 SIGNING AND PUBLISHING OF ORDINANCES.
   Ordinances must be signed by the Mayor, attested by the Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer, published after passage by the Council, and recorded by the
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose.
(Prior Code, § 200.13)
§ 30.08 SALARIES OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   (A)   The salary of the Mayor is $2,000 per annum, or another such amount as
shall be set by the City Council from time to time.
   (B)   The salary of each member of the Council is $1,500 per annum, or
another such amount as shall be set by the City Council from time to time.
   (C)   The salaries of the Mayor and Council members are payable quarterly.
   (D)   Council members receive $25 per meeting for special meetings and
committee meetings attended, or another such amount as shall be set by the City
Council from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 205.01) (Ord. 16-04, passed 10-19-2016)
§ 30.09 APPLICATION OF STATE LAWS.
   The provisions of the Government Data Practices Act, M.S. Ch. 13, the
Opening Meeting Law, M.S. Ch. 13D, and the laws relating to Gifts to Local
Officials, M.S. § 471.895, as these laws may be amended from time to time,
apply to the City Council and all boards and commissions of this city and their
members.
CHAPTER 31: OFFICIALS AND ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Boards and Commissions
   
31.01   Authority
   
31.02   Advisory nature
   
31.03   Compensation
   
31.04   Membership; terms of office
   
31.05   Appointment; application; reappointment; notification
   
31.06   Meetings
   
31.07   Attendance; vacancies; resignations and removals
   
31.08   Organization; by-laws
   
31.09   Minutes; reports; liaisons
   
31.10   Application of certain sections
Specific Organizations
   
31.25   Park and Recreation Advisory Commission
   
31.26   Planning Commission
   
31.27   Board of Adjustment and Appeals
   
31.28   Fire Department
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
§ 31.01 AUTHORITY.
   The city is authorized to create advisory boards and commissions as it deems
necessary.
(Prior Code, § 305.01)
§ 31.02 ADVISORY NATURE.
   Except as otherwise provided by law, the boards and commissions created by
this subchapter are advisory to the Council and to the City Administrator/
Clerk-Treasurer in all matters pertinent to the duties of the Council and the
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, but the boards and commissions have no other
official status or independent authority. Boards and commissions are referred
to in this subchapter as advisory commissions.
(Prior Code, § 305.03)
§ 31.03 COMPENSATION.
   Unless otherwise provided by law, members of advisory commissions receive
$25 per meeting attended, and may be reimbursed for actual and necessary
expenses if funds for that purpose are identified in the adopted city budget.
(Prior Code, § 305.05)
§ 31.04 MEMBERSHIP; TERMS OF OFFICE.
   (A)   Eligibility. Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, members
of advisory commissions must be residents of the city. Except as otherwise
provided in this section, a person serving on an advisory commission may apply
for and be appointed to another advisory commission, but on the effective date
of the appointment to the second commission, the office of the member on the
first commission is vacant.
   (B)   Terms. Members of the advisory commissions are appointed for a term of
three years. Terms of members commence on January 1 of the year in which they
are appointed and continue until a successor is appointed and qualified.
(Prior Code, § 305.07)
§ 31.05 APPOINTMENT; APPLICATION; REAPPOINTMENT; NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   Members of advisory commissions are appointed by the City Council.
   (B)   Applications for appointment to an advisory commission must be
submitted in writing to the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, who arranges
for the applicant’s appearance before the City Council if a vacancy on that
particular commission is to be filled. The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer
must forward a copy of all applications to the chair of the respective
commission.
   (C)   A member of an advisory commission desiring reappointment upon
expiration of a term must notify the City Council of the intention at least 30
days prior to the expiration date of the term.
   (D)   The City Council must cause to be publicized in the official newspaper
and by posting in the City Hall lobby a description of vacancies and impending
expiration of terms of members of various advisory commissions together with an
invitation to interested citizens to apply for appointment. The notice must be
published no less than once each month as long as a vacancy on an advisory
commission exists. The Council may not make appointments until at least one
week has elapsed from the date of the initial publication and posting.
(Prior Code, § 305.09)
§ 31.06 MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings. Meetings of advisory commissions are held at a date,
time and places as are set forth in their respective by-laws, and they meet as
necessary to fulfill the objectives of the board or commission. The procedure
at meetings is governed by the by-laws of the board or commission and Robert’s
Rules of Order, Revised.
   (B)   Open meetings. Meetings of advisory commissions are open to the
public. Dates, time and place of meetings must be published quarterly each
calendar year in the official newspaper and in other publications as the board
or commission may direct. Notice of regular and special meetings of advisory
commissions must be posted in a prominent place in the City Hall.
(Prior Code, § 305.11)
§ 31.07 ATTENDANCE; VACANCIES; RESIGNATIONS AND REMOVALS.
   (A)   Members of the advisory commissions are expected to faithfully
participate in the meetings or other activities of the commission to which they
have been appointed.
   (B)   Vacancies in the advisory commissions are filled by the City Council
for the remainder of the unexpired term.
   (C)   Commission members may be removed from office by a majority vote of
the City Council.
   (D)   A commission member who fails to attend three consecutive commission
meetings or three meetings in any six month period is deemed to have resigned.
(Prior Code, § 305.13)
§ 31.08 ORGANIZATION; BY-LAWS.
   (A)   An advisory commission must meet to adopt by-laws for the conduct of
its affairs within 30 days after the first appointment of its members.
   (B)   Commission by-laws must provide for the election from its membership
of a chair, vice-chair, secretary and other officers as it deems necessary. The
by-laws must specify the month of the election of officers, term of office,
duties of the officers, composition of task forces and committees, date and
time of meetings, number of members to constitute a quorum, the order of
business, attendance requirements and other matters necessary for the conduct
of the business of the advisory commissions. The by-laws of each commission are
not effective until approved by the City Council. The advisory commissions must
endeavor to adopt uniform by-laws.
   (C)   The commission secretary is appointed by the chair; provided, however,
that, the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer may assign members of the city
administrative staff to serve as secretary to a commission as deemed necessary.
The secretary performs the clerical duties of the commission.
(Prior Code, § 305.15)
§ 31.09 MINUTES; REPORTS; LIAISONS.
   (A)   Minutes.
      (1)   The proceedings of advisory commission meetings must be recorded in
minute form and transmitted to the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, who must
furnish copies to each member of the commission, the Mayor and City Council
members.
      (2)   A commission may make copies of its minutes available to other
advisory commissions and individuals as it deems necessary.
      (3)   The commission must keep a record of all resolutions, transactions
and findings. These records and minutes are public records.
   (B)   Reports.
      (1)   Advisory commissions must make an annual report to the City Council
containing the commission’s summary of the commission’s activities, conclusions
and recommendations. The annual report may include a proposed budget for the
commission for the ensuing year. The report must be submitted prior to August 1
of each year.
      (2)   Other commission reports, conclusions and recommendations must be
made from time to time to the City Council as may be requested by the Council
or as the commission deems appropriate in light of the matter being considered.
   (C)   Requests for expenditure of funds. Advisory commission activities
requiring the expenditure of funds from the commission’s budget must be
submitted to the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer with estimated cost figures
prior to any commitment of the expenditures.
   (D)   Liaison. The City Council must annually appoint one Council member as
an ex officio member without voting rights to each advisory commission to
provide a liaison between the City Council and the commissions.
(Prior Code, § 305.17)
§ 31.10 APPLICATION OF CERTAIN SECTIONS.
   Sections
31.04,
31.06,
31.07,
31.08 and
31.09 of this chapter do not apply to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals.
(Prior Code, § 305.19)
SPECIFIC ORGANIZATIONS
§ 31.25 PARK AND RECREATION ADVISORY COMMISSION.
   (A)   Policy and purpose. The Park and Recreation Advisory Commission is
established to promote the systematic, comprehensive development of park
facilities and recreational activities necessary for the physical, mental,
emotional and moral health and well-being of the residents of the city.
   (B)   Duties of the Commission. The Park and Recreation Advisory Commission
advises and makes recommendations to the City Council in matters pertaining to
park and recreation programs in the city.
   (C)   Membership. The Park and Recreation Advisory Commission consists of
seven members. One member of the Commission need not be a resident of the city,
but must own property within the city. One of the members appointed at-large
may be a student in a junior or senior high school at the time of his or her
appointment, and does not need to be a resident of the city.
(Prior Code, § 305.21) (Ord. 02-04, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20170920-01, passed
9-20-2017)
§ 31.26 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Policy and duties. The Planning Commission has those powers and duties
assigned to it by M.S. §§ 462.351 to 462.364, (the Municipal Planning Act), as
they may be amended from time to time, and by this code. The Planning
Commission is designated the planning agency of the city in accordance with
M.S. § 462.354, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Membership. The Planning Commission consists of five members, one
Council member and four at-large members appointed by the City Council.
   (C)   Oath of office. Members of the Planning Commission must, before
entering upon the discharge of their duties, take an oath as prescribed by law
that they will faithfully discharge the duties of their office.
(Prior Code, § 305.27) (Ord. 97-09, passed 11-5-1997; Ord. 20191016-01, passed
10-16-2019)
Cross-reference:
   Planning Commission, see §
150.01
§ 31.27 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS.
   (A)   Policy. Pursuant to M.S. § 462.354, as it may be amended from time to
time, a Board of Adjustment and Appeals is created and continued. The Board
consists of the Planning Commission.
   (B)   Duties of the Board.
      (1)   The Board hears and makes recommendations with respect to appeals
from any order, decision or determination made by an administrative officer in
the enforcement of the Zoning Code.
      (2)   The Board hears requests for variances from literal provisions of
the Zoning Code in accordance with the provisions of M.S. § 462.357, as it may
be amended from time to time.
      (3)   The Board hears appeals from the denial of a building permit for
structures within the limits of a mapped street pursuant to M.S. § 462.359, as
it may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   Rules; records. The Board must adopt rules governing its procedure.
The Board must provide for a record of its proceedings including minutes of its
meetings, its findings and its action.
   (D)   Hearings. A matter may not be heard by the Board until the applicant
thereon has been given ten days’ mailed notice in writing of the date and place
of the hearing. The notice is given by mailing to applicant at the applicant’s
last known address.
   (E)   Review of decisions. Pursuant to M.S. § 462.354, subd. 2, as it may be
amended from time to time, the decisions of the Board are advisory to the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 305.29)
§ 31.28 FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Establishment of a Fire Department. A Fire Department is hereby
created by the city. The Fire Department shall be under the general direction
and control of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 306.01)
   (B)   Composition. The Fire Department shall consist of a Fire Chief and a
number of other officers and firefighters as the Fire Chief and City Council
may determine is necessary for the effective operations of the Fire Department.
All firefighters shall be appointed by the City Council, in accordance with the
city personnel policy and the Fire Department rules and regulations as are now
or are hereinafter adopted.
(Prior Code, § 306.03)
   (C)   Rules and regulations. Rules and regulations concerning the operation
and administration of the Fire Department shall be adopted by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 306.05)
   (D)   Fire Chief. The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the City Council. The
Fire Chief will perform management duties by providing guidance and direction
to the Fire Department members.
(Prior Code, § 306.07)
   (E)   Other department officers. The other officers of the Department are
specified in the Fire Department rules and regulations and shall be elected by
the current members of the Fire Department and approved by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 306.09)
   (F)   Compensation. Firefighters shall be compensated by the city on an
hourly basis for responding to fire calls and attending drills. The hourly rate
of pay shall be set by the City Council by resolution from time to time. In
addition to the hourly fire call and drill compensation, the Fire Chief and the
Assistant Fire Chief shall be compensated by the city for their administrative
services in an annual amount to be set by the City Council by resolution from
time to time.
(Prior Code, § 306.11)
(Ord. 97-08, passed 10-15-1997; Ord. 2008-15, passed 11-5-2008; Ord. 2008-15,
passed - -2008)
CHAPTER 32: ELECTIONS
Section
   
32.01   Compliance with state law
   
32.02   Election dates
   
32.03   Filing for office
   
32.04   Council composition and election
§ 32.01 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW.
   Elections in the city are conducted in accordance with the general laws of
the state.
(Prior Code, § 210.01)
§ 32.02 ELECTION DATES.
   General elections are held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in
November in even- numbered years. The Council may set the date for a special or
primary election by resolution. (See Ord. 179, setting the municipal election
for even years and fixing terms of Council members.)
(Prior Code, § 210.03)
§ 32.03 FILING FOR OFFICE.
   The Council must, by resolution, fix the dates within which candidates for
municipal office must file in any municipal election; except that, in the case
of primary elections, the filing dates are those provided by law for cities of
the same class as the city.
(Prior Code, § 210.05)
§ 32.04 COUNCIL COMPOSITION AND ELECTION.
   The Council shall be composed of a Mayor and four Council members. The Mayor
and four Council members shall be elected at-large. Each Council member and the
Mayor shall serve for a term of four years and until a successor is elected and
qualifies. The terms of Council members shall be staggered so that two Council
members are elected during each election period.
(Prior Code, § 210.07) (Ord. 20190102-01, passed 1-2-2019)
CHAPTER 33: CIVIL DEFENSE; EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
   
33.01   Policy and purpose
   
33.02   Definitions
   
33.03   Establishment of emergency management organization
   
33.04   Powers and duties of Director
   
33.05   Local emergencies
   
33.06   Emergency regulations
   
33.07   Emergency management a government function
   
33.08   Participation in labor disputes or politics
 
   
33.99   Penalty
§ 33.01 POLICY AND PURPOSE.
   Because of the existing possibility of the occurrence of disasters of
unprecedented size and destruction resulting from fire, flood, tornado,
blizzard, destructive winds or other natural causes, or from sabotage, hostile
action or from hazardous material mishaps of catastrophic measure; and in order
to ensure that preparations of the city will be adequate to deal with those
disasters, and generally, to provide for the common defense and to protect the
public peace, health and safety, and to preserve the lives and property of the
people of the city, it is hereby found and declared to be necessary:
   (A)   To establish a city emergency management organization responsible for
city planning and preparation for emergency government operations in time of
disasters;
   (B)   To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during emergencies and
disasters;
   (C)   To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between the city and other
political subdivisions of the state and of other states with respect to the
carrying out of emergency preparedness functions; and
   (D)   To comply with the provisions of M.S. § 12.25, as it may be amended
from time to time, which requires that each political subdivision of the state
shall establish a local organization for emergency management.
§ 33.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISASTER. A situation which creates an immediate and serious impairment to
the health and safety of any person, or a situation which has resulted in or is
likely to result in catastrophic loss to property, and for which traditional
sources of relief and assistance within the affected area are unable to repair
or prevent the injury or loss.
   EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances which calls for
immediate action to prevent from developing or occurring.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. The preparation for and the carrying out of all
emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are
primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage
resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood, tornado and other acts of
nature, or from sabotage, hostile action, or from industrial hazardous material
mishaps. These functions include, without limitation, fire-fighting services,
police services, emergency medical services, engineering, warning services,
communications, radiological and chemical, evacuation, congregate care,
emergency transportation, existing or properly assigned functions of plant
protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other
functions related to civil protection, together with all other activities
necessary or incidental for carrying out the foregoing functions. EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT includes those activities sometimes referred to as “civil defense”
functions.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES. The total personnel resources engaged in city-
level emergency management functions in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter or any rule or order thereunder. This term includes personnel from city
departments, authorized volunteers and private organizations and agencies.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION. The staff responsible for coordinating
city-level planning and preparation for disaster response. This ORGANIZATION
provides city liaison and coordination with federal, state and local
jurisdictions relative to disaster preparedness activities and assures
implementation of federal and state program requirements.
§ 33.03 ESTABLISHMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.
   There is hereby created within the city government an emergency management
organization which shall be under the supervision and control of the City
Emergency Management Director, called “the Director”. The Director shall be
appointed by the City Council for an indefinite term and may be removed by the
Council at any time. The Director shall serve with a salary as established by
the City Council and shall be paid his or her necessary expenses. The Director
shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration and
operation of the emergency preparedness organization, subject to the direction
and control of the City Council. The emergency management organization shall
conform to and be consistent with, where applicable, all state and federal
requirements, including the National Incident Management System framework found
at 44 C.F.R. pt. 201, as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 33.04 POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.
   (A)   The Director shall represent the city on any regional or state
conference for emergency management. The Director shall develop proposed mutual
aid agreements with other political subdivisions of the state for reciprocal
emergency management aid and assistance in an emergency too great to be dealt
with unassisted, and shall present these agreements to the City Council for its
action. These arrangements shall be consistent with the State Emergency Plan.
   (B)   The Director shall make studies and surveys of the human resources,
industries, resources and facilities of the city as deemed necessary to
determine their adequacy for emergency management and to plan for their most
efficient use in time of an emergency or disaster. The Director shall establish
the economic stabilization systems and measures, service staffs, boards and
sub-boards required, in accordance with state and federal plans and directions
subject to the approval of the Mayor.
   (C)   The Director shall prepare a comprehensive emergency plan for the
emergency preparedness of the city and shall present the plan to the City
Council for its approval. When the City Council has approved the plan, it shall
be the duty of all city agencies and all emergency preparedness forces of the
city to perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved. The
plan may be modified in like manner from time to time. The Director shall
coordinate the emergency management activities of the city to the end that they
shall be consistent and fully integrated with the emergency plans of the
federal government and the state and correlated with emergency plans of the
county and other political subdivisions within the state.
   (D)   In accordance with the State and City Emergency Plan, the Director
shall institute training programs, public information programs and conduct
practice warning alerts and emergency exercises as may be necessary to assure
prompt and effective operation of the City Emergency Plan when a disaster
occurs.
   (E)   The Director shall utilize the personnel, services, equipment,
supplies and facilities of existing departments and agencies of the city to the
maximum extent practicable. The officers and personnel of all city departments
and agencies shall, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperate with and
extend services and facilities to the city’s emergency management organization
and to the Governor upon request. The head of each department or agency in
cooperation with the Director shall be responsible for the planning and
programming of those emergency activities as will involve the utilization of
the facilities of the department or agency.
   (F)   The Director shall, in cooperation with those city departments and
agencies affected, assist in the organizing, recruiting, and training of
emergency management personnel, which may be required on a volunteer basis to
carry out the emergency plans of the city and state. To the extent that
emergency personnel are recruited to augment a regular city department or
agency for emergencies, they shall be assigned to the departments or agencies
and shall be under the administration and control of the department or agency.
   (G)   Consistent with the state emergency services law, the Director shall
coordinate the activity of municipal emergency management organizations within
the city and assist in establishing and conducting
training programs as required to assure emergency operational capability in the
several services as provided by M.S. § 12.25, as it may be amended from time to
time.
   (H)   The Director shall carry out all orders, rules and regulations issued
by the Governor with reference to emergency management.
   (I)   The Director shall prepare and submit reports on emergency
preparedness activities when requested by the Mayor.
§ 33.05 LOCAL EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   A local emergency may be declared only by the Mayor or his or her
legal successor. It shall not be continued for a period in excess of three days
except by or with the consent of the City Council. Any order or proclamation
declaring, continuing or terminating a local emergency shall be given prompt
and general publicity and shall be filed in the office of the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer.
   (B)   A declaration of a local emergency shall invoke necessary portions of
the response and recovery aspects of applicable local or inter-jurisdictional
disaster plans, and may authorize aid and assistance thereunder.
   (C) No jurisdictional agency or official may declare a local emergency
unless expressly authorized by the agreement under which the agency functions.
However, an interjurisdictional disaster agency shall provide aid and services
in accordance with the agreement under which it functions.
Penalty, see § 32.99
§ 33.06 EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Whenever necessary, to meet a declared emergency or to prepare for an
emergency for which adequate regulations have not been adopted by the Governor
or the City Council, the City Council may by resolution promulgate regulations,
consistent with applicable federal or state law or regulation, respecting the
conduct of persons and the use of property during emergencies, and the repair,
maintenance and safeguarding of essential public services, emergency health,
fire and safety regulations, drills or practice periods required for
preliminary training and all other matters which are required to protect public
safety, health and welfare in declared emergencies.
   (B)   Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be in writing, shall
be dated, shall refer to the particular emergency to which it pertains, if so
limited, and shall be filed in the office of the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer. A copy shall be kept posted and available for public inspection
during business hours. Notice of the existence of these regulations and their
availability for inspection at the City Clerk’s office shall be conspicuously
posted at the front of the city hall or other headquarters of the city or at
other places in the affected area as the City Council shall designate in the
resolution. By resolution, the City Council may modify or rescind a regulation.
   (C)   (1)   The City Council may rescind any regulation by resolution at any
time. If not sooner rescinded, every regulation shall expire at the end of 30
days after its effective date or at the end of the emergency to which it
relates, whichever comes first.
      (2)   Any resolution, rule or regulation inconsistent with an emergency
regulation promulgated by the City Council shall be suspended during the period
of time and to the extent conflict exists.
   (D)   (1)   During a declared emergency, the city is, under the provisions
of M.S. § 12.37, as it may be amended from time to time and notwithstanding any
statutory or Charter provision to the contrary, empowered, through its City
Council, acting within or without the corporate limits of the city, to enter
into contracts and incur obligations necessary to combat the disaster by
protecting the health and safety of persons and property and providing
emergency assistance to the victims of a disaster.
      (2)   The city may exercise these powers in the light of the exigencies
of the disaster without compliance with the time-consuming procedures and
formalities prescribed by law pertaining to the performance of public work,
entering rental equipment agreements, purchase of supplies and materials,
limitations upon tax levies and the appropriation and expenditure of public
funds, including, but not limited to, publication of resolutions, publication
of calls for bids, provisions of personnel laws and rules, provisions relating
to low bids and requirement for bids.
Penalty, see § 32.99
§ 33.07 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT A GOVERNMENT FUNCTION.
   (A)   All functions and activities relating to emergency management are
hereby declared to be governmental functions.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not affect the right of any
person to receive benefits to which he or she would otherwise be entitled under
this resolution or under the worker’s compensation law, or under any pension
law, nor the right of any person to receive any benefits or compensation under
any act of Congress.
§ 33.08 PARTICIPATION IN LABOR DISPUTES OR POLITICS.
   The emergency management organization shall not participate in any form of
political activity, nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for
political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a labor dispute.
§ 33.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any regulation
adopted thereunder relating to acts, omissions or conduct other than official
acts of city employees or officers is guilty of a misdemeanor.
CHAPTER 34: GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES
Section
Background Checks
   
34.01   Purpose
   
34.02   Background investigations authorized
   
34.03   Access authorized
   
34.04   Data
   
34.05   Consent required
   
34.06   Rejection of applicants
Disposition of Unclaimed Property
   
34.20   Unclaimed property; purpose
   
34.21   Method of disposition
   
34.22   Property having insubstantial value
   
34.23   Items which may be destroyed
   
34.24   Disposition of proceeds
Collection of Unpaid Service Charges and Fees
   
34.35   Authority
   
34.36   Collection procedures
BACKGROUND CHECKS
§ 34.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose and intent of this subchapter is to establish regulations that
will allow law enforcement access to the state’s computerized criminal history
information for specified non-criminal purposes of employment, volunteer and
licensing background checks for the positions and licenses described in §
34.03(B) and (C) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 120.01) (Ord. 2013-01, passed 5-15-2013)
§ 34.02 BACKGROUND INVESTIGATIONS AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   General. The County Sheriff’s Department is hereby required, as the
exclusive entity within the city, to do a criminal history background
investigation on applicants for the following positions and licenses within the
city, unless the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer concludes that a background
investigation is not needed.
   (B)   Employment/volunteer positions.
      (1)   All regular part-time and full-time employee positions;
      (2)   All firefighters as authorized by M.S. § 299F.035, as it may be
amended from time to time; and
      (3)   Any volunteer positions that work with children or vulnerable
adults.
   (C)   License applications.
      (1)   Adult establishments: owners; operators; and managers;
      (2)   3.2% malt liquor licenses: administrators under the corporation or
partnership; each individual or person having any beneficial interest in the
license; and
      (3)   Intoxicating liquor licenses: any individual having any beneficial
interest in the license.
(Prior Code, § 120.03) (Ord. 2013-01, passed 5-15-2013)
§ 34.03 ACCESS AUTHORIZED.
   In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to
screen employment, volunteer or license applicants, the Sheriff’s Department is
authorized to access data maintained in the state’s Bureau of Criminal
Apprehensions (“BCA”) Computerized Criminal History information system in
accordance with BCA policy.
(Prior Code, § 120.05) (Ord. 2013-01, passed 5-15-2013)
§ 34.04 DATA.
   Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Sheriff’s
Department under the care and custody of the Sheriff or his or her designee. A
summary of the results of the computerized criminal history data may be
released by the Sheriff’s Department to the city, including the City Council,
the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, the City Attorney or other city staff
involved in the hiring, selection or license approval process.
(Prior Code, § 120.07) (Ord. 2013-01, passed 5-15-2013)
§ 34.05 CONSENT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize
the city and the Sheriff’s Department by written consent to undertake the
investigation.
   (B)   The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of M.S.
Chapter 13, as it may be amended from time to time, regarding the collection,
maintenance and use of the information.
(Prior Code, § 120.09) (Ord. 2013-01, passed 5-15-2013)
§ 34.06 REJECTION OF APPLICANTS.
   (A)   Except for the positions set forth in M.S. § 364.09, as it may be
amended from time to time, the city will not reject an applicant for employment
or a license on the basis of the applicant’s prior conviction unless the crime
is directly related to the position of employment or license sought and the
conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor with a jail
sentence.
   (B)   If the city rejects the applicant’s request on this basis, it must
notify the applicant in writing of the following:
      (1)   The grounds and reasons for the denial;
      (2)   The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in M.S. §
364.06, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (3)   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment or the
license; and
      (4)   All competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon
reapplication.
(Prior Code, § 120.11) (Ord. 2013-01, passed 5-15-2013)
DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
§ 34.20 UNCLAIMED PROPERTY; PURPOSE.
   (A)   This subchapter has been enacted to provide for the custody and
disposal of property other than motor vehicles coming into the possession of
the city in the course of municipal operations and remaining unclaimed by the
owner.
   (B)   This subchapter has been adopted pursuant to the provisions of M.S. §
471.195, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 310.01)
§ 34.21 METHOD OF DISPOSITION.
   Property that has come into the possession of the city and has remained
unclaimed by its owner for a period of 60 days or more may be disposed of by
the city by sale to the highest bidder at public auction or sale. The public
auction or sale is conducted under the direction of the City Administrator/
Clerk- Treasurer, following published notice in the official newspaper at least
ten days in advance of the sale.
(Prior Code, § 310.03) (Ord. 17-05, passed 6-21-2017)
§ 34.22 PROPERTY HAVING INSUBSTANTIAL VALUE.
   Property having no substantial value may be discarded or given away by the
city, but a list of such items so disposed of must be retained in the files of
the city for at least six years.
(Prior Code, § 310.05)
§ 34.23 ITEMS WHICH MAY BE DESTROYED.
   (A)   Items of personal property having nuisance potential, such as
firearms, dangerous weapons, liquor and narcotics, may be destroyed upon order
of the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer.
   (B)   A list of items so destroyed must be maintained by the Administrator/
Clerk-Treasurer for a period of at least six years.
(Prior Code, § 310.07)
§ 34.24 DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS.
   The proceeds of the sale must be deposited in the General Fund of the city,
subject to the right of the former owner to payment of the sale price from the
fund upon application and satisfactory proof of ownership within six months of
the sale.
(Prior Code, § 310.09)
COLLECTION OF UNPAID SERVICE CHARGES AND FEES
§ 34.35 AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter is adopted pursuant to M.S. §§ 415.01, 366.011 and 366.012,
as they may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 121.01) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 7-3-2013; Ord. 20220720-01, passed
7-20-2022; Ord. 20220720-02, passed 7-20-2022)
§ 34.36 COLLECTION PROCEDURES.
   If the city is authorized to impose a service charge or fee on the owner,
lessee or occupant of property, or any of them, for a governmental service
provided by the city, the city may certify to the County Auditor, on or before
October 15 of each year, any unpaid service charges or fees which shall then be
collected together with property taxes levied against the property. A charge or
fee may be certified to the County Auditor only if, on or before September 15,
the city has given written notice to the property owner of its intention to
certify the charge or fee to the Auditor. The service charges or fees shall be
subject to the same penalties, interest and other conditions provided for the
collection of property taxes. This subchapter is in addition to any other law
authorizing the collection of unpaid costs and service charges or fees.
(Prior Code, § 121.03) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 7-3-2013; Ord. 20220720-01, passed
7-20-2022; Ord. 20220720-02, passed 7-20-2022)
CHAPTER 35: LICENSING AND PERMITTING PROCEDURES
Section
General Provisions
   
35.01   Policy and purpose
   
35.02   Fees
   
35.03   Application of chapter
   
35.04   Notice and hearing
Licensing Procedures
   
35.15   License required
   
35.16   Application
   
35.17   Payment of fee
   
35.18   Bond and insurance
   
35.19   Approval or denial of licenses
   
35.20   License term
   
35.21   License certificates
   
35.22   Exhibition of license certificate
   
35.23   Transfer of license
   
35.24   Renewal of license
   
35.25   License revocation, denial or suspension
   
35.26   Hearing
   
35.27   Inspections
License Fees
   
35.40   License fees
   
35.41   Penalty for late payment of license fees
Permit Procedures
   
35.55   Permits required
   
35.56   Permit application
   
35.57   Granting permits
   
35.58   Permit fees
   
35.59   Payment of fees
   
35.60   Types of fees
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 35.01 POLICY AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   By the enactment of this chapter, the City Council intends to
establish to the maximum degree possible a uniform system for the issuance,
revocation, suspension and renewal of licenses and permits for all activities
for which licenses and permits are required by this code of ordinances.
   (B)   The Council also intends that fees for licenses and permits required
by this code are those set by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1000.01)
§ 35.02 FEES.
   (A)   General. The fees for the various licenses and permits are adopted by
Council resolution from time to time and are set out in §
36.02 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Other provisions. City events and city-wide celebrations sponsored by
local non-profit/civic organizations in conjunction with the city are exempt
from license and permit fees, except for on-sale intoxicating and 3.2% malt
liquor. The organization obtaining the license must reimburse out-of-pocket
expenses incurred by the city related to the event.
(Prior Code, § 1000.03)
§ 35.03 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   General. Where a provision of this code requiring a license or a
permit contains no procedures for issuance, revocation, suspension, renewal or
fee, the provisions of this chapter apply.
   (B)   Other provisions. Where a provision of this code requiring a license
or a permit contains procedures for its issuance, revocation, suspension,
renewal or fee, the provisions prevail over this chapter.
   (C)   Conflicts. Where a direct conflict exists between a license or permit
fee set by any provision of this code and a fee set by this chapter, the fee
set by this chapter applies.
(Prior Code, § 1000.05)
§ 35.04 NOTICE AND HEARING.
   (A)   Vending machines. Prior to the increase of a license fee for vending
machines, as defined in M.S. § 471.707, as it may be amended from time to time,
the Council must hold a public hearing on the question of the increase. The
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer must mail written notice of the time and date of
the hearing to vending machine licensees at least 30 days prior to the hearing.
   (B)   Liquor and beer.
      (1)   Prior to the increase of the license fees for intoxicating liquor
and 3.2% malt liquor both on-sale and off-sale, the Council must hold a public
hearing on the question of the increase.
      (2)   The Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer must mail written notice of the
time and date of the hearing to holders of the licenses at least 30 days prior
to the hearing.
(Prior Code, § 1000.07)
LICENSING PROCEDURES
§ 35.15 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful to engage in a trade, profession, business or privilege in
the city for which a license is required by any provision of this code without
first obtaining a license from the city in the manner provided in this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 1005.01)
§ 35.16 APPLICATION.
   Application for a license is made to the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer upon
forms provided by the city. The applicant must state the location of the
proposed activity and other facts as are required for or applicable to the
granting of the license.
(Prior Code, § 1005.03)
§ 35.17 PAYMENT OF FEE.
   (A)   The fees required for a license must be paid at the office of the
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer before the granting of the license.
   (B)   Unless otherwise provided by this code, a license fee may not be
prorated for a portion of a year, and a license fee paid will not be refunded.
(Prior Code, § 1005.05)
§ 35.18 BOND AND INSURANCE.
   Required bonds must be executed by two sureties, or a surety company, and be
subject to the approval of the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer and the Council.
Where policies of insurance are required, the policies must be approved as to
substance and form by the City Attorney. Satisfactory evidence of coverage by
bond or insurance must be filed with the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer before
the license is issued.
(Prior Code, § 1005.07)
§ 35.19 APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF LICENSES.
   Where the approval of any city officer or state officer or the Council is
required prior to the issuance of a license, the approval must be presented to
the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer before the license is issued. A license may
not be approved by any city officer or issued by the Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer if it appears that the conduct of the activity for which a license is
sought will be contrary to the health, safety or welfare of the public or any
regulation, law or ordinance applicable to the activity.
(Prior Code, § 1005.09)
§ 35.20 LICENSE TERM.
   The term of the license year begins on January 1 and ends on December 31.
Where the issuance of licenses for periods of less than one year is permitted,
the effective date of the license is the date of issuance.
(Prior Code, § 1005.11)
§ 35.21 LICENSE CERTIFICATES.
   License certificates must show the date of issue, the activity licensed and
the term of the license. The certificates must be signed by the Administrator/
Clerk-Treasurer, and be impressed with the city seal.
(Prior Code, § 1005.13)
§ 35.22 EXHIBITION OF LICENSE CERTIFICATE.
   A licensee must carry the license certificate upon the licensee’s person at
all times when engaged in the activity for which the license was granted. Where
the licensed activity is conducted at a fixed place of business or
establishment, the certificate must be exhibited at all times in some
conspicuous place on the premises. The licensee must present the license
certificate when applying for a renewal and upon request of any police officer
or authorized representative of the city.
(Prior Code, § 1005.15)
§ 35.23 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   Unless otherwise provided, a license is not transferable without the
authorization of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 1005.17)
§ 35.24 RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   License renewals are issued in the same manner and subject to the same
conditions as original licenses.
(Prior Code, § 1005.19)
§ 35.25 LICENSE REVOCATION, DENIAL OR SUSPENSION.
   A license issued or to be issued by the city may be denied, suspended or
revoked by the Council for any of the following causes:
   (A)   Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statement contained in the
application for license, or made in carrying on the licensed activity;
   (B)   Conviction of any crime, or misdemeanor pertaining to license held or
applied for;
   (C)   Conducting a licensed activity in a manner as to constitute a breach
of the peace, or a menace to the health, safety and welfare of the public, or a
disturbance of the peace or comfort of the residents of the city, upon
recommendation of the city health authorities or other appropriate city
official;
   (D)   Expiration or cancellation of any required bond or insurance, or
failure to notify the city within a reasonable time of changes in the terms of
the insurance or the carriers;
   (E)   Actions unauthorized or beyond the scope of the license granted;
   (F)   Violation of any regulation or provision of this code applicable to
the activity for which the license has been granted, or any regulation or law
of the state so applicable; and/or
   (G)   Failure to continuously comply with all conditions required as
precedent to the approval of the license.
(Prior Code, § 1005.21)
§ 35.26 HEARING.
   A license may not be suspended or revoked until after a hearing is granted
to the licensee. The hearing to be held before the City Council upon due notice
to the licensee stating the time and place of the hearing, together with a
statement of the violation alleged to be the cause for the revocation or
suspension of the license.
(Prior Code, § 1005.23)
§ 35.27 INSPECTIONS.
   The city health authority and other appropriate city officials may enter
upon the premises where any licensed activity is being conducted for the
purpose of inspection at any reasonable hour.
(Prior Code, § 1005.25)
LICENSE FEES
§ 35.40 LICENSE FEES.
   The fees for the various licenses are set out in §
36.02 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 1010.01)
§ 35.41 PENALTY FOR LATE PAYMENT OF LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   No penalty. A penalty for the late payment of any license will not be
incurred by any licensee provided the owner or agent makes application for the
renewal of the existing license to the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer and
includes therein the payment of the required fee therefor prior to the
expiration date of the license.
   (B)   Penalty for late payment. A person whose licensed trade, business,
profession, activity or privilege is licensed by the city, other than one who
has been closed down or who has not operated the activity in the city after the
expiration of the licensing year, must pay to the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer the regular license fee and in addition thereto the following penalty
for late application for a renewal license:
      (1)   One to seven days late: a 25% penalty;
      (2)   Eight to 30 days late: a 50% penalty; and
      (3)   After expiration of 30 days from the due date, the activity for
which a license is required must cease and a new license or permit for the
activity will not be considered until the owner of the business personally
appears before the City Council. If the new license or permit is approved, the
fee consists of the amount set forth for new licenses and permits, plus any
late penalty fee that was not paid for the old license.
   (C)   Late payment of the license fee with penalty no bar to prosecution for
operating without a license. The late payment of the license fee along with the
penalty set forth herein is no bar to any prosecution by the city for operating
any licensed trade, business, profession, activity or privilege within the city
without a license therefor.
(Prior Code, § 1010.03)
PERMIT PROCEDURES
§ 35.55 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful to engage in any trade, profession, business or privilege in
the city for which a permit is required by any provision of this code without
first obtaining a permit from the city in the manner provided in this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 1015.01)
§ 35.56 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application for a permit is made to the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer
on forms furnished by the city. The application must contain information as to
location, nature, extent and costs of the proposed structure, work,
installation or other purposes, and other information which the Building
Official or other duly authorized persons may require under this code.
   (B)   The application must contain a declaration that the facts and
representations therein made are true and correct, which statement must be
subscribed to by the person or persons, or officers or agents of a corporation,
applying for the permit.
(Prior Code, § 1015.03)
§ 35.57 GRANTING PERMITS.
   Upon payment to the city by the applicant of the required fee for any
permits and, upon approval of the appropriate inspector, the permit will be
issued, except where Council approval is required, in which case the Building
Official is authorized to issue the permit after approval is granted by the
Council.
(Prior Code, § 1015.05)
§ 35.58 PERMIT FEES.
   The fees for the various permits are set out in §
36.02 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 1015.07)
§ 35.59 PAYMENT OF FEES.
   (A)   Payment. The permit fee and other fees and charges set forth in this
code will be collected by the city before the issuance of any permits, and the
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, Building Official or other persons duly
authorized to issue the permit for which the payment of a fee is required under
the provisions of this code may not issue a permit until the fee has been paid.
   (B)   Double fees. If a person begins work of any kind for which a permit
from the city is required, without having secured the necessary permits
therefor, either previous to or on the date of commencement of the work, that
person must, when subsequently securing the permit, pay double the fee provided
for the permit and is also subject to 1criminal prosecution as set forth in
this code.
(Prior Code, § 1015.09)
§ 35.60 TYPES OF FEES.
   (A)   Dogs; special provisions. Notwithstanding the provisions of this code,
the City Council may by resolution fix the impounding fees, the boarding of
dogs fees and the fees required for euthanasia.
(Prior Code, § 1015.11)
   (B)   Zoning and subdivision fees; special provisions.
      (1)   Scope and application. This section applies to applications for the
platting or replatting of land and variances from platting regulations made
pursuant hereto and to applications for zoning district changes, zoning code
text amendments, conditional use permits and variances, made pursuant to
Chapter 163 of this code of ordinances.
      (2)   Basic fee. The basic fee for an application to which this section
applies is set in §
36.02 of this code of ordinances.
      (3)   Additional fee.
         (a)   In order to defray the costs to the city of processing
applications to which this division (B) applies, applicants must pay, in
addition to the basic fee, a fee computed in accordance with this division (B).
This additional fee represents the following costs:
            1.   Costs of materials for the application including, but not
limited to, maps, graphs, charts and drawings; and
            2.   Staff and consultant time spent in preparing materials for the
application, including necessary research.
         (b)   The amount of the additional fee will be estimated by the City
Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer at the time of application based upon an hourly
rate for staff and consultant time and estimated costs of materials. The hourly
rate and cost estimates utilized in computing the fee must be made available to
the applicant by the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer.
      (4)   Fees; payment; deposit. The basic fee and a cash deposit equal to
the estimated additional fee must accompany an application filed under this
division (B). The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer must establish procedures
for accounting for all costs represented by the additional fee. If the actual
costs are less than the additional fee cash deposit, the excess must be
returned to the applicant within 30 days after final action by the Council on
the application. If the actual costs exceed the additional fee cash deposit,
the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer must bill the applicant for the excess at the
end of each month, and the bill will be payable within 30 days of receipt. The
application form must contain a statement that applicant agrees to pay all
billings. The Council may not grant any application to which this subchapter
applies until all application fees and excess billings are paid.
      (5)   Refunds. Except as provided in division (B)(4) above, the basic and
additional application fees may not be refunded unless the application is
withdrawn prior to its referral to the Planning Commission by the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer or the Council.
(Prior Code, § 1015.13)
CHAPTER 36: FINANCE AND REVENUE; FEE SCHEDULE
Section
   
36.01   Fire and Explosion Escrow Loss Account
   
36.02   Fee schedule
§ 36.01 FIRE AND EXPLOSION ESCROW LOSS ACCOUNT.
   (A)   Findings and purpose. The City Council finds that damaged structures
may violate the existing health or safety standards which may endanger the
public health, safety or welfare if they are not repaired, replaced or removed.
M.S. § 65A.50, as it may be amended from time to time, authorizes the city to
establish a trust or escrow account to receive proceeds from final insurance
settlements for real property damaged by fire or explosion in order to ensure
that any structures or improvements located on the damaged property are
replaced, repaired or demolished in a manner that complies with local code
requirements. On 8-6-2014, the City Council adopted Res. 2014-16 that
established this escrow account and the City Council wishes to memorialize the
establishment in the city code.
(Prior Code, § 445.01)
   (B)   Dedicated fund. The escrow account that was established by Res. 2014-
16 is hereby confirmed as the dedicated escrow account required pursuant to the
requirements and obligations set forth in M.S. § 65A.50, as it may be amended
from time to time. The purpose of the fund shall be to receive a portion of
insured real property fire or explosion settlement proceeds as described in
M.S. § 65A.50, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (1)   The escrow account shall be administered by the City Administrator/
Clerk-Treasurer.
      (2)   The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall be responsible for
notifying the Commissioner of the Department of Commerce of the city’s use of
the account in accordance with M.S. § 65A.50, as it may be amended from time to
time.
(Prior Code, § 445.03)
   (C)   Applicability and designations.
      (1)   The city shall uniformly apply M.S. § 65A.50, as it may be amended
from time to time, with respect to all property located within the city.
      (2)   The city designates and authorizes the following city employees in
accordance with M.S. § 65A.50, as it may be amended from time to time.
         (a)   The city’s Building Official is authorized to execute affidavits
certifying violations of health and safety as required by M.S. § 65A.50, subd.
3, as it may be amended from time to time.
         (b)   The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to receive
reasonable proof that damaged or destroyed portions of an insured structure are
repaired, replaced or removed or that an insured has entered into a contract
for repair, replacement or removal of the damaged portions as required by M.S.
§ 65A.50, subd. 8, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 445.05)
(Ord. 200191120-01, passed 11-20-2019)
§ 36.02 FEE SCHEDULE.
Type of Service Fee
Type of Service                                        Fee
ADMINISTRATIVE
Administrative citation                                $50
Administrative fee (special service charges - mowing,  $50
snow removal and the like)
Assessment notice-unpaid city services-at time mailed  $20 each notice
City Attorney                                          Actual cost
City Engineer                                          Actual cost
City map                                               Actual cost
Clerk/Zoning Administrator                             $40/hour
Community room rental                                  $20/1.5 hours, plus $10/
                                                       additional hour
Copies - multiple (b/w, legal or letter, one-sided;    $0.15
<5, no charge)
Copies - per page (b/w, legal or letter, one-sided;    $0.25
<5, no charge)
Copy - audit                                           $15, plus postage
Copy - budget                                          $9, plus postage
Copy - code book                                       $125, plus postage
Copy - Planning and Land Use Code (500)                $10, plus postage
Credit card processing fee - Square (payments made at  3.25% per transaction
City Hall)
Credit card processing fee - merchant services (online $2.75 per transaction
bill pay)
Data practices requests                                Per policy
Fax - per page - send or receive                       $1
Filing fee for public office                           $2
Group camp sites at Robinson Park                      $30/night
Individual camp sites at Robinson Park                 $10/night
Lions Hill open/closure - after hours                  $10
Meeting agenda copy - per year and mailing             $20
Meeting minutes copy - per year and mailing            $25
Non-sufficient fund check (NSF)                        Max allowed by state
Plat map and the like                                  Engineer’s cost
Property abatement (contracted out)                    Cost billed to city
Repeat nuisance service calls                          $350 (first), $500
                                                       (second)
Special assessment search                              $40
Subsequent similar offense within 12 months            150% of pervious fee
ALCOHOL
3.2% beer off-sale review                              $20
3.2% beer on-sale review                               $110
Consumption and display permit                         $300 per year
Liquor/beer in park - special permit                   Council approval, plus
                                                       temporary permit fee
Liquor license (Sunday) review                         $125
Liquor off-sale license review                         $125
Liquor on-sale license review                          $1,600
Liquor - wine on-sale (first time/renewal)             $550/$200
Outside patio (initial/renewal)                        $100/$50
Temporary                                              $25
ANIMALS
Appeal hearing for dangerous dogs, potentially         $100
dangerous dogs or dogs seized for destruction
Bees, keeping of                                       $25
Chickens, keeping of                                   $25
Dangerous dog registration fee                         $200 annually
Dog - certified warnings, beginning second warning     $15
Educational non-domestic animal permit                 No charge
Non-domestic animal event permit                       No charge
Permit to destroy animal (firearms)                    No charge
Release fee                                            $25/first; doubles with
                                                       subsequent
Release permit fee                                     No charge
BUILDINGS
After the fact fee for permitted structures            Double the required
                                                       permit fee
                                                       2-hour call-out charge
Building inspections                                   for weekend and holiday
                                                       inspections
Building offices                                       Actual cost
Building permit                                        1997 UBC rate (adopted
                                                       5-20-2009)
   $1 to $500 valuation                             $23.50
   $501 to $2,000                                   $23.50/first $500, plus
                                                       $3.05/$100
   $2,001 to $25,000                                $69.25/first $2,000,
                                                       plus $14/$1,000
   $25,001 to $50,000                               $391.25/first $25,000,
                                                       plus $10.10/$1,000
   $50,001 to $100,000                              $643.75/first $50,000,
                                                       plus $7/$1,000
   $100,001 to $500,000                             $993.75/first $100,000,
                                                       plus $5.60/$1,000
                                                       $3,223.75/first
   $500,001 to $1,000,000                           $500,000, plus $4.75/
                                                       $1,000
                                                       $5,608.75/first
   $1,000,001 and up                                $1,000,000, plus $3.65/
                                                       $1,000
Demolition permit - garage                             $25
Demolition permit - house                              $60
Driveway permit                                        $25, plus escrow
Escrow                                                 $100 - $10,000 depending
                                                       on project
Fence permit                                           $10
House movers license                                   $100, plus $500 deposit
Maintenance permit                                     $40
Manufactured home installation permit                  $100
Moving permit                                          $15
Occupancy inspection                                   $0
Plan review
   Additional plan/site review (changes, additions, $47
revisions)
   Residential                                      50% of permit fee
   Commercial                                       65% of permit fee
Reinstatement fee (if suspended)                       $25
Rental license application fee                         $25/year
Sidewalk, curb or gutter permit                        $25
Tower/antenna permit fee                               $50
Traffic officer                                        Actual cost
CEMETERY
Cremains (opening/closing)                             $200
Grave opening/closing (traditional)                    Family pays contractor
                                                       directly
Locate fee (monuments/burial)                          $100
Perpetual care - one grave space                       $350
Property - one grave space                             $100
Winter cemetery plowing (January through March 15)     $75
Winter cremains (January through March 15)             $275
Winter locate fee (January through March 15)           $200
DEVELOPMENT
Annexation/detachment processing request               $100
Building sewer permit                                  $25
                                                       $250, plus staff/
Business subsidy agreement application                 consultant time; plus
                                                       escrow - determined by
                                                       staff
                                                       $500, plus staff/legal
Developer agreement processing                         time, plus escrow
                                                       determined by staff
Environmental audit worksheet review                   Staff/consultant time
Environmental impact review                            Staff/consultant time
Park dedication fees
   Commercial/industrial                            5% or $400 per acre
   Residential                                      10% or $400 per dwelling
                                                       unit
Public improvement petition review                     $50
Sewer access charge (SAC) - per equivalent residential $1,500
connection (ERC)
Sewer service connection license (annual)              $25, plus $1,000 bond
Trunk sanitary sewer area fee                          $1,925/acre
Trunk water main area fee                              $2,420/acre
Water access charge (WAC) - per equivalent residential $1,500
connection (ERC)
Water connection permit                                $25
Water meter fee                                        $50
Water meter test fee                                   $25 if within 2%
FIRE
Emergency page - institutional - min 1 hour            $750 min/1 hour
Extrication and technical rescue - per 1/2 hour        $500
Fire alarm systems - notify Fire Department            No charge
                                                       Portion of proceeds from
Fire and explosion escrow                              insurance settlement to
                                                       ensure cleanup and the
                                                       like
Fire call - auto                                       $450
Fire call - false alarm (hard-wired, auto dial-out     $0 (first), $350
systems)                                               (second), $650 (third)
Fire hydrant permit                                    $425 cash (min/1 hour)
Fire hydrant service charge (annual)                   No charge
Permit to clean commercial cooking ventilation systems No charge
Scene security when necessary to protect the public    $380 min/1 hour
from a clear and present danger (such as a gas leak,   $350/hour per rig and
fuel spills, investigations, downed electrical lines   $25 per firefighter per
and the like)                                          hour
FRANCHISES
Cable television franchise fee                         5%
                                                       $2.59/month for each
                                                       residential service
                                                       agreement
Franchise fee for retail customers of Minnesota Power  $2.59/month for each
                                                       commercial, industrial
                                                       or other service
                                                       agreement
PERMITS - LAND DISTURBANCE
Land disturbance permit - major (2,000 cubic yards or  $500 ($350 refundable if
more; 1 acre or more; 3 feet deep or more)             no engineering review
                                                       needed)
Land disturbance permit - minor (25 - 2,000 cubic      $50
yards or 1 - 3 feet deep)
Storm water management plan
   Application fee                                  $100
   Deposit                                          $1,500
                                                       In addition to
   Letter of credit                                 application, based on
                                                       project construction
                                                       items
PERMITS/LICENSES - MISCELLANEOUS
Cannabis retail registration                           Issued by Pine County
Courtesy bench license (annual)                        No charge
Flammable liquid storage permit                        $5
Junk dealer’s license                                $250
Mobile food units and food carts license fee           $25/day (temporary),
                                                       $100 (annual)
Peddlers/transient merchants/solicitors                $25
Public swimming pools (annual)                         $25
Solid waste collection license review                  $40
Special event permit                                   $0, clean up deposit may
                                                       be required
Target/trap shooting license (annual)                  $25
RIGHT-OF-WAY
Additional inspection - 1/2-hour minimum               $45
Annual registration                                    $30
Construction and performance bonds                     As needed
Degradation fee                                        Cost as per ordinance
Emergency permit                                       $40
Excavation permit                                      $40
Obstruction permit                                     $40 (50% discount in
                                                       paid in January)
Other ROW permit                                       $40
Overhead facilities permit                             $40, plus 50% discount
                                                       if paid in January
                                                       $40, plus surety bond,
Small wireless facility permit                         also co-locate rate and
                                                       the like
Utility permit                                         $40, plus surety bond
STREETS AND PARKS
Backhoe                                                $150/hour
Commercial use of Robinson Park - 3 or fewer events    $50 (labor cost, plus
                                                       disposal)
Commercial use of Robinson Park - more than 3 events   $100 (>100 square feet -
                                                       $40)
Compost - non-resident                                 $10/hour
Dump truck                                             $100/hour
Electrical box - lease - weekend                       $100
Mower/weed whip                                        $40
Pickup truck                                           $75/hour
Riding mower                                           $75
                                                       City costs, plus minimum
Salt and sand                                          (3/4-yard minimum; 1/2-
                                                       hour minimum for truck)
Skid steer                                             $125/hour
Snow - downtown business parking lots                  $80
Special vehicle moving permit                          $10 (annual)
Sweeper                                                $150/hour
Tractor and mower                                      $100/hour
Yard clean-up                                          1-hour minimum per load
UTILITY
Automatic building sprinkler system - direct           $100
connection to main (annual)
Certification fee (admin)                              10% of amount certified
                                                       to taxes
Certification notice - unpaid notice - at time mailed  $20
Commercial meter                                       $10/day or $150/month
Commercial meter deposit                               $1,000
Hydrant use permit                                     $25
   3/4” meter                                     $5/day or $75/month
   3/4” meter deposit                             $150
Late meter return fee                                  $50
Late payment fee                                       10% of balance
Lawn sprinkler/irrigation system permit                $50
Private wastewater disposal system permit              $25
Sewer (on-site systems) compliance inspections         Done by the county
Sewer base fee (fixed rate)                            $16.82 each notice
                                                       Will increase 0.5%
Sewer fixed rate                                       annually, effective 1-1-
                                                       2023
Sewer rate per gallon (volume)                         $4.50/1,000 gallons
                                                       Will increase 1.5%
Sewer volume rate                                      annually, effective 1-1-
                                                       2023
State test fee                                         $0.53
Storm sewer connection fee                             $500 per new development
                                                       See §
Storm water utility user fee                           158.05 of this code of
                                                       ordinances
Surcharge for non-compliance with clear water          $25/month
discharge requirements
Technology access                                      $0.07
Water base fee (fixed rate)                            $15.68
Water, continuation of service fee                     $50
Water, disconnect/connect (seasonal)                   $15
Water discontinuation of service notice                $10
                                                       Will increase 0.5%
Water fixed rate                                       annually, effective 1-1-
                                                       2023
Water rate per gallon (volume)                         $6.49/1,000 gallons
                                                       Double the current water
Water use                                              volume rate/1,000
                                                       gallons ($20 minimum)
                                                       Will increase 1.5%
Water volume rate                                      annually, effective 1-1-
                                                       2023
ZONING AND PLANNING
Adult establishment license                            $1,500
Appeals                                                $100
Conditional use review                                 $225
Entertainment license                                  $1,500, plus $10/parcel
Final plat - deposit                                   $2,000
Final plat review                                      $500, plus staff/
                                                       consultant time
Floodplain permit                                      $100
                                                       Requires interim use
Home occupation                                        permit or conditional
                                                       use permit
Interim use permit                                     $225
Lot split application                                  $225
Ordinance amendment                                    $250, plus staff/
                                                       consultant time
Preliminary plat - deposit                             $2,000
Preliminary plat review                                $500, plus staff/
                                                       consultant time
                                                       $200, plus acceptable
PUD application                                        security, plus staff/
                                                       consultant time
Sign permit                                            $25
Sketch plat review                                     $100, plus staff/
                                                       consultant time
                                                       $25, plus investigation
Use and occupancy permit/zoning compliance form        fee, plus staff/
                                                       consultant time
Vacation of street/alley/easement                      $225, plus staff/
                                                       consultant time
Variance                                               $225
 
(Scheduled passed 1-19-2022; Ord. 20220216-01, passed 2-24-2022; Schedule
amended 6-15-2022; Ord. 20221228-01, passed 12-28-2022; Schedule amended - -
2023; Ord. 20240117-02, passed 1-17-2024; Ord. 20240417-01, passed 4-17-2024;
Ord. 20241218-01, passed 12-18-2024)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   UTILITIES GENERALLY
      
51.   SOLID WASTE
      
52.   WATER
      
53.   SEWERS
CHAPTER 50: UTILITIES GENERALLY
Section
Trunk Sanitary Sewer and
Trunk Water Main Area Fees
   
50.01   Area fees generally
   
50.02   Amounts
   
50.03   Additional fees
   
50.04   Payment of fees
   
50.05   Deposit
TRUNK SANITARY SEWER AND TRUNK WATER MAIN AREA FEES
§ 50.01 AREA FEES GENERALLY.
   The area charges for sanitary sewer areas and water main areas are
established by this subchapter. The fees are based on gross acreage and have
been determined on the basis of the 4-6-2005 engineering report of Short,
Elliott, Hendricksen, consulting engineers, entitled “Trunk Utility Area Fees
(Report)”. The report is on file in the office of the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer and is available for public inspection during normal city business
hours.
(Prior Code, § 725.01) (Ord. 2006-04, passed 8-16-2006)
§ 50.02 AMOUNTS.
   (A)   The sanitary sewer area fee shall be as described on the fee schedule
in §
36.02.
   (B)   The water main area fee shall be as described on the fee schedule in §
36.02.
(Prior Code, § 725.03) (Ord. 2006-04, passed 8-16-2006)
§ 50.03 ADDITIONAL FEES.
   The fees imposed by §
50.02 of this chapter are separate and in addition to sewer availability
charges and water availability charges imposed by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 725.05) (Ord. 2006-04, passed 8-16-2006)
§ 50.04 PAYMENT OF FEES.
   The fees imposed by §
50.02 of this chapter are payable:
   (A)   At the execution of a development agreement; or
   (B)   At the time a building permit is issued as determined by the City
Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 725.07) (Ord. 2006-04, passed 8-16-2006)
§ 50.05 DEPOSIT.
   The fees imposed by §
50.02 of this chapter must be deposited in the Permanent Improvement Revolving
Fund.
(Prior Code, § 725.09) (Ord. 2006-04, passed 8-16-2006)
CHAPTER 51: SOLID WASTE
Section
   
51.01   Purpose
   
51.02   Definitions
   
51.03   Storage prohibitions
   
51.04   Authorized storage and waste containers
   
51.05   Composting
   
51.06   Collection and removal
   
51.07   Non-compliance
 
   
51.99   Penalty
§ 51.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The City Council finds that it is in the best interests of the health
and safety of the residents of the city to mandate that all residential and
other generators of waste in the city provide for disposal thereof as set forth
in this chapter.
   (B)   Disposal of waste in accordance with this chapter will help to ensure
that waste is disposed of properly and promptly and will help to avoid
potential health and safety risks to residents and persons in the city caused
by improper disposal or lack of disposal of waste.
(Prior Code, § 635.01) (Ord. 2014-05, passed 4-2-2014)
§ 51.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED PROPERTY. Deteriorated, wrecked or derelict property in unusable
condition and left outside unprotected from the elements. The term ABANDONED
PROPERTY includes, but is not limited to, motor vehicles, trailers, boats,
machinery, appliances and furniture.
   CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS. The definition as set forth in M.S. § 115A.03, subd. 7,
as it may be amended from time to time.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. The definition as set forth in M.S. § 116.06, subd. 11, as
it may be amended from time to time.
   MIXED MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE. The definition as set forth in M.S. § 115A.03,
subd. 21, as it may be amended from time to time.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Materials that are separated from mixed municipal
solid waste for the purpose of recycling, including paper, glass, plastics,
metals, automobile oil and batteries.
   SOLID WASTE. The definition as set forth in M.S. § 116.06, subd. 22, as it
may be amended from time to time.
   YARD WASTE. The definition as set forth in M.S. § 115A.03, subd. 38, as it
may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 635.03) (Ord. 2014-05, passed 4-2-2014`)
§ 51.03 STORAGE PROHIBITIONS.
   It is unlawful to throw or deposit solid waste, yard waste, construction
debris or hazardous waste on public or private property in the city. It is
unlawful to burn solid waste, yard waste, construction debris or hazardous
waste. Abandoned property may be stored on public or private property only in a
garage or storage building.
(Prior Code, § 635.05) (Ord. 2014-05, passed 4-2-2014) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.04 AUTHORIZED STORAGE AND WASTE CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Removal and recycling. Occupants of any premises, or if unoccupied,
the owner, must place, deposit or keep on the premises all solid waste and yard
waste in the manner as herein provided. The property owner or occupant must
have solid waste and yard waste removed and hauled away by a commercial hauler
at regularly scheduled intervals. The city encourages residents to recycle
recyclable materials by bringing them to the city-designated drop-off site for
recycling.
   (B)   Container requirements.
      (1)   Solid waste and yard waste must be accumulated in one or more fly-
tight containers. The owner or occupant of any residential, multi-family
dwelling, commercial or industrial establishment or any other premises where
solid waste or yard waste is accumulated, must provide one or more water-tight
containers sufficiently sized to receive all solid waste and yard waste which
may accumulate between collection times.
      (2)   All containers must have outside handles or other proper
attachments for lifting. All solid waste and yard waste must be deposited and
kept in the containers and so covered as to shed water and keep odor in, and
insects, rodents and vermin out.
   (C)   Placing of containers. Containers must be kept in the rear of the
premises or in a garage located on the premises. The containers must be placed
near a street, alley or driveway, or at such other appropriate place, as
convenient for the collection and removal of the contents. The containers may
not be placed in the appropriate place more than 24 hours before collection and
must be removed within 24 hours after removal of the contents.
(Prior Code, § 635.07) (Ord. 2014-05, passed 4-2-2014) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.05 COMPOSTING.
   (A)   Private composting. The private composting of yard wastes and
putrescible food wastes is permitted if all of the following conditions are
met.
      (1)   The compost pile must be screened from view of the public right-of-
way and adjacent properties.
      (2)   The compost pile must be kept in a container constructed of wood,
wire, mesh, concrete block or a combination thereof, or in a commercially
available compost bin designed for composting organic waste.
      (3)   The compost pile must be managed so as to prevent the scattering of
yard wastes or other material.
      (4)   The compost pile must be managed in a manner to prevent odor,
harborage of animals and the stockpiling of material which does not readily
decompose within a calendar year.
      (5)   Only the yard waste and putrescible food wastes which are produced
on the premises may be composted on the premises.
   (B)   Off-site composting. Yard and putrescible food wastes may be brought
off-site to a privately- or publicly-owned composting site.
   (C)   Disposal of other wastes. No person shall throw or place any solid
waste, hazardous waste, construction debris, recyclable material, yard waste or
other debris in any ditch, stream, river or retention basin that regularly or
periodically carries surface water runoff. Any person who deposits any of the
above shall remove it or cause it to be removed immediately.
(Prior Code, § 635.09) (Ord. 2014-05, passed 4-2-2014) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.06 COLLECTION AND REMOVAL.
   Residential households and other commercial, industrial and institutional
generators may implement an environmentally sound alternative form of disposal.
The alternative form of disposal must be in compliance with all laws and
regulations relating thereto, but may not involve burying, burning,
accumulation or transportation of solid waste to a facility not licensed for
receipt and processing of same. Generators wishing to be allowed to pursue
alternatives shall be required to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer that they have arrangements in place and that
they are permitted by law. Generators failing to demonstrate environmentally
acceptable alternatives will be required to contract and pay for collection
from a commercial hauler. Generators wishing to appeal a decision of the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer regarding alternative disposal methods may do so
within 30 days of notice of the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer’s decision
by giving written notice to the city of the generator’s appeal. The appeal
shall be made to the City Council and shall be accompanied by additional
information as the generator believes will allow the City Council to determine
whether the alternative disposal method proposed by the generator is
environmentally adequate and likely to be implemented. The Council may
condition its approval of alternative disposal methods in a manner, including
requiring the production of written contracts or financial guarantees, as the
Council may determine to be needed to ensure compliance with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 635.11) (Ord. 2014-05, passed 4-2-2014)
§ 51.07 NON-COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Proper disposal. No person shall deposit or allow the deposit of solid
waste from any source in any place other than a sanitary landfill or other
county-designated facility. The discarding of solid waste, construction debris,
hazardous waste, yard waste or recyclable materials on any street, alley,
drive, park, playground or other public place or on any vacant lot shall
constitute violation of this chapter whether it is discarded by the individual
upon whose premises the material originates or by some other person or
collector, licensed or unlicensed.
   (B)   Failure to dispose. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to fail to dispose of solid waste or other waste which may be or
which may accumulate upon property owned or occupied by the generator in a
sanitary manner.
(Prior Code, § 635.13) (Ord. 2014-05, passed 4-2-2014) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for
any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota Statutes
specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90
days, or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
   (C)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time, in
either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
   (D) The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
   (E)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if any
person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this code,
the City Council or any city official designated by it may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
(Prior Code, § 635.15)
CHAPTER 52: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Utilities Superintendent
   
52.02   General operation of system
   
52.03   Use restricted to authorized persons
   
52.04   Damage to water system
   
52.05   Discontinuance of service for violations
   
52.06   Deficiency of water; shutting off water
   
52.07   Supply from one service
   
52.08   Tapping mains prohibited
   
52.09   Repair of leaks
   
52.10   Abandoned services
   
52.11   Excavation and construction requirements
   
52.12   Private water supplies
   
52.13   Use confined to premises
   
52.14   Connections beyond city boundaries
   
52.15   Water conservation
   
52.16   Applications
   
52.17   Service charges
   
52.18   Damage to curb stop
   
52.19   Time for connections
   
52.20   Property assessments
   
52.21   Curb stop and building gate valve
   
52.22   Supervision by plumber
   
52.23   Turning on water
Rates and Charges; Meters
   
52.35   Accounts; how kept
   
52.36   Water rates
   
52.37   Payment of charges
   
52.38   Penalty for late payment
   
52.39   Action to collect charges
   
52.40   Meters
   
52.41   Water meter setting
   
52.42   Charges for availability of municipal water
   
52.43   Hydrant service charge
   
52.44   Discontinuing seasonal customers; freeze-ups
   
52.45   Discontinuance of water service
   
52.46   Fire services
   
52.47   Senior citizen rates
   
52.48   Lawn sprinkler/irrigation systems
 
   
52.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 UTILITIES SUPERINTENDENT.
   The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer may appoint a Utilities
Superintendent, who is to discharge the responsibilities imposed by this
chapter, together with such other duties as may be required or assigned to that
person.
(Prior Code, § 715.01)
§ 52.02 GENERAL OPERATION OF SYSTEM.
   The municipal water system is to be operated as a public utility and
convenience from which revenue will be derived under the management and control
of the City Council. The system is to be operated and maintained in a manner as
to provide its service with maximum efficiency.
(Prior Code, § 715.03)
§ 52.03 USE RESTRICTED TO AUTHORIZED PERSONS.
   It is unlawful to make, construct or install a water service installation or
make use of a water service that is connected to the water system, except in
the manner provided in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 715.05) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.04 DAMAGE TO WATER SYSTEM.
   It is unlawful to remove or damage a structure, appurtenance or property of
the water system, or fill or partially fill any excavation, or raise or open
any gate constructed or maintained for the water system.
(Prior Code, § 715.07) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.05 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE FOR VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Water service may be shut off at a curb stop connection or gate valve
box connection if:
      (1)   The owner or occupant of the premises served or a person working on
pipes or equipment thereon that are connected with the water system has
violated or threatens to violate provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   Charges for water, service, meter or any other financial
obligations under this chapter imposed on the present or former owner or
occupant of the premises served is unpaid; and
      (3)   There has been fraud or misrepresentation by the owner or occupant
of the premises served in connection with services provided under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 715.09)
   (B)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city's form for application for
utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address,
room number and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly
visible and easily readable provisions to the effect that:
      (1)   All bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth on
the bill;
      (2)   If any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second bill will
be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid within ten
days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued for
nonpayment; and
      (3)   (a)   Any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill
shall have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be represented in
person and by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may
present, orally or in writing, his or her complaint and contentions to the city
official in charge of utility billing.
         (b)   This official shall be authorized to order that the customer’s
service not be discontinued and shall have the authority to make a final
determination of the customer’s complaint.
   (C)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained; only
questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence of
payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
   (D)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility service
to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only after
all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on charge in
an amount set by the city (see fee schedule in § 36.02).
§ 52.06 DEFICIENCY OF WATER; SHUTTING OFF WATER.
   The city is not liable for a deficiency or failure in the supply of water to
consumers. In case of fire, or alarm of fire, or in making repairs or
construction of new works, water may be shut off and kept shut off as long as
deemed necessary by the Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 715.11)
§ 52.07 SUPPLY FROM ONE SERVICE.
   Not more than one housing unit or building may be supplied from one service
connection, except by special permission of the Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 715.13)
§ 52.08 TAPPING MAINS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for a person except one employed or authorized by the city to
tap a distribution main or pipe of the water supply system or insert stopcocks
or ferrules therein.
(Prior Code, § 715.15) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.09 REPAIR OF LEAKS.
   The consumer or owner must maintain the service pipe from the curb stop or
building gate valve into the house or building. In the case of failure upon the
part of a consumer or owner to repair a leak occurring in the service pipe
within 24 hours after verbal or written notice from the Superintendent, the
water will be shut off and will not be turned on until a penalty charge has
been paid and the leak repaired. If the waste of water is great or if damage is
likely to result from the leak, the water may be turned off immediately pending
repairs.
(Prior Code, § 715.17)
§ 52.10 ABANDONED SERVICES.
   (A)   Service installations that have been abandoned or have not been used
for three years will be disconnected at the main by the city, and the related
expense of the city will be charged to the property as an unpaid utility bill.
   (B)   When buildings are reconstructed or redeveloped and it is desired to
increase or change the old water service, connections with the mains may not be
made until all old services have been removed and the main plugged by the city
or the owner’s authorized contractor, and any related expense of the city will
be charged to the property as an unpaid utility bill.
(Prior Code, § 715.19)
§ 52.11 EXCAVATION AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   An excavation for the water system may not be made until a permit for
the connection has been issued by the Superintendent. The permit fee is set in
§
36.02 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Excavations for making a tap from city water mains must conform to
Federal Register Part 2, Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health
Administration, 29 C.F.R. part 1926, Occupational Safety and Health Standards -
Excavations: Final Rule. The excavations must extend to a depth at least 12
inches lower than the bottom of the water main. Ample clear space must be
allowed for insertion of tapping machine. Excavations must be safe. If not
determined safe by the tapper a tap may not be made. A safe ladder must be
furnished by the contractor for use of entry, tapping, inspection and exiting.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work must be restored to as good or better condition than before work
commenced.
   (C)   In compliance with the Minnesota Plumbing Code, separation of water
service pipes and sewer service pipes must be no less than ten feet apart
horizontally or may be placed in a common trench if the bottom of the water
service pipe is kept at a minimum of 12 inches above the top of the sewer pipe
at all points and the water pipe is placed on a solid shelf at one side of the
common trench. A common trench may also be used without the separation
requirements if the sewer pipe is of ductile iron, schedule 40 plastic, or
SDR35 ASTM D3034 plastic pipe and the water pipe is of copper or ductile iron.
(Prior Code, § 715.21) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.12 PRIVATE WATER SUPPLIES.
   It is unlawful to connect a water pipe of the water system with a pump,
well, tank or piping that is connected with any other source of water supply.
If the cross-connections are found to exist, the owner or the owner’s plumber
must give notice to the Superintendent and make an immediate correction of the
problem. Failure to correct the problem will result in the discontinuation of
the city’s water supply by the Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 715.23) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.13 USE CONFINED TO PREMISES.
   It is unlawful to permit water from the water system to be used for any
purpose, except upon that person’s premises unless written consent is obtained
from the Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 715.25) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.14 CONNECTIONS BEYOND CITY BOUNDARIES.
   Where water mains of the city are in any street or alley adjacent to or
outside the corporate limits of the city, the Council may issue permits to the
owners or occupants of properties adjacent or accessible to the water mains to
make proper water service pipe connections with the water mains of the city,
and to be supplied with water in conformity with the applicable provisions of
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 715.27)
§ 52.15 WATER CONSERVATION.
   (A)   Restrictions against sprinkling; other limitations of water use. If
the City Council determines that a shortage of water supply threatens the city,
the Council may, by resolution, limit the times and hours during which water
may be used from the water system. It is unlawful to cause or permit water to
be used for anything other than in home use during the period covered by the
resolution.
   (B)   Water conservation plan. The city has adopted a water conservation
plan (plan) approved by the state’s Department of Natural Resources. The plan
identifies the conditions under which the Council may disclose a shortage. The
plan is available for public inspection in the office of the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer. Violations of the plan are punishable as
provided in §
52.99(B) of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 715.29) (Ord. 2006-02, passed 6-7-2006) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.16 APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Applications for service installations and for water service are made
to the Building Department on printed forms as provided by the Department.
   (B)   Applications for service installations and for water service must be
made by the owner or agent of the property to be served and state the size and
location of service connection required. The applicant must, at the time of
making application, pay to the city the amount of fees or deposit required for
the installation of the service connection set in §
36.02 of this code of ordinances. Applications for services larger than one
inch must be accompanied by two sets of plans or sketches indicating preferred
location of service pipe and size of service based on building demand. No
person will make a service connection with any public water unless regularly
licensed to perform such work, and no permit will be granted to any person
except such regularly licensed persons.
   (C)   When service connections have been installed, application for water
service may be made to the department, either by the owner, agent, tenant or
occupant of the premises.
   (D)   The size of water service connections and meters must be approved by
the Superintendent. The water service may not be less than the size of the
service pipe from the main to the curb stop. To better serve the building over
a longer period of time, and because of future water usage, such as yard
irrigation systems, swimming pools and dishwashers, it is recommended that a
one inch service pipe be the smallest service size. All services up to two inch
must be type K copper with flared fittings for one- inch and three-inch part
compression connection fittings approved by the Superintendent for two-inch
diameter copper. Services larger than two inches must be ductile iron Class 52
type designated by the city standard specifications for water mains for the
current year.
   (E)   A meter with fittings and gaskets will be furnished to the contractor
or plumber at the time a connection permit is issued.
   (F)   The plumber must notify the Building Department within 24 hours after
piping is complete and ready for meter installation, giving street address and
permit number.
   (G)   Water billing starts at the time of installation of the water meter,
or if the meter is not installed, seven days after completion of outside
piping. Billing will be calculated upon the minimum rate prorated on a monthly
basis.
(Prior Code, § 715.31)
§ 52.17 SERVICE CHARGES.
   (A)   A permit must be obtained from the Building Department to connect to
the existing water service leads at the curb box and interior plumbing. Permits
will be issued only to a licensed plumber.
   (B)   Additional charges must be paid at the time of making application for
tapping of water main, installation of service line, installation of curb stop
and box and restoration of street surface where a curb box and service lead is
installed. The charges are as follows.
      (1)   Where the installation is to be on an unsurfaced street, the amount
to be charged is fixed by the Utilities Superintendent based upon the actual
cost of installing the service, plus administrative cost.
      (2)   Where the installation is upon a surfaced street, there is a fee
for restoration of a typical road bituminous street in addition to the above
charge. For the restoration of a higher type street, the fee will be set by the
Utilities Superintendent. All backfill materials must be mechanically compacted
in 12 inch layers to the density of the adjacent material in the roadway area
in accordance with the state’s Highway Department standard specifications to
the existing street grade.
      (3)   The owner must install, or have installed, the service connections
from the water main to the property line. Payment for the service connections
must be made before the work is started.
      (4)   The city will supply the corporation stop, saddle (if required),
curb stop and box up to two inch which will be charged to the plumber when
applying for a tap. Cost will also include labor, equipment and overhead.
Service larger than two inch requires the owner to contract a qualified tapper
who must be approved by the Utilities Superintendent. The tapping sleeves must
be stainless steel. The sleeves must be mechanical joint or approved equal with
a flanged outlet for connection to the tapping sleeve. The tapping sleeves must
be as manufactured by Ford “fast tap” with ductile iron gland and stainless
steel bolts or JCM model 432 stainless steel tapping sleeve, or approved equal.
The owner must also provide valves and valve boxes. The valves must be
resilient seat manufactured to meet applicable requirements of AWWA C500 and
AWWA C109-80. The resilient seat valves must be Waterous, American, Clow or
Mueller. The valve boxes must be Tyler 6860.
(Prior Code, § 715.33) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.18 DAMAGE TO CURB STOP.
   (A)   Before any grading or excavation is started, the water curb stop box
must be located and checked for damage by the contractor.
   (B)   Location ties will be furnished by the Superintendent at time
connection permit is issued.
   (C)   If the shutoff box can not be located or is found bent or in a damaged
condition, the Superintendent is to be called at once.
   (D)   The contractor assumes all responsibility for damage to the shutoff
box unless the Superintendent certifies that damage existed before excavation
or grading started.
(Prior Code, § 715.35) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.19 TIME FOR CONNECTIONS.
   If the plumber or contractor laying the service pipe fails to have the
connection made at the time specified in the application, notice must be given
to the Superintendent fixing another day on which the plumber wishes to make
connection. The notice must be given at least two days previous to the
excavation for laying of the service pipe, and the connection must be made
before 4:30 p.m., except in special cases, and then the work may be done only
upon a written order from the Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 715.37)
§ 52.20 PROPERTY ASSESSMENTS.
   (A)   The permit fee for water main tapping will be paid for each connection
in the amount specified in §
36.02 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   In addition, before any permit is issued, the following conditions
must be complied with:
      (1)   A permit will not be issued to tap or connect with any water main
of the city directly or indirectly from any lot or tract of land unless the
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer has certified:
         (a)   The lot or tract of land has been assessed for the cost of
construction of the water main with which the connection is made;
         (b)   If no assessment has been levied for the construction cost, the
proceedings for levying an assessment have been or will be completed in due
course; and
         (c)   If no assessment has been levied and no assessment proceedings
will be completed in due course, that a sum equal to the portion of cost of
constructing the water main would be assessable against the lot or tract has
been paid to the city.
      (2)   (a)   If the certificate cannot be issued by the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, a permit to tap or connect to any water main may
not be issued unless the applicant has paid an additional connection fee, equal
to the portion of the cost of construction of the main which would be
assessable against the lot or tract to be serviced by the tapping connection,
including interest at a rate equal to the interest rate of 20 years or the
amount of years the assessment was decreased, when it is determined by the
Utilities Superintendent that the improvement was not subject to utilization
until a later date.
         (b)   The assessable cost is to be determined by the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer upon the same basis as any assessment previously
levied against other property for the main.
         (c)   If no such assessment has been levied, the assessable cost will
be determined upon the basis of the uniform charge which may have been or which
will be charged for similar tapping or connection with the main, allocated on
frontage basis, or both.
(Prior Code, § 715.39)
§ 52.21 CURB STOP AND BUILDING GATE VALVE.
   (A)   Curb stop boxes must be installed at a point on the property line most
suitable to the property, and must be left in an accurate vertical position
when back filling is completed. Curb stop boxes will be installed at an
approximate depth of seven and one-half feet below the grade established by the
Utilities Superintendent.
   (B)   Type K copper tubing must be used for installation of water services.
   (C)   The curb stop must be mounted on a concrete block for a good base
support.
   (D)   The building gate valve if wet tapped must be located next to the
water main within two feet and must remain at the same depth as the water main.
This will be considered the building shut off. Whenever possible, a wet tap is
recommended so as not to interrupt existing customers.
(Prior Code, § 715.41)
§ 52.22 SUPERVISION BY PLUMBER.
   Piping connections from curb box to house supply piping must be made under
the supervision of a licensed plumber.
(Prior Code, § 715.43) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.23 TURNING ON WATER.
   Only an authorized city employee may turn on or off any water supply at the
curb stop.
(Prior Code, § 715.45) Penalty, see §
52.99
RATES AND CHARGES; METERS
§ 52.35 ACCOUNTS; HOW KEPT.
   (A)   Accounts must be kept on the books of the Administration Department by
the house and street number and under the account number assigned thereto, and
by the name of the owner or of the person signing the application for service.
Bills and notices sent by the Administration Department will be sent to the
house or street number of the property.
   (B)   If non-resident owners or agents desire personal notice sent to a
different address, they must file an application therefor with the
Administration Department . An error in address must be promptly reported to
the Administration Department . Responsibility for a notice of change of
ownership rests with the owner. For purposes of this chapter, the term OWNER
has the meaning given by §
10.05 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 715.47)
§ 52.36 WATER RATES.
   (A)   Schedule. The rate due and payable to the city by each water user
within the city for water taken will be charged per 1,000 gallons, payable
periodically, subject, however, to a minimum charge to each water user for each
period during which water service is furnished. This minimum charge represents
a basic facility and service cost inherent in operation of the water system.
The charges are set by resolution of the City Council on an annual basis in §
36.02 of this code of ordinances. For services unable to be metered, usage
charges will be billed by the average sage per month per occupant.
   (B)   Estimates. In case the meter is found to have stopped or to be
operating in a faulty manner, the amount of water used will be estimated in
accordance with the amount used previously in comparable periods of the year.
   (C)   Billing. Where service is for less than a full billing period, the
charge will be prorated.
   (D)   Automatic sprinkler system. Where a connection is made to an automatic
building sprinkler system for standby service only, on either municipal or
private water mains, a charge for the service will be made on an annual basis
in the amount set by §
36.02 of this code of ordinances. These rates apply in all cases where
automatic sprinklers are installed and where fire gates and other outlets are
sealed.
   (E)   Special contract. Rates due and payable by each water user located
beyond the territorial boundaries of the city will be determined by special
contract.
   (F)   Minimum rates apply. Where a service pipe is connected to the curb
stop and laid into the building with no intention of connection to the building
piping for use immediately, the minimum rates and charges set in division (A)
above apply.
   (G)   Installation. A meter must be installed on the street valve in the
house regardless of whether inside piping is connected.
   (H)   Continuance. If a water customer elects to discontinue the use of the
municipal water system, the regular or minimum charge continues until such date
as the service pipe is excavated and disconnected at the curb stop.
(Prior Code, § 715.49)
§ 52.37 PAYMENT OF CHARGES.
   Any prepayment or overpayment of charges may be retained by the city and
applied on subsequent monthly statements.
(Prior Code, § 715.51)
§ 52.38 PENALTY FOR LATE PAYMENT.
   Each billing for water service not paid when due incurs a penalty charge as
established in §
36.02 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 715.53)
§ 52.39 ACTION TO COLLECT CHARGES.
   (A)   An amount due for water charges may be certified to the County Auditor
for collection with real estate taxes in the following year in accordance with
M.S. § 444.075, as it may be amended from time to time. This certification will
be made regardless of who applied for water services, whether it was the owner,
tenant or other person. Applications for water service will contain an
explanation in clear language that unpaid water bills will be collected with
real estate taxes in the following year. The city may bring a civil action or
other remedies to collect unpaid charges.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, the term WATER CHARGES means and
includes without limitation water rate charges, permit charges, availability
charges, connection charges and any rate or charge authorized by M.S. §
444.075, as it may be amended from time to time, or imposed by this chapter.
When unpaid charges are certified for collection with taxes, the term CHARGES
includes a certification fee set by §
36.02 of this code of ordinances and interest on the unpaid charges at the
annual rate set by §
36.02 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 715.55)
§ 52.40 METERS.
   (A)   Except for extinguishment of fires, only authorized city employees may
use water from the water system or permit water to be drawn therefrom, unless
the same is metered by passing through a meter supplied or approved by the
city. Only persons authorized by the Superintendent may connect, disconnect,
take apart or, in any manner, change, or cause to be changed, or interfere with
any such meter or the action thereof.
   (B)   A water meter fee must be paid by customers for the furnishing of
water meters by the city. The customer must pay the fee before the water meter
is installed. The fee required is not a customer service deposit and is not
computed with reference to or based upon service supplied; the fee is required
to insure the safekeeping and proper maintenance of the meter only, and for no
other purpose. The fee is set by §
36.02 of this code of ordinances. The fee stands to the credit of the property
where the meter is installed, rather than to the credit of the owner of the
property at the time of the original fee payment. The water meter fee is non-
refundable.
   (C)   (1)   The city will maintain and repair all meters when rendered
unserviceable through ordinary wear and tear and replace them if necessary.
      (2)   However, where replacement, repair or adjustment of any meter is
rendered necessary by the act, neglect, including damage from hot water backup,
freeze-ups or carelessness of the owner or occupant of any premises, the
expense caused the city thereby will be charged against and collected from the
water customer.
   (D)   A consumer may, by written request, have a meter (up to one inch)
tested by the Water Department; at which time, the owner may be present or have
a representative present. If the meter is found to register within 2% of being
correct, a charge will be made for making the test. If the meter is found 2%
incorrectly, no charge will be made for making the test. If the meter is found
to over-register more than 2%, there will be a proportional deduction made from
the previous water bill. A water meter will be considered to register
satisfactorily when it registers within 2% of accuracy. The charges for meter
testing are set by §
36.02 of this code of ordinances.
   (E)   Except for additional or auxiliary meters, water meters are the
property of the city.
   (F)   Authorized city employees have free access at reasonable hours to all
parts of every building and premises connected with the water system for
reading, inspection and repair of meters. Failure to provide access may result
in one or more of the following actions:
      (1)   Imposition, along with and in addition to other charges for
service, a quarterly penalty charged as established by §
36.02 of this code of ordinances;
      (2)   Termination of service to the premises; and
      (3)   Billing and collecting for service to the premises on an estimated
consumption basis whether or not meter readings are being obtained.
   (G)   Commercial or industrial buildings must be metered with one master
meter of adequate size, as approved by the Superintendent. If additional or
auxiliary meters are desired for recording the subdivision of the supply, the
meters must be furnished and set up by the owner or consumer at the owner’s or
the consumer’s expense, and the owner or consumer must assume all
responsibility of reading, billing and maintaining same.
(Prior Code, § 715.57)
§ 52.41 WATER METER SETTING.
   Water meters must be installed in accordance with the following rules.
   (A)   The service pipe from the water main to the meter, when the same
enters the building, must be brought through the floor in a vertical position.
   (B)   The meter must be located so that the bottom is not less than 12
inches above the finished floor line and not greater than 24 inches above the
finished floor line. A full flow valve must be placed approximately 12 inches
above the floor. A stop and waste valve must be installed on the house side
adjacent to the meter, or just above the meter. The meter must be set not more
than 12 inches measured horizontally from the inside line of the basement wall,
unless an alternate method is approved by the Superintendent. An approved
fitting must be provided to support the meter in the proper vertical position.
Meters larger than one inch must be set on a pedestal.
   (C)   (1)   Meters two inch or greater in size must be equipped with a
bypass line equal to one-half the size of the existing pipe size so that in the
event a meter needs to be tested, repaired or replaced, the building will still
have a minimum amount of water supplied.
      (2)   The bypass line must be valved on each side, in addition to the
meter valves and when completed must be sealed by the city’s Utility
Department. This seal may not be tampered with and will be subject to a fine if
seal is found tampered with or broken.
   (D)   Meter installations must have a full flow valve placed approximately
12 inches above the floor. A stop and waste valve must be installed on the
house side just above the meter. Fittings and pipe are to be red brass or
bronze. Full way valves must be brass 125 pounds standard.
   (E)   Meter, valves and fittings must be kept readily accessible at all
times.
(Prior Code, § 715.59) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.42 CHARGES FOR AVAILABILITY OF MUNICIPAL WATER.
   (A)   For the purpose of providing funds for the city’s wells, water
treatment, water storage and water distribution systems, and the plant and
facilities connected therewith, and the payment of capital charges represented
by bonds, certificates of indebtedness or otherwise, which may be used to
finance the costs of additions or expansions to the facilities and the payment
of reasonable requirements or reserves for replacement in obsolescence thereof,
there is hereby imposed upon each lot, parcel of land, building or premises
having any connection with the city’s water system, a water availability charge
(WAC), as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   Properties in the city that are improved and have water-consuming
plumbing facilities and that abut upon streets or other places where water
mains are located are subject to the water availability charge provided for in
this section. The water availability charge shall be imposed in addition to the
user charges for water service and shall be determined and administered as
follows.
      (1)   The water availability charge must be paid prior to the issuance of
an applicable permit and before connecting to the city’s water system.
      (2)   If, after the initial water availability charge is paid, an
additional building permit is issued, the use of the property changes or a new
water connection is made, the water availability charge will be recalculated
and any additional charges must be paid.
      (3)   The unit charge multiplier for the water availability charge shall
be set forth from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
   (C)   The amount of the water availability charge for a particular property
shall be calculated by first determining the number of equivalent residential
connections (ERCs) applicable to the property. The number of ERCs shall be
determined by using the most current Metropolitan Council Environmental
Services Sewer Availability Procedure Manual. The number of ERCs for a use not
represented in the procedure manual shall be decided by the city engineer based
on estimated flows. Once the number of ERCs are determined, the water
availability charge for the property shall be calculated by multiplying the
number of ERCs for the property by the water availability unit charge.
   (D)   Accounts will be kept, bills will be rendered and collected, and
charges will be made for delinquent accounts in accordance with the procedures
applicable to charges for municipal water.
(Prior Code, § 715.61) (Ord. 2008-09, passed 8-6-2008)
§ 52.43 HYDRANT SERVICE CHARGE.
   (A)   (1)   There is an annual service charge for fire hydrants, payable by
each owner (including the city) upon whose property the hydrant is situated.
These hydrants must conform to the type specified by the city.
      (2)   Any other type must be replaced by the owner and at the owner’s
expense. The charge covers a yearly maintenance program at which time the city
will operate and lubricate the operating nut, nozzle caps and visually inspect
all bolts and nuts that are above existing grade. Any replacement of parts will
be billed to the owner at the owner’s expense and will include city’s cost for
labor.
(Prior Code, § 715.63)
   (B)   (1)   Hydrants are available throughout the city, but the use of a
fire hydrant, unless authorized by the Water Department, is prohibited.
Temporary service from fire hydrants is available for contractors. A hydrant
rental fee is required for usage of a hydrant for small water users. A hydrant
rental fee, along with a metered charge, is required for tank filling and
prolonged usages of fire hydrant. The meter will be furnished and installed by
the Water Department.
      (2)   Permits to use a fire hydrant will be issued for each individual
job or contract, and for a minimum of 30-day periods as the Superintendent may
determine. The permit must state the location of the hydrant and will be for
the use of that hydrant and none other.
      (3)   The fee for hydrant use is set by section §
36.02 of this code of ordinances
      (4)   Hydrants may be opened only with an operating hydrant wrench and
spanner which must be obtained from the Water Department after a deposit fee
has been paid. The hydrant must be fully opened in order to operate properly.
      (5)   The fire hydrant will be checked before and after the usage. Any
damage done will be charged to the holder of the permit.
(Prior Code, § 715.71)
Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.44 DISCONTINUING SEASONAL CUSTOMERS; FREEZE-UPS.
   (A)   Water service, discontinuing. A consumer desiring to discontinue the
use of water must notify the Water Department.
   (B)   Seasonal customers. There are no seasonal customers for water and
sanitary sewer services. Charges are based upon the consumption of water. If
there is no consumption for that month, a fee is charged according to the
current rate schedule. The customer may have the water temporarily shut off and
turned on at the curb box at the current fee. A fee for water disconnect/
connect will be charged as set by §
36.02 of this code of ordinances.
   (C)   Freeze-ups. Water breaks due to freezing lines, in which a residence
is not in use, are the responsibility of the owner. The owner will be charged
for all water consumption as well as any sewer rates. An owner may appeal their
sewer billing to the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 715.65)
§ 52.45 DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE.
   (A)   Grounds. Water service to a property may be shut off by the city for
the following reasons:
      (1)   Violation of a provision of this code relating to the operation,
maintenance or connection to the water system;
      (2)   Fraud or misrepresentation by an owner or occupant in connection
with an application for service; and/or
      (3)   Shut-off procedures. If the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer
determines that grounds exist for shutting off water service, the
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer must notify the owner or occupant or both of the
city’s intent to shut off, by mailed, written notice not less than ten days nor
more than 30 days prior to the date of shut-off. The notice must state that the
owner or occupant or both may request a hearing before the City Council at its
next regularly scheduled meeting and that at the hearing the owner or occupant
or both may present testimony as to why the service should not be shut off. The
request for a hearing must be presented in writing to the City Administrator/
Clerk-Treasurer not later than the fifth day after mailing of the notice. A
request from either the owner or occupant is sufficient to require the hearing.
If a request for a hearing is received, the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer
may not shut off service until the hearing has been held and then only at the
direction of the City Council. If a request for a hearing is not timely
received, the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer may shut off the water service
without further notice.
   (C)   Failure of the owner or occupant or either of them to pay rates and
charges for water service when due.
      (1)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city’s form for application for
utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address,
room number and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly
visible and easily readable provisions to the effect that:
         (a)   All bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth on
the bill;
         (b)   If any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second bill
will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid within
ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued for
nonpayment; and
         (c)   Any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill shall
have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be represented in person
and by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may present,
orally or in writing, his or her complaint and contentions to the city official
in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to order that
the customer’s service not be discontinued and shall have the authority to make
a final determination of the customer’s complaint.
      (2)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained;
only questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence
of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
      (3)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility
service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only
after all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on
charge in an amount set by the city (see fee schedule in §
36.02).
   (D)   Emergency shut-off. The procedure in divisions (A)(3) and (B) above do
not apply to water shut-off for the reasons specified in §
52.09 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 715.67)
§ 52.46 FIRE SERVICES.
   (A)   The construction of fire services must be made under the personal
supervision of an authorized employee of the Building Department. The cost of
this supervision will be charged to the owner.
   (B)   Private fire protection services may be constructed with detector
meters. All outlet valves must be sealed, and the system approved by the Water
Department, Fire Department and conforms with all building codes. Detector
checks the same size as building piping must be installed in all fire lines
with a rising stem gate valve on each side of the check. All fire service lines
will be equipped with an approved backflow preventer unless waived by the
Superintendent. This requirement includes, but is not limited to, annual
testing to be performed by the owner, and a copy of the test to be presented to
the city. Testing must be done by an accredited backflow preventer tester.
   (C)   Fire protection systems may be opened in case of fire or for
inspection, and may not supply water for domestic use, other than fire
suppression purposes.
   (D)   When seals on a fire protection system are broken, the owner or
occupant must notify the Water Department within 24 hours.
   (E)   If more than one service is installed on the same premises, the piping
of one may not be connected with the other, except with permission of the
Utilities Department.
   (F)   The Fire Marshal may limit the size of fire protection services where
the street mains are not adequately sized in order to protect public interest.
   (G)   If the owner or occupant of any premises is found to be using water
from a fire service for purposes other than fire protection, the Water
Department may require the owner of the premises to furnish and install, at the
owner’s expense and under the direction of the Water Department, an approved
water meter and to keep the same in accurate operating condition.
(Prior Code, § 715.69)
§ 52.47 SENIOR CITIZEN RATES.
   The Council may by resolution establish maximum water and sewer use rates
for senior citizens and disabled persons, the qualifications for and the method
of administering the special rates.
(Prior Code, § 715.73)
§ 52.48 LAWN SPRINKLER/IRRIGATION SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Purpose. All lawn sprinkler/irrigation systems connected to the
municipal water system, shall require a permit for connection and are to be
installed in accordance with the State Plumbing Code. The purpose of this
section is to promote efficient use of water for lawn sprinkler/irrigation
systems to allow the city’s water system flexibility in meeting peak demands.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms
shall have the meanings given to them.
      BACKFLOW PREVENTER. Any approved mechanical or air gap system designed
and installed in order to prevent the accidental backflow of water from one
source to another.
      LAWN SPRINKLER/IRRIGATION SYSTEM. All pumps, lines and sprinkler heads
which are located on private property or within adjacent public right-of-way
that have a sole purpose of irrigating gardens, grass or landscaping.
   (C)   Construction of a lawn sprinkler/irrigation system. The location of
lines and sprinkler heads for all lawn and landscape irrigation system may be
located within private property or the city right-of-way or easement subject to
the following conditions:
      (1)   A permit will be required for all lawn sprinkler/irrigations
systems installed. The permit cost will be established yearly in the annually
adopted city fee schedule.
      (2)   The connection to the water system must be done in conformance with
the State Plumbing Code.
      (3)   The low voltage electrical wiring portion of the lawn sprinkler/
irrigation system must be performed by a licensed Techno logy Systems
Contractor who employs a qualified Power Limited Technician per M.S. § 326.242,
as it may be amended from time to time.
      (4)   An approved back flow prevention device must be installed as a part
of all lawn sprinkler/irrigation systems. The device shall be installed per
manufacturer installation instructions. The type of approved backflow device
must be provided when applying for a permit.
      (5)   All newly installed lawn sprinkler/irrigation systems are required
to have rain sensors installed as part of the system. This is in accordance
with M.S. § 103.298, as it may be amended form time to time, and federal water
conservation standards.
      (6)   The owner of the lawn sprinkler/irrigation system is responsible
for any maintenance or repair of the lawn and landscape irrigation system.
      (7)   The owner of the lawn sprinkler/irrigation system assumes all
liability and responsibility for damages to the lawn and landscape irrigation
system that is caused by city activities, including, but not limited to, snow
removal.
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for
any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota Statutes
specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90
days, or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
   (C)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time, in
either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
   (D) The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
   (E)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if any
person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this code,
the City Council or any city official designated by it may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
(Prior Code, § 715.29)
CHAPTER 53: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
53.01   Definitions
   
53.02   Control by Utilities Superintendent
   
53.03   Use of public sewers required
   
53.04   Protection from damage
   
53.05   Sewer availability charge
   
53.06   Inspectors; power and authority
Building Sewers and Connections
   
53.20   Sufficient capacity
   
53.21   Permit required
   
53.22   Permit applications
   
53.23   Classes of building sewer permits
   
53.24   Costs and expenses
   
53.25   Separate, independent sewers
   
53.26   Existing building sewers
   
53.27   Conformance to state provisions
   
53.28   Connection requirements
   
53.29   Inspections
   
53.30   Barricades and lights
   
53.31   Licensed persons
   
53.32   Bonds
   
53.33   Fees in city fee schedule
   
53.34   Suspension or revocation
Discharges
   
53.45   Clear water discharges
   
53.46   Other prohibited discharges
   
53.47   Certain discharges which are limited
   
53.48   Responsibilities of Utilities Superintendent
   
53.49   Compliance
   
53.50   Pretreatment of flow equalization
   
53.51   Grease, oil and sand interceptors
   
53.52   Charges and penalties
   
53.53   Special agreements, arrangements
   
53.54   Rates and charges
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act also referred to as the Clean
Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   ASTM. American Society for Testing Materials.
   AUTHORITY. The City of Sandstone, Minnesota, or its representative thereof.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal. Also referred to as a HOUSE CONNECTION or SERVICE
CONNECTION.
   CITY. The area within the corporate boundaries of the City of Sandstone as
presently established or as amended by ordinance or other legal actions at a
future time. The term CITY, when used herein, may also be used to refer to the
City Council and its authorized representative.
   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or COD. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
chemical oxidation of organic matter as determined by standard laboratory
procedures, and as expressed in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l).
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and
fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES/SDS
permit if the treatment facilities are designed to treat the pollutants to a
degree which complies with effluent concentration limits imposed by the permit.
   CONTROL MANHOLE. A structure specially constructed for the purpose of
measuring flow and sampling of wastes.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   FECAL COLIFORM. Any number of organisms common to the intestinal tract of
humans and animals whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator of
pathogenic matter.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state, such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater.
   GARBAGE. Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and serving of food.
   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Any pollutant that is not defined as a compatible
pollutant, including non-biodegradable dissolved solids.
   INDUSTRY. Any non-governmental or non-residential user of a publicly owned
treatment works which is identified in the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, latest edition, which is categorized in Divisions A, B, D, E and I.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The liquid, gaseous and solid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trade or business, or from the development, recovery,
and processing of natural resources, as distinct from residential or domestic
strength wastes.
   INFILTRATION. Water entering the sewage system (including building drains
and pipes) from the ground through such means as defective pipes, pipe joints,
connections and manhole walls.
   INFILTRATION/INFLOW or I/I. The total quantity of water from both
infiltration and inflow.
   INFLOW. Water other than wastewater that enters a sewer system (including
building drains) from sources such as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar
drains, yard and area drains, foundation drains, drains from springs and swampy
areas, manhole covers, cross-connections from storm sewers, catch basins,
surface runoff, street wash waters or drainage.
   INTERFERENCE. The inhibition or disruption of the city’s wastewater disposal
system processes or operations which causes or significantly contributes to a
violation of any requirement of the city’s NPDES and/or SDS permit. The term
includes sewage sludge use or disposal by the city in accordance with published
regulations providing guidelines under § 405 of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1345
or any regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, being 42
U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq., the Clean Air Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq., the
Toxic Substances Control Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq., or more
stringent state criteria applicable to the method of disposal or use employed
by the city.
   MPCA. Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Federal regulations
establishing pretreatment standards for introduction of pollutants in publicly-
owned wastewater treatment facilities which are determined to be not
susceptible to treatment by the treatment facilities or would interfere with
the operation of the treatment facilities, pursuant to § 307(b), being 33
U.S.C. § 1317(b), of the act.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. A permit
issued by the MPCA, setting limits on pollutants that a permittee may legally
discharge into navigable waters of the United States pursuant to §§ 402 and
405, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1342 and 1345, respectively, of the Act.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewers,
which overflow into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface
water or ground water.
   NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any use, such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or during which the only pollutant
added, is heat.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTE. Wastewater that is primarily introduced by
residential users with a BOD concentration not greater than 220 mg/l and a
suspended solids (SS) concentration not greater than 325 mg/l.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
   PRETREATMENT. The treatment of wastewater from industrial sources prior to
the introduction of the waste effluent into a publicly-owned treatment works.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 cm) in any dimension.
   SEWAGE. The spent water of a community. The preferred term is WASTEWATER.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
      (1)   COLLECTION SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to collect
wastewater from individual point course discharges and connections.
      (2)   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer intended to serve as a sanitary sewer and a
storm sewer.
      (3)   FORCEMAIN. A pipe in which wastewater is carried under pressure.
      (4)   INTERCEPTOR SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to transport
wastewater from collection sewers to a treatment facility.
      (5)   PRIVATE SEWER. A sewer which is not owned and maintained by a
public authority.
      (6)   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer owned, maintained and controlled by a public
authority.
      (7)   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer intended to carry only liquid and water-
carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters
which are not admitted intentionally.
      (8)   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. A drain or sewer intended to carry
storm waters, surface runoff, ground water, subsurface water, street wash
water, drainage and unpolluted water from any source.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER. Any industrial user of the wastewater treatment
facility which has a discharge flow in excess of 25,000 gallons per average
work day, has exceeded 5% of the total flow received at the treatment facility,
whose waste contains a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts pursuant to § 307(a) of
the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a) or whose discharge has a significant effect,
either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the
wastewater disposal system, the quality of sludge, the system’s effluent
quality or emissions generated by the treatment system.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any
given constituent, or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration
longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration
of flows during normal operation, and will adversely affect the collection and/
or performance of the wastewater treatment works.
   STATE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (SCS) PERMIT. Any permit (including any terms,
conditions and requirements thereof) issued by the MPCA, pursuant to M.S. §
115.07, as it may be amended from time to time, for a disposal system as
defined by M.S. § 115.01, subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Utilities Superintendent or a deputy, City
Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer, agent or representative thereof.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) or TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS). The total suspended
matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in water,
wastewater or other liquids, and is removable by laboratory filtering as
prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,
latest edition, and referred to as non-filterable residue.
   TOXIC POLLUTANT. The concentration of any pollutant or combination of
pollutants which upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism will cause
adverse affects as defined in standards issued pursuant to § 307(a) of the Act,
being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a).
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards, and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities.
   USER. Any person who discharges or causes or permits the discharge of
wastewater into the city’s wastewater disposal system.
   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community and referred to as sewage. From
the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-
carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions together with any ground water, surface water and storm water that
may be present.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS or TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of any
devices, facilities, structures, equipment or processes owned or used by the
city for the purpose of the transmission, storage, treatment, recycling and
reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage or industrial wastewater or
structures necessary to recycle or reuse water including interceptor sewers,
outfall sewers, collection sewers, pumping, power and other equipment and their
appurtenances; extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions and alterations
thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled water supply, such
as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any works including
land which is an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate
disposal of residues resulting from the treatment.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water,
either continuously or intermittently.
   WPCF. The Water Pollution Control Federation.
(Prior Code, § 710.01)
§ 53.02 CONTROL BY THE UTILITIES SUPERINTENDENT.
   (A)   The Utilities Superintendent supervises public sewers and service
connections in the city, and is responsible for administering the provisions of
this chapter.
   (B)   The Utilities Superintendent will be directly under the authority of
the City Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer. The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer
will report to the City Council any actions taken regarding this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 710.03)
§ 53.03 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal
jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other
objectionable waste.
   (B)   It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet or watercourse
within the city or in any area within the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage
or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment as defined by state
and federal regulation and in accordance with the city’s NPDES permit as has
been provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, holding tank, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage, within the corporate limits of the
city.
   (D)   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, and which, by nature of
its use, generates sanitary sewage or other water carried waste which is
amendable to conventional treatment processes, situated within the city and
abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or
may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer, is hereby located a
public sanitary sewer, is hereby required at the owner or owners expense to
install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect the facilities,
either new or existing, directly to the proper public sewer in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after date of official notice by
the City Council to do so; provided that, the public sewer is within 100 feet
(30.48 meters) of the owners property line and is deemed economically feasible
by the City Council.
   (E)   In the event an owner fails to connect to a public sewer in compliance
with a notice given pursuant to division (D) above, the city will undertake to
have the connection made and will assess the cost thereof against the
benefitted property. The assessment, when levied, will bear interest at the
rate determined by the City Council and will be certified to the Auditor of the
county and will be collected and remitted to the city in the same manner as
assessments for local improvements. The rights of the city will be in addition
to any penalties or remedial or enforcement provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 710.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.04 PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.
   It is unlawful to maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment that is a part of the wastewater facilities. Any person violating
this provision will be subject to immediate arrest under charge of a
misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 710.13) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.05 SEWER AVAILABILITY CHARGE.
   (A)   For the purpose of providing funds for the city’s waste water
treatment, force mains, lift stations and sewage collection systems, and the
plant and facilities therewith, and the payment of capital charges represented
by bonds, certificates of indebtedness or otherwise, which may be used to
finance the costs of additions or expansions to the facilities, and the payment
of reasonable requirements or reserves for replacement in obsolescence thereof,
there is hereby imposed upon each lot, parcel of land, building or premises
having any connection with the city’s public sanitary sewer system, a sewer
availability charge (SAC), as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   Properties in the city that are improved and have facilities that
utilize the sanitary sewer system and that abut upon streets or other places
where the sanitary sewer is located are subject to the sewer availability
charge provided for in this section. The sewer availability charge shall be
imposed in addition to the user charges for sanitary sewer service and shall be
determined and administered as follows.
      (1)   The sewer availability charge must be paid prior to the issuance of
an applicable permit and before connecting to the city’s sanitary sewer system.
      (2)   If, after the initial sewer availability charge is paid, an
additional building permit is issued, the use of the property changes or a new
sanitary sewer connection is made, the sewer availability charge will be
recalculated and any additional charges must be paid.
      (3)   The unit charge multiplier for the sewer availability charge shall
be set forth from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
   (C)   The amount of the sewer availability charge for a particular property
shall be calculated by first determining the number of equivalent residential
connections (ERCs) applicable to the property. The number of ERCs shall be
determined by using the most current Metropolitan Council Environmental
Services Sewer Availability Procedure Manual. The number of ERCs for a use not
represented in the procedure manual shall be decided by the City Engineer based
on estimated flows. Once the number of ERCs is determined, the sewer
availability charge for the property shall be calculated by multiplying the
number of ERCs for the property by the sewer availability unit charge.
(Prior Code, § 710.15) (Ord. 2008-09, passed 8-6-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.06 INSPECTORS; POWER AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   A duly authorized employee of the city, bearing proper credentials and
identification, may enter all properties for the purposes of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to the discharges to
the city’s sewer system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   An authorized employee of the city is authorized to obtain information
concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the type and
source of discharge at the wastewater collection system. An industry may
withhold information considered confidential, however, the industry must
establish that the revelation to the public of the information in question,
might result in an advantage to competitors.
   (C)   While performing the necessary work on private properties, the
Superintendent will observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the owner, and the owner will be held harmless for injury or
death to the city employees and the city will indemnify the company against
loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims
and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the owner
and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be
caused by negligence or failure of the owner to maintain safe conditions as
required in §
53.51(C) of this chapter.
   (D)   The Engineer or Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of
the city bearing proper credentials and identification will be permitted to
enter all private properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage
works lying within the property. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the
property will be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated
easement pertaining to the private property involved.
(Prior Code, § 710.17)
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
§ 53.20 SUFFICIENT CAPACITY.
   Any new connection or connections to the sanitary sewer system will be
prohibited unless sufficient capacity is available in all downstream facilities
including, but not limited to, capacity for flow, BOD and suspended solids, as
determined by the Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 710.09)
§ 53.21 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No unauthorized person or persons will uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the city.
(Prior Code, § 710.09) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.22 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Applications for permits will be made by the owner or authorized agent
and the party employed to do the work, and must state the location, name of
owner, street number of the building to be connected and how occupied.
   (B)   No person may extend any private building drain beyond the limits of
the building or property for which the service connection permit has been
given.
(Prior Code, § 710.09) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 10-7-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.23 CLASSES OF BUILDING SEWER PERMITS.
   (A)   There are two classes of building sewer permits:
      (1)   For residential and commercial service; and
      (2)   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
   (B)   In either case, the application must be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or any other information considered pertinent in the judgment of
the city. The industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must provide
information describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics and type of
activity.
(Prior Code, § 710.09) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 53.24 COSTS AND EXPENSES.
   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the
building sewer will be borne by the owner or owners. The owner or owners will
indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
(Prior Code, § 710.09)
§ 53.25 SEPARATE, INDEPENDENT SEWERS.
   A separate and independent building sewer will be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway. The building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer. The city does not and will not assume
any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any
such connection aforementioned.
(Prior Code, § 710.09)
§ 53.26 EXISTING BUILDING SEWERS.
   Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the city inspector, to meet all
the requirements of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 710.09)
§ 53.27 CONFORMANCE TO STATE PROVISIONS.
   (A)   (1)   The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a
building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
testing and backfilling the trench, will all conform to the requirements of the
Minnesota Building and Plumbing Codes or other applicable rules and regulations
of the city.
      (2)   In the absence of code provisions or in the amplification thereof,
the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specification of the ASTM
and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9, will apply.
   (B)   (1)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer will
conform to the requirements of the Minnesota Building and Plumbing Codes or
other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth
in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No.
9.
      (2)   All such connections will be made gas-tight and water-tight, and
verified by proper testing to prevent the inclusion of infiltration/inflow. Any
deviation from these prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by
the city prior to installation.
(Prior Code, § 710.09) (Ord. passed 2009-04, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 53.28 CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS.
   Whenever economically possible, the building sewer will be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
the building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by the building drain will be lifted by an approved
means and discharged to the building sewer.
(Prior Code, § 710.09)
§ 53.29 INSPECTIONS.
   The applicant for the building sewer permit will notify the city’s Plumbing
Inspector when the building sewer is ready for final inspection and connection
to the public sewer. The connection will be made under the general supervision
of the Superintendent or authorized representative thereof.
(Prior Code, § 710.09) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 53.30 BARRICADES AND LIGHTS.
   All excavations for building sewer installation will be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work must be restored to as good or better condition than before work
commenced.
(Prior Code, § 710.09) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 10-7-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.31 LICENSED PERSONS.
   (A)   No person will make a service connection with any public sewer unless
regularly licensed under this chapter to perform the work, and no permit will
be granted to any person, except the regularly licensed person.
   (B)   Any person desiring a license to make a service connection with public
sewers, will apply in writing to the City Council with satisfactory evidence
that the applicant or employer is trained or skilled in the business and
qualified to receive a license. All applications will be referred to the
Superintendent for recommendations to the Council. If approved by the Council,
the license will be issued by the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer upon the
filing of a bond as provided in §
53.32 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 710.09) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 10-7-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.32 BONDS.
   No license will be issued to any person until a $1,000 bond to the city, or
another such amount as shall be set by the City Council from time to time,
approved by the Council, is filed with the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer
conditioned that the licensee will indemnify and save harmless the city from
all suits, accidents and damage that may arise by reason of any opening in any
street, alley or public ground, made by the licensee or by those in the
licensee’s employment for any purpose whatever, the street and alley over the
opening to the condition existing prior to installation, adequately guard with
barricades and lights and will keep and maintain the same to the satisfaction
of the Superintendent, and will conform in all respects to the rules and
regulations of the Council relative thereto, and pay all fines that may be
imposed on the licensee by law.
(Prior Code, § 710.09) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 53.33 FEES IN CITY FEE SCHEDULE.
   The license fee for making service connection is set by the city’s fee
schedule. All licenses will expire on December 31 of the license year unless
the license is suspended or revoked by the Council for cause. Upon failure to
apply for a license renewal prior to the expiration date thereof, the license
fee for the ensuing is set by the city’s fee schedule.
(Prior Code, § 710.09) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 53.34 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   The Council may suspend or revoke any license issued under this chapter for
any of the following causes:
   (A)   Giving false information in connection with the application for a
license;
   (B)   Incompetence of the licensee; and/or
   (C)   Willful violation of any provisions of this chapter or any rule or
regulation pertaining to the making of service connections.
(Prior Code, § 710.09) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 10-7-2009)
DISCHARGES
§ 53.45 CLEAR WATER DISCHARGES.
   (A)   It is unlawful to discharge or cause to be discharged into the
sanitary sewer system, either directly or indirectly, any clear water discharge
defined as storm water, natural precipitation, ground water or flow from roof
runoff, surface runoff, subsurface drainage, down spouts, eave troughs,
rainspouts, yard drains, sump pumps, foundation drains, yard fountains, ponds,
swimming pools, cistern overflows or water discharged from any air conditioning
unit or system.
   (B)   Clear water must be discharged to sewers specifically designated as
storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the City Engineer.
   (C)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make or maintain a
connection between any conductor used to carry clear water discharge and the
sanitary sewer system. Buildings and structures which require a sump pump
system to discharge excess water from foundations shall have a permanently
installed rigid discharge pipe which shall not at any time discharge water into
the sanitary sewer system. The discharge pipe shall not have any connections
for altering the path of discharge.
      (2)   The discharge pipe must either extend at least three feet outside
the foundation wall and be directed toward the front or rear yard of the
property or be directly connected to the storm sewer system. Discharge pipes
that are directly connected to the storm sewer system must have a check valve.
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on
approval of the engineer, to a storm sewer or natural outlet, subject to
approval and the issuance of a discharge permit by the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency.
   (D)   Every person owning improved real estate that discharges into the
sanitary sewer system must within 30 days from the date of a written inspection
request from the city:
      (1)   Allow a representative of the city to inspect both the inside and
outside of buildings located on the property to confirm that there is no sump
pump or other prohibited clear water discharge into the sanitary sewer system;
      (2)   Furnish the city with a certificate of compliance in a form found
acceptable to the city from a licensed plumber which certifies that the
buildings on the property have no prohibited clear water discharge into the
sanitary sewer system; or
      (3)   Failure by a property owner to allow an inspection by a
representative of the city or to provide the city with a certificate of
compliance within 30 days from the date of the city’s inspection request shall
cause the property to be immediately subject to the surcharge provided for in
division (E) below until compliance with this subdivision is demonstrated.
   (E)   A surcharge in the amount specified in the city’s fee schedule shall
be imposed in the case of a property that is not in compliance with the clear
water discharge requirements of this subdivision. The surcharge shall be added
to every subsequent sanitary sewer billing until the property is found to be in
compliance as determined by the city. Should a property certified in compliance
with this section be later found to have reconnected so that there is clear
water discharge into the sanitary sewer system, the property owner shall be
subject to the surcharge for all months between the last two inspections.
   (F)   The remedies provided in this subdivision are cumulative and do not
limit the right of the city to pursue any other available legal remedy,
including, but not limited to, criminal prosecution, seeking an injunction
ordering disconnection or allowing the city to correct the violation or
obtaining an administrative search warrant.
   (G)   The city reserves the right to inspect or require a certificate of
compliance regarding all properties at least yearly to verify compliance with
this section.
   (H)   The City Council may by resolution provide for waivers for hardships
from the requirements of this section.
(Prior Code, § 710.11) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 10-7-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.46 OTHER PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   It is unlawful to discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
   (A)   Any liquids, solids or gases which, by reason of their nature or
quantity, are, or may be, sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other
substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the
wastewater disposal system or to the operation of the system. Prohibited
materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, benzene, naptha,
toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates,
perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides;
   (B)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0 or higher than 9.5, or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment or personnel of the wastewater disposal system;
   (C)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic pollutants in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to inhibit or
disrupt any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals or create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the wastewater
disposal system. A toxic pollutant will include but not be limited to any
pollutant identified pursuant to § 307(a) of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317
(a); and/or
   (D)   Solid or viscous substances which will cause obstruction to the flow
in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment
facility, such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage with particles greater
than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure,
bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes,
cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings,
grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastic,
asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating
oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes.
(Prior Code, § 710.11) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 10-7-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.47 CERTAIN DISCHARGES WHICH ARE LIMITED.
   (A)   The following described substances, materials, water or wastes will be
limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities
which will not harm either sewers, the wastewater treatment works treatment
process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving waters
or soil, vegetation and ground water, or will not otherwise endanger life,
limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. The Superintendent may set
limitations lower than limitations established in the regulations below if, in
the Superintendent’s opinion, much more severe limitations are necessary to
meet the above objectives. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of
these wastes, the Engineer and/or Superintendent will give consideration to
such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and
velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of
the sewage treatment process, the city’s NPDES and/or SDS permit, capacity of
the treatment plant, degree of treatability of the wastes in the sewage
treatment plant and other factors deemed pertinent.
   (B)   The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of
waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which will not be
violated without approval of the Superintendent are as follows:
      (1)   Any wastewater having a temperature higher than 150°F (65°C), or
causing, individually or in combination with other wastewater, the influent at
the wastewater treatment plant to have a temperature exceeding 104°F (40°C), or
having heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the wastewater
treatment works resulting in interference therein;
      (2)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 10 mg/l or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F (0 - 61°C);
and any wastewater containing oil and grease concentrations of mineral origin
of greater than 50 mg/l, whether emulsified or not;
      (3)   Any quantities of flow, concentrations or both, which constitute a
“slug”, as defined herein;
      (4)   Any garbage not properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be
connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants,
hospitals, catering establishments or similar places where garbage originates
from the preparation of food on the premises or when served by caterers;
      (5)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either
singly or by interaction with other wastes are capable of creating a public
nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers
for their maintenance and repair;
      (6)   Any waters or wastes with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions;
      (7)   Non-contact cooling water or unpolluted storm, drainage or ground
water;
      (8)   Wastewater containing inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate) in
such quantities that would cause disruption with the wastewater disposal
system;
      (9)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of a half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in compliance with
applicable state and federal regulations;
      (10)   Any waters or wastes containing the following substances to a
degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the
wastewater treatment works in excess of limits set by the Superintendent for
the materials that cannot be removed by city’s wastewater treatment system:
         (a)   Arsenic;
         (b)   Cadmium;
         (c)   Copper;
         (d)   Cyanide;
         (e)   Lead;
         (f)   Mercury;
         (g)   Nickel;
         (h)   Silver;
         (i)   Total chromium;
         (j)   Zinc; and
         (k)   Phenolic compounds.
      (11)   Any wastewater which creates conditions at or near the wastewater
disposal system which violates any statute, rule, regulation or ordinance of
any regulatory agency or state or federal regulatory body;
      (12)   Any waters or wastes containing BOD or suspended solids of a
character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle
the materials at the wastewater treatment works, except as may be permitted by
specific written agreement subject to the provisions of this chapter; and/or
      (13)   Any waters or wastes exceeding the following limitations:
         (a)   BOD: 220 mg/l or 320 lbs/day maximum for any one user;
         (b)   TSS: 325 mg/l;
         (c)   Grease/oil: 50 mg/l; and
         (d)   Flow: 170,000 gpd maximum for any one user.
(Prior Code, § 710.11) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 53.48 RESPONSIBILITIES OF UTILITIES DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in this chapter and which, in the judgment of
the Superintendent, may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater treatment
facilities, processes or equipment; receiving waters and/or soils, vegetation
and ground water; or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a
public nuisance, the Superintendent may do one or more of the following:
      (1)   Reject the wastes;
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
public sewers, pursuant to § 307(b) of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(b), and
all addendums thereof;
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge;
      (4)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling, treating and
disposing of the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer service charges
or to cover any fines accessed by a regulatory agency; and
      (5)   Assess the following penalties, which may be other such amounts as
shall be set by the City Council from time to time:
         (a)   Fifty cents per pound of BOD over the limit;
         (b)   Fifty cents per pound of TSS over the limit;
         (c)   Twenty-five dollars per pound of grease over the limit;
         (d)   Three dollars and thirty cents per kgal of flow over the limit
and up to 100 kgal over the limit; and
         (e)   Six dollars and sixty cents per kgal of flow over 100 kgal over
the limit.
   (B)   If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design, installation and maintenance of the plants and
equipment will be made at the owners’ expense, and will be subject to review
and approval by the city pursuant to the requirements of the MPCA.
(Prior Code, § 710.11) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 10-7-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.49 COMPLIANCE.
   No user will increase the use of process water or, in any manner, attempt to
dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment
to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in this chapter or
contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards or any state
requirements.
(Prior Code, § 710.11) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 10-7-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.50 PRETREAMENT OF FLOW EQUALIZATION.
   Where pretreatment of flow equalization facilities are provided or required
for any wastes or water, they must be maintained continuously in a satisfactory
and effective operation at the expense of the owner or owners.
(Prior Code, § 710.11) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 10-7-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.51 GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.
   (A)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors will be provided when, in the
opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts as specified in
§
53.47(B) of this chapter, any flammable wastes as specified in §
53.46(A) of this chapter, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that, the
interceptors will not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors will be of the type to be readily and easily accessible
for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the
owner or owners will be responsible for the proper removal and disposal of the
captured materials by appropriate means, and will maintain a record of dates
and means of disposal which are subject to review by the Superintendent. Any
removal and hauling of the collecting materials not performed by the owner’s
personnel must be performed by a currently licensed waste disposal firm.
   (B)   When required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes will install a suitable structure, or
control manhole or manholes with the necessary meters, samplers and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes. The structure will be easily accessible and safely
located, and must be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Engineer. The structure will be installed by the owner at his or her expense
and will be maintained by the owner so as to be safe for use at all times.
   (C)   The owners of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes may, at the discretion of the city, be required to provide
laboratory measurements, tests or analyses of waters or wastes to illustrate
compliance with this chapter and any special condition for discharge
established by the city or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the
discharge. The number, type and frequency of sampling and laboratory analyses
to be performed by the owner will be as stipulated in writing by the city. The
industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater
discharge to assure that compliance with federal, state and local standards are
being met. The owner will report the results of measurements and laboratory
analyses to the city at such times and in a manner as prescribed by the city.
The owner will bear the expense of all measurements, analyses and reporting
required by the city. At such times as deemed necessary, the city reserves the
right to take its own measurements and samples for analysis by an independent
laboratory.
   (D)   The measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter will be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association.
Sampling methods, location, times, duration and frequencies are to be
determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the Superintendent and
engineer.
   (E)   Where required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a
sanitary sewer will provide protection from an accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this chapter. Where
necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharges of prohibited materials
will be provided and maintained at the owner’s expense. Detailed plans showing
facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection will be
submitted to the Superintendent for review and approval prior to construction
of the facility. Review and approval of the plans and operating procedures will
not relieve any user from the responsibility to modify the user’s facility as
necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. Users will notify the
Superintendent immediately upon having a slug or accidental discharge of
substances of wastewater in violation of this chapter to enable countermeasures
to be taken by the Superintendent to minimize damage to the wastewater
treatment works. The notifications will not relieve any user of any liability
for any expense, loss or damage to the wastewater treatment system or treatment
process or for any fines imposed on the city on account thereof under any state
and federal law. Employees will ensure that all employees who may cause or
discover such a discharge are advised of the emergency notifications procedure.
   (F)   No person, having charge of any building or other premises which
drains into the public sewer, will permit any substance or matter which may
form a deposit or obstruction to flow or pass into the public sewer. Within 90
days after receipt of written notice from the city, the owner will install a
suitable and sufficient catch basin or waste trap, or if one already exists,
will clean out, repair or alter the same, and perform such other work as the
Superintendent may deem necessary. Upon the owner’s refusal or neglect to
install a catch basin or waste trap or to clean out, repair or alter the same
after the period of 90 days, the Superintendent may cause the work to be
completed at the expense of the owner or representative thereof.
   (G)   (1)   Whenever any service connection becomes clogged, obstructed,
broken or out of order, or detrimental to the use of the public sewer, or unfit
for the purpose of drainage, the owner will repair or cause the work to be done
as the Superintendent may direct.
      (2)   Each day after 90 days, that person neglects or fails to so act
will constitute a separate violation of this chapter, and the Superintendent
may then cause the work to be done and recover from the owner or agent the
expense thereof by an action in the name of the city.
   (H)   The owner or operator of any motor vehicle washing or servicing
facility will provide and maintain in serviceable condition at all times, a
catch basin or waste trap in the building drain system to prevent grease, oil,
dirt or any mineral deposit from entering the public sewer system.
(Prior Code, § 710.11) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 10-7-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.52 CHARGES AND PENALTIES.
   In addition to any penalties that may be imposed for violation of any
provision of this chapter, the city may assess against any person the cost of
repairing or restoring sewers or associated facilities damaged as a result of
the discharge of prohibited wastes by the person, and may collect an assessment
as an additional charge for the use of the public sewer system or in any other
manner deemed appropriate by the city.
(Prior Code, § 710.11) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 53.53 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS, ARRANGEMENTS.
   No statement contained in this chapter is construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern
whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by
the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern;
providing that, national categorical pretreatment standards and the city’s
NPDES and state disposal system permit limitations are not violated.
(Prior Code, § 710.11) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 53.54 RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Accounts; how kept. Accounts must be kept on the books of the
Administration Department by the house and the street number and under the
account number assigned thereto, and by the name the owner or of the person
signing the application for service. Bills and notices sent by the
Administration Department will be sent to the house or street number of the
property. If nonresident owners or agents require personal notice sent to
different addresses, they must file and application therefor with the
Administration Department. An error in address must be promptly reported to the
Administration Department. Responsibility for a notice of change of ownership
rests with the owner. For purposes of this section, the term OWNER has the
meaning given to it by §
10.05.
   (B)   Sewer rates.
      (1)   Schedule. The rate due and payable to the city by each sewer user
within the city for sewer used will be charged per 1,000 gallons, payable
periodically, subject to a minimum charge to each sewer user for each period
during which service is furnished. The minimum charge represents the basic
facility and service cost inherent in the operation of the sewer system. For
services unable to the metered, usage charges will be billed by the average
usage per month per occupant. The charges and usages are set by resolution of
the City Council on an annual basis as part of the fee schedule established by
§
36.02 of this code of ordinances.
      (2)   Estimates. In case the meter is found to have stopped or o be
operating in a faulty manner, the amount of sewer used will be estimated in
accordance with the amount used previously in comparable periods of the year.
      (3)   Billing. Where service is for less than a full billing period, the
charge will be prorated.
      (4)   Minimum rates apply. Where service pipe is laid into the building
with no intention of connecting to the building piping for use immediately, the
minimum rates and charges set in division (B)(1) above apply.
      (5)   Installation. A meter and remote register must be installed on the
street valve or well service in the house, regardless of whether the inside
piping is connected.
      (6)   Continuance. If a sewer customer elects to discontinue the use of
the municipal sewer system, the regular or minimal charge continues until the
service pipe is excavated and disconnected at the curb stop.
      (7)   Special contract. Rates due and payable by each sewer user located
beyond the territorial boundaries of the city will be determined by a special
contract.
   (C)   Penalty for late payment. Each billing for sewer service not paid when
due incurs penalty charge of 10% of the mount past due.
   (D)   Action to collect charges. An amount due for sewer charges may be
certified to the County Auditor for collection with real estate taxes in the
following year in accordance with M.S. § 444.075, as it may be amended from
time to time. This certification will be regardless of who applied sewer
services, whether it was the owner, tenant or other person. Applications for
sewer service will contain an explanation in clear language that unpaid sewer
bills will be collected with real estate taxes the following year.
      (1)   Sewer charges; term. The city may bring a civil action or other
remedies to collect unpaid charges. For purposes of this section, the term
SEWER CHARGES means and includes without limitation sewer rate charges, permit
charges, availability charges, connection charges and any rate or charge
authorized by M.S. § 444.075, as it may be amended from time to time, as
imposed by this section.
      (2)   General charges; term. When unpaid charges are certified for
collection with taxes, the term CHARGES includes a certification fee set by the
fee schedule and interest on the unpaid charges at the annual rate as part of
the fee schedule established by §
36.02 of this code of ordinances.
(Penalty, see § 10.99)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC AND PARKING RULES AND REGULATIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC AND PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC AND PARKING RULES AND REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   State law adopted by reference
   
70.02   Snowmobiles and OHVs
Traffic Regulations
   
70.15   Emergency street closings
   
70.16   Cutting across public or private property
   
70.17   Weight limits; seasonal restrictions
   
70.18   Unreasonable acceleration
Parking Regulations
   
70.30   General parking rules
   
70.31   Prohibited parking
   
70.32   Residential areas
   
70.33   Tow-away of vehicles
   
70.34   “Parking” defined
   
70.35   Handicapped parking
   
70.36   Authority to issue parking citations
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 STATE LAW ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   M.S. Chapter 169, the “Highway Traffic Regulation Act”, as it may be
amended from time to time, is adopted by reference and is as much a part of
this code as if fully set forth herein. A violation of M.S. Chapter 169, as it
may be amended from time to time, as herein adopted is a violation of this
code.
(Prior Code, § 1300.01)
   (B)   For purposes of this chapter, the terms defined in M.S. § 169.011, as
adopted herein, as it may be amended from time to time, have the meanings given
by that section.
(Prior Code, § 1300.03)
§ 70.02 SNOWMOBILES AND OHVS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLE (OHV). Includes all-terrain vehicles (ATVs), off-
highway motorcycles (OHMs) and off-road vehicles (ORVs).
      OWNER. A person, other than a lien holder, having the property in or
title to a snowmobile or OHV entitled to the use or possession thereof.
      OPERATE. To ride in or on and control the operation of a snowmobile or
OHV.
      OPERATOR. Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
snowmobile or OHV.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. The entire strip of land traversed by a highway or street
in which the public owns the fee or an easement for roadway purposes.
      SNOWMOBILE. A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice
or natural terrain steered by wheels, skis or runners.
      STREET. Any public roadway including streets, highways and alleys.
(Prior Code, § 1330.01)
   (B)   Incorporation of state law by reference. It is the intent of this
section to supplement M.S. §§ 84.81 through 84.915, as they may be amended from
time to time, with respect to the operation of snowmobiles; M.S. §§ 84.771
through 84.781, as they may be amended from time to time, with respect to the
operation of off-highway vehicles (OHVs); M.S. §§ 84.787 through 84.795, as
they may be amended from time to time, with respect to the operation of off-
highway motorcycles (OHMs); M.S. §§ 84.797 through 84.8045, as they may be
amended from time to time, with respect to the operation of off-road vehicles
(ORVs); and M.S. §§ 84.92 through 84.928, as they may be amended from time to
time, with respect to the operation of all-terrain vehicles (ATVs). These
statutes are incorporated by reference.
(Prior Code, § 1330.02)
   (C)   Operation.
      (1)   Operation on streets.
         (a)   A person may not operate a snowmobile or OHV upon private
property without prior permission of the property owner.
         (b)   When operating a snowmobile or OHV upon a street, the operation
must be at the extreme right of the street as near to the curb or shoulder
thereof as practical under the circumstances.
         (c)   A snowmobile or OHV may not pull any type of sled, toboggan,
skis or other mechanical attachment, or person, except when attached to the
snowmobile or OHV by a solid tongue or similar attachment.
         (d)   A snowmobile or OHV may not be operated within the city unless
it is equipped with at least one head lamp and one tail lamp and with brakes
that conform to the standards prescribed by rule of the Commissioner of
Transportation.
         (e)   When two or more snowmobiles or OHVs are operated together or as
a group, the snowmobile or OHV must stay in single file while operating upon
any street.
         (f)   A snowmobile or OHV may not be operated upon a sidewalk.
         (g)   The driver of a snowmobile or OHV must yield the right-of-way to
on-coming traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard.
      (2)   General rules. It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate
any snowmobile or OHV
in the following unsafe or harassing ways:
         (a)   At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under all
the surrounding circumstances and in no event at a speed greater than 20 mph;
         (b)   In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger
the person or property of another or to cause injury or damage thereto;
         (c)   While under the influence of intoxicating drugs or alcohol;
         (d)   Without a lighted head and tail light when required for safety
and registration numbers as required by law;
         (e)   In a public park, public or private school playground, or
hospital zone (that area within one block of a hospital or nursing home),
except on designated trails;
         (f)   Within the principal Business District of the city; except that,
the operation will be permitted in an emergency during the period of time when
snow upon the roadway or other traveled way renders travel by automobile
impractical;
         (g)   A snowmobile or OHV may not be operated upon any portion of
Lions Hill or Spring Park Cemetery;
         (h)   A snowmobile or OHV may not be operated within the city while
carrying more than two persons, exclusive of passengers seated on a pulled
sleigh or similar type trailing device; and
         (i)   A snowmobile or OHV may not be operated inside the city limits
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; except that, occasional
operation upon a public street between those hours is permitted when the
operator is proceeding directly to the operator’s home.
      (3)   Special provisions. The City Council may authorize variances for
special events.
(Prior Code, § 1330.03) (Ord. 20200219-01, passed 2-19-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
§ 70.15 EMERGENCY STREET CLOSINGS.
   (A)   Reasons. In an emergency either the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer or
the Fire Chief may close off any public street, alley or area to vehicular or
pedestrian traffic, including parked cars and to reroute traffic when necessary
to control or prevent a riot, to fight or prevent the spreading of a fire, to
control or remove explosives, to repair electrical service, gas, water or sewer
main or to prevent damage to life, limb or property that might result from any
traffic or other hazard.
   (B)   Procedure. The Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer may close off or prohibit
vehicular traffic on a public street or alley or portion thereof in order to
effect the orderly installation, repair, maintenance or snow removal of any
streets. Prior to closing a street or alley, both the Fire and Police
Departments must be notified.
   (C)   Temporary closing. The Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer may order the
temporary closing off or the temporary designation of one-way traffic or to
reroute any or all vehicular traffic on any public street, alley or area when
it appears necessary to control vehicular or pedestrian traffic or crowds
resulting from any large public gathering, prior to, during and after a public
or private convention, assembly, parade, carnival, circus, political rally or
sports events where the use of the public street, park or other public property
is necessary or incidental to the holding or convening of any of the foregoing
activities.
   (D)   Barrier; warnings. A street or area may be closed to vehicular or
pedestrian traffic or to parked cars at any hour by the stationing of a police
officer at both ends of the street or area, who may then direct traffic, or
during the daylight hours by posting or erecting suitable signs, flags or
barriers at both ends of the street or area so designated, stating the
restriction imposed and by whose authority the restriction is imposed, or at
night by the placing of suitable barriers and warning lights or flasher signals
at both ends of the street or areas so designated. Drivers must obey police
officers and barriers, flags, signs, lights or signals so placed.
   (E)   Emergency traffic restrictions. The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer
may make and enforce necessary traffic-control restrictions in time of
emergency; provided that, public notice of the restrictions be published, or
broadcast, or posted in at least two public places; and, further that, any
restrictions be reviewed by the Council at the next regular Council meeting,
following the establishment of the emergency restrictions, at which time the
restrictions may be continued or abandoned by resolution of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 1305.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.16 CUTTING ACROSS PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   It is unlawful to disobey the instructions of an official traffic-control
device within the meaning of this subchapter, unless at the time otherwise
directed by a police officer, by driving into or across public or private
property so as to obviate the need to comply with the traffic-control device.
(Prior Code, § 1305.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.17 WEIGHT LIMITS; SEASONAL RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Prohibition; weight. It is unlawful to operate a vehicle or a
combination of vehicles upon a public street, alley or highway within the city,
during the period between March 20 and May 15 where the gross weight on any
single axle exceed 8,000 pounds. This limitation does not apply to emergency
vehicles of public utilities used incidental to making repairs to its plant or
equipment within the city, or to roads or streets paved with concrete.
   (B)   Council action.
      (1)   The Council may by resolution prohibit the operation of vehicles
upon public streets or alleys in the city. The Council may also by resolution
impose restrictions as to the weight of vehicles to be operated upon streets or
alleys, whenever the streets or alleys, by reason of deterioration, rain, snow
or other climatic conditions may be seriously damaged or destroyed unless the
use of vehicles thereon is prohibited or their permissible weights reduced.
      (2)   The resolution adopted must designate the particular streets or
alleys affected and must set forth the prohibitions or restrictions imposed on
the streets or alleys.
   (C)   Posting of signs. Upon the adoption of a prohibition or restriction as
provided for in this subchapter, the Street Superintendent must cause to be
posted or erected signs plainly indicating the prohibition or restriction at
each end of the street or alley or that portion of any street or alley affected
thereby. The prohibition or restriction is not effective until after the signs
are so posted or erected.
   (D)   Special permits. A person desiring to move a vehicle or combination of
vehicles of a size or weight or load exceeding the maximum authorized by this
subchapter or otherwise not in conformity with the provisions hereof, may make
written application therefor to the Council and upon good cause being shown
therefor, the Council may, in its discretion, issue a permit. The application
and permit must specifically describe the vehicle or vehicles and loads to be
moved, the public streets over which the same is to travel and the period of
time for which the permit is granted. The Council must prescribe the conditions
to govern the operation of the vehicle or vehicles and may require an
undertaking or other security to compensate for any injury to any roadway or
road structure. The permit must be carried on the vehicle or combination of
vehicles to which it refers and be open to inspection by any police officer,
official or employee of the city.
   (E)   Damage to streets. A person driving a vehicle, object or contrivance
upon a city street is liable for all damages that the highway or highway
structure sustains as a result of any illegal operation, driving or moving of
the vehicle, object or contrivance, or as a result of operation, driving or
moving a vehicle, object or contrivance in excess of the maximum weight
authorized by and pursuant to the issuance of a permit. When the driver is not
the owner of the vehicle, object or contrivance, but is operating, driving or
moving the same with the express or implied permission of the owner, then the
owner and driver are jointly and severally liable for damage. The damage may be
recovered in a civil action brought by the city.
   (F)   Enforcement.
      (1)   A police officer or the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer having
reason to believe that the weight of a vehicle and load is unlawful, may
require the driver to stop and submit to a weighing of the vehicle, either by
means of portable or stationary scales, and may require that the vehicle be
driven to the nearest scales, in the event the scales are within five miles.
      (2)   If an officer or the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer determines
that the weight of any vehicle or the load thereon exceeds the maximum
authorized, the officer may require the driver to stop the vehicle in a
suitable place and remain standing until the portion of the load is removed as
may be necessary to reduce the gross weight of the vehicle to the limit as
permitted under the provisions of this subchapter.
      (3)   Materials so unloaded must be cared for by the owner or driver of
the vehicle, at the risk of the owner or driver.
      (4)   A driver of a vehicle who fails or refuses to stop and submit the
vehicle and load to a weighing, or who fails or refuses, when directed by an
officer upon a weighing of the vehicle, to stop the vehicle and otherwise
comply with the provisions of this subchapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 1305.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.18 UNREASONABLE ACCELERATION.
   (A)   It is unlawful to start or accelerate any motor vehicle with an
unnecessary exhibition of speed on a public or private way within the city
limits.
   (B)   Unreasonable squealing or screeching sounds emitted by the tires or
the throwing of sand or gravel by the tires of the vehicle or both is prima
facie evidence of unnecessary exhibition of speed.
(Prior Code, § 1305.07) Penalty, see §
10.99
PARKING REGULATIONS
§ 70.30 GENERAL PARKING RULES.
   (A)   Parallel to curb. Vehicles must be parked or stopped parallel with the
edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of traffic, with the curb-side
wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the edge of the roadway, and not
closer than four feet to another vehicle parked at the curb.
   (B)   Where no curb. On streets and highways not having a curb, a vehicle
stopped or parked must be stopped or parked parallel with and to the right of
the paved or improved or main traveled part of the street or highway.
   (C)   One-way roadway. On a one-way roadway, a vehicle must be parked with
the front of the vehicle facing in the same direction on the one-way street as
the traffic thereof is permitted to pass.
   (D)   Angle parking. On those streets that have been marked or signed for
angle parking, vehicles must be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by
the marks or signs.
   (E)   “Boulevard” defined. For the purposes of this subchapter, the term
BOULEVARD means the area between the adjacent property line and the portion of
a roadway improved for public traffic.
(Prior Code, § 1310.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.31 PARKING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Specified places.
      (1)   A vehicle may not be parked, whether attended or unattended, except
when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or traffic-control device in any of the places
specified in this division (A):
         (a)   On a sidewalk or boulevard;
         (b)   In front of a public or private driveway or alley or within five
feet of the intersection of any public or private driveway or alley with any
street or highway;
         (c)   Within an intersection;
         (d)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant, mailbox or mail receptacle;
         (f)   On a crosswalk;
         (g)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
         (h)   Within 30 feet upon the approach of any flashing school signal,
stop sign, traffic- control signal or school sign at the side of a roadway;
         (i)   Within a designated or marked bus stop;
         (j)   Within a 50-foot distance of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing;
         (k)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and
on the side of a street opposite to the entrance to any fire station within 75
feet of the entrance when properly sign-posted;
         (l)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
the stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
         (m)   Upon a bridge or approach or other elevated structure upon a
street or highway or within a street or highway tunnel, except as otherwise
provided by this code;
         (n)   At a place where there are placed temporary signs prohibiting
parking; and/or
         (o)   Within an area designated “no parking” and appropriately marked
pursuant to City Council resolution.
      (2)   It is unlawful to park a vehicle:
         (a)   So as to block a fire escape or the exit from any building; and/
or
         (b)   Contrary to an order to proceed by a peace officer directing,
controlling or regulating traffic.
      (3)   It is unlawful to move a vehicle not owned by that person into a
prohibited parking area or away from the curb to an unlawful distance.
(Prior Code, § 1310.03)
   (B)   (1)   Cars for sale. It is unlawful to place a vehicle on a highway to
display the vehicle for sale or exchange. A vehicle is deemed to be displayed
in violation of this division (B) when it is found standing upon a street or
highway, and bearing a sign indicating that it is for sale or exchange.
      (2)   Disabled vehicles.
         (a)   Passenger or recreational vehicles, trucks or boats in an
inoperative state may not be parked in residential districts for a period
exceeding seven days.
         (b)   INOPERATIVE means incapable of movement under its own power and
in need of repairs.
         (c)   The provisions of this division (B) relating to stopping,
standing and parking do not apply to the driver of a vehicle that is disabled
for a reasonable time while on the paved or improved or main traveled portion
of a street or highway in a manner and to an extent that it is impossible to
avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in the position.
      (3)   No parking zones. It is unlawful to stop, stand or park a vehicle,
except as otherwise provided in this subchapter or unless directed to do so by
a police officer, on a street or highway where the City Council has established
a no parking zone and the zone is marked by sign or yellow curb.
      (4)   Off-street parking. It is unlawful to park a vehicle in an
industrial, commercial or multiple or single dwelling area where off-street
parking area or truck standing spaces are provided. Vehicles must use a
designated area for parking, loading or unloading.
      (5)   City parks. It is unlawful to park a vehicle in a city park other
than in a designated parking area or campsite.
      (6)   Angle parking. Angle parking is prohibited on public streets or
alleys within the city.
      (7)   Snow emergency. After a snowfall of at least one and one-half
inches in the city, parking is prohibited on public streets and alleys until
and after the street or alley has been plowed and the snow removed to the curb
line.
      (8)   City parking lot. It is unlawful to park a truck in the city
parking lot.
(Prior Code, § 1310.05)
(Ord. 2005-02, passed 4-20-2005; Ord. 2011-07, passed 6-15-2011; Ord. 17-04,
passed 6-7-2017; Ord. 20191218-01, passed 12-18-2019) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.32 RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      COMMERCIAL VEHICLE OR EQUIPMENT. Trailers and commercial vehicles with a
gross vehicle weight in excess of 15,000 pounds, dump trucks, truck tractors,
travel trailers, trailers, semi- trailers and heavy equipment.
      GOVERNMENTAL VEHICLE. A vehicle owned or controlled by the federal
government, the state or a political subdivision of the state.
      RESIDENTIAL AREA. Any area in the city located in Traditional Residential
or Suburban Residential Zoning Districts.
   (B)   It is unlawful for a person to park a commercial vehicle or equipment
on a public street or alley in a residential area of the city, except for the
purpose of loading and unloading. This division (B) does not apply to
governmental vehicles engaged in government business.
   (C)   (1)   A vehicle parked in violation of this section may be impounded
by a duly authorized employee of the city, and will be returned to the owner
only after payment of the impoundment fees established by Council resolution.
      (2)   The impoundment of a commercial vehicle or equipment under this
section does not preclude the prosecution of the owner of the vehicle or
equipment for violation of this division (B).
(Prior Code, § 1310.06) (Ord. 00-05, passed 12-6-2000; Ord. 2011-03, passed 2-
16-2011; Ord. 20210721, passed 7-21-2021) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.33 TOW-AWAY OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   A vehicle parked in violation of this section may be ordered removed
from a public street or alley by a peace officer or authorized city official. A
vehicle may be towed if:
      (1)   The vehicle is parked in violation of snow emergency regulations;
      (2)   The vehicle is parked in a rush-hour restricted parking area;
      (3)   The vehicle is blocking a driveway, alley, mailbox, mail receptacle
or fire hydrant;
      (4)   The vehicle is parked in a bus lane, or at a bus stop, during hours
when parking is prohibited;
      (5)   The vehicle is parked within 30 feet of a stop sign and visually
blocking the stop sign;
      (6)   The vehicle is parked in a disability transfer zone or disability
parking space without a disability parking certificate or disability license
plates;
      (7)   The vehicle is parked in an area that has been posted for temporary
restricted parking at least 12 hours in advance;
      (8)   The vehicle is parked within the right-of-way of a controlled
access highway or within the traveled portion of a public street when travel is
allowed there;
      (9)   The vehicle is unlawfully parked in a zone that is restricted by
posted signs to use by fire, police, public safety or emergency vehicles;
      (10)   A law enforcement official has probable cause to believe that the
vehicle is stolen, or that the vehicle constitutes or contains evidence of a
crime and impoundment is reasonably necessary to obtain or preserve the
evidence;
      (11)   The driver, operator or person in physical custody of the vehicle
is taken into custody and the vehicle is impounded for safekeeping;
      (12)   A law enforcement official has probable cause to believe that the
owner, operator or person in physical control of the vehicle has failed to
respond to five or more citations for parking or traffic offenses;
      (13)   The vehicle is unlawfully parked in a zone that is restricted by
posted signs to use by taxicabs;
      (14)   The vehicle is unlawfully parked and prevents egress by a lawfully
parked vehicle;
      (15)   The vehicle is parked, on a school day during prohibited hours, in
a school zone on a public street where official signs prohibit parking; or
      (16)   If authorized by M.S. § 168B.035, as it may be amended from time
to time.
   (B)   (1)   If a vehicle is to be towed, a peace officer or parking
enforcement officer must prepare, in addition to the written citation, a
written towing report describing the motor vehicle and the reasons for towing.
The towing report must be signed by the officer and the tow driver. The owner
or driver of the vehicle must be notified, if present or readily available, to
remove the vehicle, otherwise the vehicle is to be towed away to a garage,
service station or other place of safekeeping as soon as possible to facilitate
snow removal, street maintenance, the orderly flow of traffic, fire fighting or
other lawful purpose. The owner must pay the costs of the towing and storage.
      (2)   Except in an emergency, the removal of a vehicle by or under the
direction of the peace officer or other authorized city official does not
prevent the prosecution of a violation of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 1310.07) (Ord. 2011-03, passed 2-16-2011; Ord. 20191218-01,
passed 12-18-2019)
§ 70.34 “PARKING” DEFINED.
   For purposes of this subchapter, the term PARK includes the term “stand” or
“standing” and “stop” or “stopping”.
(Prior Code, § 1310.09)
§ 70.35 HANDICAPPED PARKING.
   It is unlawful to park, obstruct or occupy with a motor vehicle a parking
space, on public or private property, designated and posted as parking space
for handicapped persons pursuant to the state’s Building Code unless the
vehicle has prominently displayed upon it an insignia or certificate issued by
the Division of Motor Vehicles in the state’s Department of Public Safety,
pursuant to M.S. § 169.345, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 1310.11) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.36 AUTHORITY TO ISSUE PARKING CITATIONS.
   Licensed peace officers, the Fire Chief and the Public Works Superintendent
are expressly authorized to issue citations against a person, firm or
corporation who violates any provision of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 1310.13) (Ord. 2011-03, passed 2-16-2011)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC AND PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Seasonal parking restrictions
   
II.   Historic Downtown District parking restrictions
   
III.   Snowmobiles and OHVs
SCHEDULE I. SEASONAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   There is created a Residential Parking District consisting of all
developed and traveled streets, avenues and alleys in the city, except the
Historic Downtown District as defined in Schedule II of this chapter.
   (B)   Commencing on November 1 of each year and terminating on March 31 and
thereafter on March 31 of each succeeding year, the following standards apply
in the Residential District:
      (1)   Parking is prohibited on either side of each street, avenue or
alley between the times of 9:00 p.m. each day and 9:00 a.m. the following day,
except for the exception in the following clause; and
      (2)   Parking may not exceed 30 minutes on the following streets and
avenues:
 
Street            Location
Court Avenue      At its intersection with 3rd Street (T.H. 123), thence
                  southerly to its intersection with Division Street
Division Street   At its intersection with Main Avenue (T.H. 123), thence
                  easterly to its intersection with Court Avenue
Old Military Road At its intersection with T.H. 123, thence southerly to its
                  intersection with Eagle Drive
 
(Prior Code, § 1310.13) (Ord. 97-02, passed 1-22-1997; Ord. 20210721-03, passed
7-21-2021) Penalty, see §
10.99
SCHEDULE II. HISTORIC DOWNTOWN DISTRICT PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
   Between November 1 and March 31 parking is prohibited in the Historic
Downtown District between 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on each side of each of the
following streets and avenues:
 
Street              Location
Commercial Avenue   From 5th Street to 3rd Street
Court Avenue        South from intersection with Division Street to Washington
                    Street
Division Street     East from intersection with Court Avenue to Grant Avenue
5th and 4th Streets From Main Avenue to Court Avenue
 
(Prior Code, § 1310.13) (Ord. 97-02, passed 1-22-1997; Ord. 20210721-03, passed
7-21-2021) Penalty, see §
10.99
SCHEDULE III. SNOWMOBILES AND OHVS.
   Snowmobiles or OHVs may be operated only on the routes herein established,
except for the purpose of reaching and leaving the established routes by the
most direct street route to the home of the operator or the usual place of
storage of the snowmobiles or OHVs. The routes as established are as follows:
Street Location
Street               Location
North-south routes
   Angle Avenue   From 7th Street to 6th Street
   Main Street    From 6th Street to Lark Street/Cedar Street
   Old Military Road
   Pine Avenue    From 3rd Street to the southern end of the road
East-west routes
   7th Street
   Minnesota StreeFrom Palisade Avenue to State Highway 23
   3rd Street     From Pine Avenue east to the city limits
 
(Ord. 20200219-01, passed 2-19-2020; Ord. 20200219-02, passed 2-27-2020)
Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMAL CONTROL
      
91.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
      
92.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
93.   CEMETERIES
      
94.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
      
95.   ALARM SYSTEMS
      
96.   SPECIAL EVENTS AND GATHERINGS
CHAPTER 90: ANIMAL CONTROL
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Dogs and cats
   
90.03   Non-domestic animals
   
90.04   Farm animals
   
90.05   Impounding provisions
   
90.06   Keeping dogs
   
90.07   Nuisances
   
90.08   Chickens
   
90.09   Seizing animals
   
90.10   Dangerous animals
   
90.11   Diseased animals
   
90.12   Dangerous, potentially dangerous dogs
   
90.13   Basic care
   
90.14   Breeding moratorium
   
90.15   Enforcement; pound
   
90.16   Application of state law
   
90.17   Keeping honey bees
 
   
90.99   Penalty
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. A mammal, reptile, amphibian, fish, bird (including fowl and
poultry) or other member commonly accepted as a part of the animal kingdom.
   AT LARGE. Off the premises of the owner and not under the custody and
control of the owner or other person, either by leash, cord and chain or
otherwise restrained or confined.
   BROODING. The period of chicken growth when supplemental heat must be
provided, due to the bird’s inability to generate enough body heat.
   CAT. Both the male and female of the Felidae species commonly accepted as
domesticated household pets.
   CHICKEN. A domesticated bird that serves as a source of eggs or meat.
   COOP. The structure for the keeping or housing of chickens permitted by this
chapter.
   DOG. Both the male and female of the canine species, commonly accepted as
domesticated household pets and other domesticated animals of a dog kind.
   DOMESTIC ANIMALS. Those animals commonly accepted as domesticated household
pets. The term includes dogs, cats, caged birds, gerbils, hamsters, guinea
pigs, domesticated rabbits, domesticated ferrets, fish, non-poisonous and non-
constricting reptiles or amphibians and other similar animals.
   EXERCISE YARD. A larger fenced area that provides space for exercise and
foraging for the birds when supervised.
   FARM ANIMALS. Those animals commonly associated with a farm or performing
work in an agricultural setting. The term includes members of the equestrian
family (horses, mules), bovine family (cows, bulls) sheep, poultry (chickens,
turkeys), fowl (ducks, geese), swine (including Vietnamese potbellied pigs),
goats, bees and other animals associated with a farm, ranch or stable.
   HEN. A female chicken.
   NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS. Those animals commonly considered to be naturally wild
and not naturally trained or domesticated or which are commonly considered to
be inherently dangerous to the public health, safety and welfare. The term
includes:
      (1)   A member of the large cat family (family Felidae) including lions,
tigers, cougars, bobcats, leopards and jaguars, but excluding commonly accepted
domesticated house cats;
      (2)   A naturally wild member of the canine family (family Canidae)
including wolves, coyotes, dingoes and jackals, but excluding commonly accepted
domesticated dogs;
      (3)   A crossbreed such as the crossbreed between a wolf and a dog,
unless the cross-breed is commonly accepted as a domesticated house pet;
      (4)   A member or relative of the rodent family, including skunks
(whether or not scent glands have been removed), raccoons or squirrels, but
excluding those members otherwise defined or commonly accepted as domesticated
pets;
      (5)   A poisonous, venomous, constricting or inherently dangerous member
of the reptile or amphibian families including rattlesnakes, boa constrictors,
pit vipers, crocodiles and alligators; and
      (6)   Any other animal not listed above, but which can be reasonably
included in the divisions in this definition, including, but not limited to,
bears, deer, monkeys and game fish.
   OFFICER. Any person designated by the city as an enforcement officer.
   OWNER. A person owning, keeping or harboring an animal.
   RELEASE PERMIT. A permit issued by the animal control officer for the
release of an animal that has been taken to the pound.
      (1)   A RELEASE PERMIT may be obtained upon payment of a fee in
accordance with that regular registration requirement if the animal is not
currently registered with the city, payment of a release fee, any maintenance
costs incurred in capturing and impounding the animal.
      (2)   The release fee is set in §
36.02 of this code of ordinances. The fee increases for each impounding. For
the purpose of a RELEASE PERMIT, any change in the registered ownership of an
animal subsequent to its impoundment and release resets that animal’s
impoundment count to the beginning of the fee scale.
   ROOSTER. A male chicken.
   RUN. A fully-enclosed and covered area attached to a coop where the chickens
can roam unsupervised.
(Prior Code, § 911.01) (Ord. 00-04, passed 12-1-2000; Ord. 2008-16, passed 11-
19-2008; Ord. 2010-05, passed 9-15-2010; Ord. 20180117-07, passed 1-17-2018)
§ 90.02 DOGS AND CATS.
   (A)   Running at large prohibited. It is unlawful for any person who owns,
harbors or keeps a dog or cat, or the parents or the guardians of any such
person under 18 years of age, to allow the dog, ferret or cat to run at large.
Dogs or cats shall be on a leash and accompanied by a responsible person or
accompanied by and under the control and direction of a responsible person so
as to be effectively restrained by command or by leash, but are permitted in
streets or on public land unless the city has posted an area with signs reading
“Dogs or Cats Prohibited”.
   (B)   Cats. All provisions of this chapter apply to cats unless otherwise
provided.
   (C)   Vaccinations.
      (1)   Dogs, ferrets and cats kept harbored, maintained, or transported
within the city must have current vaccinations from a licensed veterinarian
for:
         (a)   Rabies with a live modified vaccine; and
         (b)   Distemper.
      (2)   A certificate of vaccination must be kept on which is stated the
date of vaccination, owner’s name and address, the animal’s name (if
applicable), sex, description and weight, the type of vaccine and the
veterinarian’s signature. Upon demand made by the animal control officer or a
police officer, the owner must present for examination the required certificate
of vaccination for the animal. If certificates are not presented, the owner or
keeper of the animal will have seven days in which to present the certificate
to the animal control officer or police officer. Failure to do so is a
violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 911.03) (Ord. 00-04, passed 12-1-2000; Ord. 2008-16, passed 11-
19-2008; Ord. 2010-05, passed 9-15-2010; Ord. 20180117-02, passed 1-17-2018)
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS.
   (A)   General. It is unlawful for a person to own, possess, harbor or offer
for sale, a non-domestic animal within the city limits. This section does not
apply to animals specifically trained for and actually providing assistance to
the handicapped or disabled, and for those animals brought into the city as
part of a veterinarian clinic or scientific research laboratory. Non-domestic
animals may also be brought into the city for other purposes pursuant to
division (B) below.
   (B)   Non-domestic animal permits.
      (1)   Non-domestic animal event permit. A person may bring a non-domestic
animal into the city to be used for wildlife photography or for an exhibition,
activity or event that is open to the general public, including, but not
limited to, temporary petting zoos located at community events and festivals;
provided that, a non-domestic animal permit is obtained for the event in
advance from the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer. The event permit will be
issued for the particular event which must not exceed 21 days. The permit may
specify further conditions under which the animals must be kept while within
the city.
         (a)   Application requirements. Applicants for non-domestic animal
event permits must be identifiable persons or entities. Applicants must file an
application for a permit no less than 48 hours prior to the event. A permit
application may be filed less than 48 hours prior to the event if written
approval is obtained from the Animal Control Officer or the officer’s designee.
The permit application must include the following information:
            1.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and
contact information for any of its representatives associated with the event;
            2.   A description of the event, including the date(s) and time(s);
            3.   The types and numbers of animals that will be present;
            4.   A safety plan for the animals and the public. The safety plan
must include specific information on how the animals will be restrained or
controlled and the training, experience and skills of all person(s) that will
be controlling and restraining the animals;
            5.   The location of the event;
            6.   Evidence of a surety bond or liability insurance which covers
incidences or occurrences involving the animals; and
            7.   All other reasonable pertinent information as requested by the
city.
         (b)   Notification. Upon issuance of a non-domestic animal event
permit, the applicant shall notify all adjacent property owners of the issuance
of the permit in a form acceptable to the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer
prior to the occurrence of the event. The applicant shall provide the city with
a copy of the notice that was provided along with a list of person(s) that were
notified.
         (c)   Inspection. The city shall have the authority to investigate the
conditions and inspect the site at which the animal(s) will be kept or
displayed and to require the production of reasonable veterinary or similar
record to the extent deemed necessary to ensure the safety and health of any
person or animal.
         (d)   Security. The applicant shall provide for security so that the
animals are observed at all times while they are in the city. Any personnel
required as part of the safety plan to protect the animals and the public shall
be present at all times and any tools, devices or firearms shall be readily
available.
         (e)   Confiscation. The city may confiscate, order veterinarian care
or prevent from exhibition any animal which possesses a threat to public
safety, including, but not limited to, animals not current with vaccinations or
any animal that is in immediate danger due to cruelty, abuse or neglect.
      (2)   Educational non-domestic animal permit. Institutions that are
accredited by the Association of Zoos and Aquariums or Audubon centers,
societies or chapters may bring non-domestic animals into the city to be used
for educational purposes; provided that, an educational non-domestic animal
permit is obtained from the city. The educational non-domestic animal permit
will apply to all educational activities conducted by the particular
institution that involve it bringing non-domestic animals into the city during
the course of a one-year period. The permit may specify further conditions
under which the animal(s) must be kept while within the city.
         (a)   Application requirements. Applicants for education non-domestic
animal permits must be identifiable entities. The permit application shall
include the following information:
            1.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and
the names and contact information of its representatives responsible for the
activities;
            2.   A general description of the types of educational activities
that the applicant will be conducting with the non-domestic animal(s);
            3.   The types of animals that will be used;
            4.   A description of how each type of animal will be restrained or
controlled and a description of the training, experience and skills of the
individual that will be restraining or controlling the animal(s);
            5.   Evidence of a surety bond or liability insurance which covers
incidences or occurrences involving the animals; and
            6.   All other reasonably pertinent information as requested by the
city.
         (b)   Notification. The applicant must provide the City Administrator/
Clerk-Treasurer with at least 24 hours notice prior to the educational
activity. The applicant must provide the city with information as to the
location of the activity and the number and types of animals that will be
brought into the city. If the activity will be taking place on property that
contains a private residence, all adjacent property owners must be notified in
advance by the applicant.
      (3)   Permit application fee. An application fee must be paid upon
application for a non-domestic animal event permit or educational non-domestic
animal permit. The amount of the application fee shall be set from time to time
by City Council resolution. The applicant shall also be responsible for any
costs incurred by the city in reviewing the permit application.
      (4)   Permit denial. The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer may deny an
application for a non-domestic animal permit for any of the following reasons:
         (a)   Failure by the applicant to comply with or supply any
information requested or required by the city;
         (b)   Falsification by the applicant of any information required or
requested by the city;
         (c)   Previous or current violations by the applicant of any
provisions of this chapter; or
         (d)   Previous or current citations or violations of any local, state
or federal law by the applicant relating to cruelty to animals, public safety
or animal exhibition.
      (5)   Revocation. The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer may revoke a
non-domestic animal permit for any of the following reasons:
         (a)   Failure by the applicant to comply with the terms of this
section or the conditions of the permit;
         (b)   Falsification by the applicant of any information required by
the city;
         (c)   Current violation by the applicant of any provisions of this
chapter;
         (d)   Violation by the applicant of any local, state or federal law
applicable to animals or animal exhibitions; or
         (e)   Any instance of animal cruelty, abuse or neglect by the
applicant within the city.
      (6)   Appeal. In the event that the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer
denies an application for a non-domestic animal event permit or educational
non-domestic animal permit, the applicant may, upon written request to the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, have the permit application reviewed by the City
Council. If the application is for a non-domestic animal event permit, the
applicant must request City Council review no less than ten days prior to the
event. If the application is for an educational non-domestic animal permit, a
request for review must be made within 30 days of the date of denial. If the
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer’s decision is affirmed by the City Council,
the applicant may seek judicial review as permitted by law.
(Prior Code, § 911.05) (Ord. 00-04, passed 12-1-2000; Ord. 2008-16, passed 11-
19-2008; Ord. 2009-01, passed 4-1-2009) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 FARM ANIMALS.
   Farm animals may be kept only in a large lot rural zoning district of the
city, or on a residential lot of at least ten acres in size, but an animal
shelter may not be located within 250 feet of the boundary of an adjoining
piece of property. This section does not apply to animals brought into the city
as part of an operating zoo, veterinarian clinic, scientific research
laboratory or a licensed show or exhibition. The keeping of chickens is allowed
in accordance with §
90.08 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 911.07) (Ord. 00-04, passed 12-1-2000; Ord. 20180117-08, passed
1-17-2018) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 IMPOUNDING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Running at large. An animal running at large is declared a public
nuisance. The Animal Control Officer or any police officer may impound any dog
or other animal found running at large and must give notice of the impounding
to the owner of the dog or other animal, if known. If the owner is unknown, a
notice must be posted at the city office. The notice shall state that if the
dog or other animal is not claimed within five business days, it will be sold
or otherwise disposed of. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is
unlawful to kill, destroy or otherwise cause injury to any animal, including
dogs and cats running at large.
   (B)   Animal bites. An animal that has not been inoculated by a live
modified rabies vaccine and which has bitten a person, wherein the skin has
been punctured or the services of a doctor are required, must be confined in
the city pound for a period of not less than ten days, at the expense of the
owner. The animal may be released at the end of the time if healthy and free
from symptoms of rabies, and after payment of all costs by the owner. However,
if the owner of the animal elects immediately upon receipt of notice of need
for the confinement by the officer to voluntarily and immediately confine the
animal for the required period of time in a veterinary hospital of the owner’s
choosing, not outside of the county, and provide immediate proof of the
confinement in a manner as may be required, the owner may do so. If, however,
the animal has been inoculated with a live modified rabies vaccine and the
owner has proof of the vaccination by a certificate from a licensed
veterinarian, the owner may confine the dog or other animal to the owner’s
property.
   (C)   Reclaiming. Animals conveyed to the pound must be kept, with humane
treatment and sufficient food and water for their comfort, at least five
business days, unless sooner reclaimed by their owners or keepers as provided
by this chapter. In case the owner or keeper desires to reclaim the animal from
the pound, the following is required, unless otherwise provided for in this
chapter:
      (1)   Payment of a release fee and receipt of a release permit from City
Hall. This release fee is in addition to the release permit fee;
      (2)   Payment of maintenance costs, as provided by the pound, per day or
any part of a day while animal is in the pound;
      (3)   If a dog is not currently registered with the city, payment of the
registration fee is required; and
      (4)   If a dog designated as dangerous is seized by the city, it may be
reclaimed pursuant to the requirements of this chapter and M.S. § 347.54, as it
may be amended from time to time.
   (D)   Unclaimed animals. With the exception of dangerous dogs that have been
seized pursuant to M.S. § 347.54, as it may be amended from time to time, at
the expiration of five business days from the time an animal is impounded, if
the animal has not been reclaimed, the Animal Control Officer may let any
person claim the animal by complying with all provisions in this chapter, or
cause the animal to be destroyed in a proper and humane manner and properly
dispose of the remains thereof. The destruction of dangerous dogs shall be
conducted pursuant to the requirements of this chapter and M.S. §§ 347.54 and
347.56, as they may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 911.01) (Ord. 00-04, passed 12-1-2000; Ord. 2002-01, passed 4-3-
2002; Ord. 2008-16, passed 11-19-2008; Ord. 2009-01, passed 4-1-2009; Ord.
2010-05, passed 9-15-2010) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 KEEPING DOGS.
   (A)   Policy. The City Council has found and determined that the keeping of
large numbers of dogs on a single premises is subject to abuse, and may cause
discomfort to persons because of smell, noise, hazards and aesthetic
depreciation.
   (B)   Prohibition. The keeping of three or more than three dogs on a
residentially zoned lot of one-half acre or less is prohibited. The keeping of
five or more dogs on a residentially zoned lot of more than one-half acres is
prohibited. At least two of the five dogs must be neutered or spayed.
   (C)   Exception. This section does not apply to properly zoned commercial
pet and animal stores; to veterinarians providing medical care; to keeping a
newly born litter of pups for a period of 90 days or if a person receives no
more than one dog from a recognized animal humane or animal rescue society that
has been rescued from abandonment or an abusive situation, City Hall is
notified prior to receipt of the dog and is provided information as to where
the dog came from, and the city is allowed to monitor the progress of the dog.
The person rescuing the dog is responsible for the care and expenses of the dog
until such time as the dog, in the opinion of the animal humane or rescue
society, determines that the dog can be adopted.
(Prior Code, § 911.11) (Ord. 00-04, passed 12-1-2000; Ord. 2004-06, passed 10-
20-2004; Ord. 2008-03, passed 4-2-2008) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 NUISANCES.
   (A)   Habitual barking. It is unlawful to keep or harbor a dog that
habitually barks or cries. HABITUAL BARKING means barking for an interval of at
least five minutes with less than one minute of interruption. The barking must
also be audible off of the owner or caretaker’s premises. Similar habitual
noises by other animals such as cats are also unlawful.
   (B)   Damage to property. It shall be unlawful for any person's dog or other
animal to damage any lawn, garden or other property, whether or not the owner
has knowledge of the damage.
   (C)   Cleaning up litter. The owner of any animal or person having the
custody or control of any animal shall be responsible for cleaning up any feces
of the animal and disposing of the feces in a sanitary manner whether on their
own property, on the property of others or on public property.
   (D)   Other. An animal kept contrary to this chapter is subject to
impoundment.
(Prior Code, § 911.13) (Ord. 00-04, passed 12-1-2000; Ord. 2008-16, passed 11-
19-2008) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.08 CHICKENS.
   (A)   The keeping of chickens is allowed with no limitations and without a
permit in the Suburban Residential District of the city, or on a residential
lot of at least ten acres in size. The keeping of chickens is otherwise
prohibited in the following districts: Historic Downtown District, Highway
Fixed Use District, Industrial District, Professional/Light Industrial Business
Park District, Prospective Interchange Development Public Recreation Open
Spaces District.
   (B)   The keeping of chickens in the Traditional is allowed with the
following limitations.
      (1)   No more than five hens shall be housed or kept on any one
residential lot.
      (2)   Roosters are prohibited.
      (3)   Slaughtering of chickens on the property is prohibited.
      (4)   A separate coop is required to house the chickens.
      (5)   Chickens must be secured in a chicken coop from sunset to sunrise
each day.
      (6)   Coops must be constructed and maintained to meet the following
minimum standards:
         (a)   Located in the rear or side yard;
         (b)   Setback at least ten feet from the rear or side property lines
or from the alley;
         (c)   Interior floor space: four square feet per bird;
         (d)   Interior height: four feet minimum, seven feet maximum, to allow
access for cleaning and maintenance;
         (e)   Doors: one door to allow humans to access the coop and one door
for birds (if above ground level, must also provide a stable ramp);
         (f)   The roofed structure shall be fully enclosed, wind-proof, have
one square foot of window to 15 square feet of floor space and have a heat
source to maintain an adequate temperature during extreme cold conditions;
         (g)   Nest boxes: one box per every three hens;
         (h)   Roosts: one and one-half inch diameter or greater, located 18
inches from the wall and two to three inches above the floor;
         (i)   Coops must be elevated a minimum of 12 inches and no more than
24 inches above grade to ensure circulation beneath the coop;
         (j)   Rodent-proof coop construction and materials must be adequate to
prevent access by rodents and raccoons;
         (k)   No coop shall be constructed on any lot prior to the time of
construction of the principal structure;
         (l)   Coops must be screened from view with a solid fence or
landscaped buffer with a minimum height of four feet;
         (m)   If the coop is over 200 square feet in size, a building permit
is required; and
         (n)   If electricity will be installed in the coop, an electrical
permit is required.
      (7)   A run or exercise yard is required. Runs must be constructed and
maintained to meet the following minimum standards:
         (a)   Located in the rear or side yard;
         (b)   Size: ten square feet per bird if access to a fenced exercise
yard is available; 20 square feet per bird if access to an exercise yard is not
available. If the coop is elevated two feet so the hens can access the space
beneath, that area may count as a portion of the minimum run footprint;
         (c)   Height: six feet in height to allow access for cleaning and
maintenance;
         (d)   Gate: one gate to allow human access to the run;
         (e)   Cover: adequate to keep hens in and predators out;
         (f)   Substrate: composed of material that can be easily raked or
regularly replaced to reduce odor and flies;
         (g)   Setback at least ten feet from the rear or side property lines
or from the alley; and
         (h)   Exercise yards are required if the run does not provide at least
ten square feet per bird. They shall be set back ten feet from rear and side
property lines or from the alley.
      (8)   Chickens must not be housed in a residential house or an attached
or detached garage, except for brooding purposes only.
      (9)   All premises on which chickens are kept or maintained shall be kept
clean from filth, garbage and any substances which attract rodents. The coop
and its surroundings must be cleaned frequently enough to control odor. Manure
shall not be allowed to accumulate in a way that causes an unsanitary condition
or causes odors detectible from another property. Failure to comply with these
conditions may result in the city removing chickens from the premises.
      (10)   All grain and food stored for the use of the chickens shall be
kept in a rodent-proof container.
      (11)   Chickens shall not be kept in a manner as to constitute a nuisance
to the occupants of adjacent property.
   (C)   Any chicken coop and chicken run authorized under this chapter may be
inspected at any reasonable time by the city. Factors to be considered in
deciding whether the keeping of chickens creates a public or private nuisance
include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   The condition of any structure or building wherein any chicken is
kept;
      (2)   The proximity of pens, fences and other structures to adjacent
property lines;
      (3)   The general nature and characteristics of the neighborhood;
      (4)   The number of chickens kept on any one parcel;
      (5)   The relative size of the parcel on which the chickens are kept;
      (6)   The type of chickens being kept;
      (7)   The extent to which neighboring property is protected from the
effects of chickens (e.g., solid fences, landscape screening, buffer areas and
the like);
      (8)   The presence of objectionable odors and/or noise; and
      (9)   The relative danger the chicken would pose if exposed to the
general public.
   (D)   Application shall be made to the city along with a fee according to §
36.02 of this code of ordinances. Letters of support from adjacent property
owners shall be included with the application. If the applicant rents the
property where the chickens will be kept, a letter of support is required from
the property owner. Upon receipt of the application and fee, a permit shall be
issued.
   (E)   (1)   Violations of this section make the permit subject to
revocation. Any chicken kept in violation of this section may be impounded by
the city, and after being so impounded for five days or more without being
reclaimed by the owner may be destroyed or sold.
      (2)   Any person reclaiming the impounded chicken shall pay the costs of
impounding and boarding the bird at the time of its release. The owner may also
be proceeded against for violation of this chapter, and his or her permit may
be revoked. Any person who violates any provision of this code shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor as defined by state law and subject to the penalties thereof.
(Prior Code, § 911.14) (Ord. 20180117-05, passed 1-17-2018) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.09 SEIZING ANIMALS.
   A police officer or the Animal Control Officer may enter upon private
property and seize any animal; provided that, the following exist:
   (A)   There is an identified complaint other than the police officer or
Animal Control Officer making a contemporaneous complaint about the animal;
   (B)   The officer reasonably believes that the animal meets either the
barking dog criteria; the criteria for cruelty; or the criteria for an at large
animal;
   (C)   The officer can demonstrate that there has been at least one previous
complaint of a barking dog; inhumane treatment of the animal; or that the
animal was at large on a prior date;
   (D)   The officer has made a reasonable attempt to contact the owner of the
property and those attempts have either failed or have been ignored;
   (E)   The seizure will not involve the forced entry into a private
residence. Use of a pass key obtained from a property manager, landlord,
innkeeper or other authorized person to have the key is not an unauthorized
entry;
   (F)   No other less intrusive means is available to stop either the barking
dog, the inhumane treatment of the animal or the at large animal; and
   (G)   Written notice of the seizure is left in a conspicuous place if
personal contact with the owner of the dog is not possible.
(Prior Code, § 911.15) (Ord. 00-04, passed 12-1-2000; Ord. 2008-16, passed 11-
19-2008)
§ 90.10 DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   If, in the reasonable belief of any person, the Animal Control Officer or
police officer, an animal presents an immediate danger to the safety of any
person or the animal is threatening imminent harm or is in the process of
attacking any person, the officer may, as a last resort, destroy the animal in
a proper manner. If the animal is destroyed by the officer, a charge for
disposal of the animal shall be paid by the owner of the animal.
(Prior Code, § 911.17) (Ord. 00-04, passed 12-1-2000; Ord. 2008-16, passed 11-
19-2008)
§ 90.11 DISEASED ANIMALS.
   (A)   Running at large. It is unlawful to keep or permit to run at large in
the city, an animal that is diseased so as to be a danger to the public health
and safety, even though the animal is properly registered under this chapter.
   (B)   Confinement. An animal reasonably suspected of being diseased and
presenting a threat to public health and safety may be apprehended and confined
in the pound by a police officer or Animal Control Officer. The police officer
must have a qualified veterinarian examine the animal. If the animal is found
to be diseased in a manner so as to be a danger to the public health and
safety, the officer must cause the animal to be humanely destroyed and must
properly dispose of the remains. The owner or keeper of the animal destroyed
under this section shall be responsible for the costs of maintaining and
disposing of the animal, plus the costs of any veterinarian examinations.
   (C)   Release. If the animal, upon examination, is not found to be diseased
within the meaning of this chapter, but is registered with the city, the animal
must be released to the owner or keeper free of charge.
(Prior Code, § 911.19) (Ord. 00-04, passed 12-1-2000; Ord. 2010-05, passed 9-
15-2010) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.12 DANGEROUS, POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS.
   (A)   Adoption by reference. Except as otherwise provided in this section,
the regulatory and procedural provisions of M.S. §§ 347.50 to 347.565 (commonly
referred to as the “Dangerous Dog Regulations”), as they may be amended from
time to time, are adopted by reference.
   (B)   Definitions. Definitions in this section shall have the following
meanings:
      DANGEROUS DOG. A dog that:
         (a)   Has, when unprovoked, inflicted substantial bodily harm on a
human being on public or private property;
         (b)   Has killed a domestic animal when unprovoked while off the
owner’s property;
         (c)   Has attacked one or more persons on two or more occasions; or
         (d)   Has been found to be potentially dangerous and after the owner
has notice of the same, the dog aggressively bites, attacks or endangers the
safety of humans or domestic animals.
      DOG. Both the male and female of the canine species, commonly accepted as
domesticated household pets.
      GREAT BODILY HARM. Bodily injury which creates a high probability of
death, or which causes serious permanent disfigurement, or which causes a
permanent or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member
or organ or other serious bodily harm.
      MAINTENANCE COSTS. Any costs incurred as a result of seizing an animal
for impoundment, including, but not limited to, the capturing, impounding,
keeping, treating, examining, securing, confining, feeding, destroying,
boarding or maintaining seized animals, whether these services are provided by
the city or the pound.
      OWNER. Any person or persons, firm, corporation, organization, department
or association owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, having an interest in,
or having care, custody or control of a dog.
      POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG. A dog that:
         (a)   Has when unprovoked, inflicted a bite on a human or domestic
animal on public or private property;
         (b)   Has when unprovoked, chased or approached a person, including a
person on a bicycle, upon the streets, sidewalks or any public or private
property, other than the owner's property, in an apparent attitude of attack;
or
         (c)   Has a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
unprovoked, causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of humans or
domestic animals.
      PROPER ENCLOSURE. Securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and
locked pen or structure suitable to prevent the dog from escaping and to
provide protection for the dog from the elements. A proper enclosure does not
include a porch, patio, or any part of a house, garage, or other structure that
would allow the dog to exit of its own volition, or any house or structure in
which windows are open or in which door or window screens are the only barriers
which prevent the dog from exiting. The enclosure shall not allow the egress of
the dog in any manner without human assistance. A pen or kennel shall meet the
following minimum specifications:
         (a)   A minimum overall floor size of 32 square feet;
         (b)   Sidewalls shall have a minimum height of five feet and be
constructed of 11-gauge or heavier wire. Openings in the wire shall not exceed
two inches, support post shall be one and one-fourth inch or larger steel pipe
buried in the ground 18 inches or more. When a concrete floor is not provided,
the sidewalls shall be buried a minimum of 18 inches in the ground;
         (c)   A cover over the entire pen or kennel shall be provided. The
cover shall be constructed of the same gauge wire or heavier as the sidewalls
and openings in the wire shall not exceed two inches; and
         (d)   An entrance/exit gate shall be provided and be constructed of
the same material as the sidewalls and openings in the wire shall not exceed
two inches. The gate shall be self-closing and self-locking. The gate shall be
locked at all times when the dog is in the pen or kennel.
      SUBSTANTIAL BODILY HARM. Bodily injury that involves a temporary, but
substantial disfigurement, or that causes a temporary but substantial loss or
impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ or that causes a
fracture of any bodily member.
      UNPROVOKED. The condition in which the dog is not purposely excited,
stimulated, agitated or disturbed.
   (C)   Declaration of dangerous or potentially dangerous dog.
      (1)   A police officer, community service officer, animal control officer
or other authorized city employee may declare a dog to be dangerous or
potentially dangerous when the officer has probable cause to believe that a dog
is dangerous or potentially dangerous. The following factors will be considered
in determining a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog:
         (a)   Whether any injury or damage to a person by the dog was caused
while the dog was protecting or defending a person or the dog's offspring
within the immediate vicinity of the dog from an unjustified attack or assault;
         (b)   The size and strength of the dog, including jaw strength, and
the animal's propensity to bite humans or other domestic animals; and
         (c)   Whether the dog has wounds, scarring, is observed in a fight or
has other indications that the dog has been or will be used, trained or
encouraged to fight with another animal or whose owner is in possession of any
training apparatus, paraphernalia or drugs used to prepare such dogs to fight
with other animals.
      (2)   Beginning six months after a dog is declared dangerous or
potentially dangerous, an owner may request annually that the city review the
designation. The owner must provide evidence that the dog's behavior has
changed due to the dog's age, neutering, environment, completion of obedience
training or other factors. If enough evidence is provided, the city may rescind
the designation.
      (3)   (a)   The provisions of this section do not apply to dogs used by
law enforcement.
         (b)   Dogs may not be declared dangerous or potentially dangerous if
the threat, injury or danger was sustained by a person who was:
            1.   Committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises
occupied by the owner of the dog;
            2.   Provoking, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog, or who
can be shown to have a history of repeatedly provoking, tormenting, abusing, or
assaulting the dog; or
            3.   Committing or attempting to commit a crime.
   (D)   License required. The owner must annually license dangerous and
potentially dangerous dogs with the city and the county and must license a
newly declared dangerous or potentially dangerous dog within 14 days after
notice that a dog has been declared dangerous or potentially dangerous.
Regardless of any appeal that may be requested, the owner must comply with the
requirements of M.S. § 347.52(a) and (c), as they may be amended from time to
time, regarding proper enclosures and notification to the city upon transfer or
death of the dog, until and unless a hearing officer or court of law reverses
the declaration.
      (1)   The city will issue a license to the owner of a dangerous dog if
the owner presents sufficient evidence that:
         (a)   There is a proper enclosure;
         (b)   Written proof that there is a surety bond by a surety company
authorized to conduct business in Minnesota in the sum of at least $300,000,
payable to any person injured by a dangerous dog, or receipt of a copy of a
policy of liability insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do
business in Minnesota in the amount of at least $300,000, insuring the owner
for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog. Such surety bond or
insurance policy shall provide that no cancellation of the bond or policy will
be made unless the city is notified in writing by the surety company or the
insurance company at least ten days prior to such cancellation;
         (c)   The owner has paid the annual license fee for dangerous dogs as
established in the ordinance establishing fees and charges adopted pursuant to
§
36.02 of this code of ordinances.
         (d)   The owner has had a microchip identification implanted in the
dangerous dog. The name of the microchip manufacturer and identification number
of the microchip must be provided to the city. If the microchip is not
implanted by the owner, it may be implanted by the city at the owner's expense;
and
         (e)   The owner provides proof that the dog has been sterilized. If
the owner does not sterilize the dog within 30 days, the city may seize the dog
and sterilize it at the owner's expense.
      (2)   The city will issue a license to the owner of a potentially
dangerous dog if the owner presents sufficient evidence that:
         (a)   There is a proper enclosure;
         (b)   The owner has paid the annual license fee;
         (c)   The owner has had a microchip identification implanted in the
potentially dangerous dog. The name of the microchip manufacturer and
identification number of the microchip must be provided to the city. If the
microchip is not implanted by the owner, it may be implanted by the city at the
owner's expense.
      (3)   A pre-license inspection of the premises to insure compliance with
the city code is required. If the city issues a license to the owner of a
dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, the city shall be allowed at any
reasonable time to inspect the dog, the proper enclosure and all places where
the animal is kept.
      (4)   The owner of a dangerous dog licensed under this section must post
a sign with the uniform dangerous dog warning symbol on the property in order
to inform children that there is a dangerous dog on the property.
      (5)   A dangerous dog licensed under this section must wear a
standardized, easily identifiable tag at all times that contains the uniform
dangerous dog symbol, identifying the dog as dangerous.
      (6)   The city will charge the owner an annual license fee for a
dangerous or potentially dangerous dog as established in the ordinance to
establish fees and charges as it may be amended from time to time.
   (E)   Properly restrained in proper enclosure or outside of proper
enclosure. While on the owner's property, an owner of a dangerous or
potentially dangerous dog must keep it in a proper enclosure. Inside a
residential home, there must be a secured area maintained where the dog will
stay when persons other than family members are present. If the dog is outside
the proper enclosure, the dog must be muzzled and restrained by a substantial
chain or leash no longer than four feet and under the physical restraint of an
adult. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will prevent the dog from
biting any person or animal but that will not cause injury to the dog or
interfere with its vision or respiration.
   (F)   Notification requirements to city.
      (1)   The owner of a dog that has been declared dangerous or potentially
dangerous must notify the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer in writing if the
dog is to be relocated from its current address or if the dog has died. The
notification must be given in writing within 30 days of the relocation or
death. The notification must include the current owner's name and address, and
the new owner's name and the relocation address. If the relocation address is
outside of the city, the city may notify the local law enforcement agency of
the transfer of the dog into its jurisdiction.
      (2)   A person who owns or possess a dangerous or potentially dangerous
dog and who will rent property from another where the dog will reside must
disclose to the property owner prior to entering the lease agreement and at the
time of any lease renewal periods that the person owns or possesses a dangerous
or potentially dangerous dog that will reside at the property. A dog owner, who
is currently renting property, must notify the property owner within 14 days of
city notification if the owned dog is newly declared as dangerous or
potentially dangerous and the owner keeps the dog on the property.
      (3)   No dog that has been previously determined to be dangerous or
potentially dangerous by another jurisdiction shall be kept, owned or harbored
in the city unless the dog's owner complies with the requirements of this
section prior to bringing the dog into the city. Dogs in violation of this
division are subject to impoundment and destruction.
   (G)   Seizure. Animal control may immediately seize any dangerous or
potentially dangerous dog if:
      (1)   After 14 days after the owner has notice that the dog is declared
dangerous or potentially dangerous, the dog is not validly licensed and no
appeal has been filed;
      (2)   After 14 days after the owner has notice that the dog is dangerous,
the owner does not secure the proper liability insurance or surety coverage as
required or such required insurance is cancelled;
      (3)   The dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure;
      (4)   The dog is outside the proper enclosure and not under proper
restraint, as required by division (E) above;
      (5)   After 30 days after the owner has notice that the dog is dangerous,
the dog is not sterilized, as required by § 91.11(D)(1)(e);
      (6)   The dog's microchip has been removed.
   (H)   Reclamation. A dog seized under division (G) above may be reclaimed by
the owner of the dog upon payment of maintenance costs, and presenting proof to
animal control that the requirements of this section have been met. A dog not
reclaimed under this division within seven days may be disposed of and the
owner will be liable to the city for maintenance costs. A person claiming an
interest in a seized dog may prevent disposition of the dog by posting a
security in an amount sufficient to provide for the dog's maintenance costs.
The security must be posted with the city within seven days of the seizure
inclusive of the date seized.
   (I)   Subsequent offenses: seizure. If a person has been convicted of
violating a provision of this section, and the person is charged with a
subsequent violation relating to the same dog, the dog may be seized. If the
owner is convicted of the crime for which the dog was seized, the court may
order that the dog be destroyed in a proper and humane manner and the owner pay
the maintenance costs. If the owner is not convicted and the dog is not
reclaimed by the owner within seven days after the owner has been notified that
the dog may be reclaimed, the dog may be disposed of in manner permitted by
law.
   (J)   Notice, hearings.
      (1)   After a dog has been declared dangerous or potentially dangerous or
has been seized for destruction, the city shall give notice by delivering or
mailing it to the owner of the dog, or by posting a copy of it at the place
where the dog is kept, or by delivering it to a person residing on the
property, and telephoning, if possible. The notice shall include:
         (a)   A description of the seized dog; the authority for and purpose
of the declaration and seizure; the time, place, and circumstances under which
the dog was declared; and the telephone number and contact person where the dog
is kept;
         (b)   A statement that the owner of the dog may request a hearing
concerning the declaration and that failure to do so within 14 days of the date
of the notice will terminate the owner's right to a hearing;
         (c)   A statement that if an appeal request is made within 14 days of
the notice, the owner must immediately comply with the requirements of M.S. §§
347.52, paragraphs (a) and (c), as they may be amended from time to time,
regarding proper enclosures and notification to the city upon transfer or death
of the dog, until such time as the hearing officer issues an opinion;
         (d)   A statement that if the hearing officer affirms the dangerous
dog declaration, the owner will have 14 days from receipt of that decision to
comply with all other requirements of M.S. §§ 347.51, 347.515 and 347.52, as
they may be amended from time to time;
         (e)   A form to request a hearing; and
         (f)   A statement that if the dog has been seized, all maintenance
costs of the care, keeping, and disposition of the dog pending the outcome of
the hearing are the responsibility of the owner, unless a court or hearing
officer finds that the seizure or impoundment was not reasonably justified by
law.
      (2)   (a) After a dog has been declared dangerous, potentially dangerous
or has been seized for destruction, the owner may appeal in writing to the city
within 14 days after notice of the declaration or seizure. Failure to do so
within 14 days of the date of the notice will terminate the owner's right to a
hearing. The owner must pay a $100 fee for an appeal hearing.
         (b)   The appeal hearing will be held within 14 days of the request.
The hearing officer must be an impartial employee of the city or an impartial
person retained by the city to conduct the hearing.
         (c)   If the declaration or destruction is upheld by the hearing
officer, actual expenses of the hearing up to a maximum of $1,000, as well as
all maintenance costs, will be the responsibility of the dog's owner. The
hearing officer shall issue a decision on the matter within ten days after the
hearing. The decision shall be delivered to the dog's owner by hand delivery or
registered mail as soon as practical and a copy shall be provided to the city.
The decision of the hearing officer is final.
   (K)   Destruction of certain dogs. The Sheriff and/or hearing officer are
authorized to order the destruction or other disposition of any dog, after
proper notice is given pursuant to division (J) above and upon a finding that:
      (1)   The dog has habitually destroyed property or habitually trespassed
in a damaging manner on property of persons other than the owner;
      (2)   The dog has been declared dangerous, the owner's right to appeal
hereunder has been exhausted or expired, and the owner has failed to comply
with the provisions of this section;
      (3)   It is determined that the dog is infected with rabies;
      (4)   The dog inflicted substantial or great bodily harm on a human on
public or private property without provocation;
      (5)   The dog inflicted multiple bites on a human on public or private
property without provocation;
      (6)   The dog bit multiple human victims on public or private property in
the same attack without provocation;
      (7)   The dog bit a human on public or private property without
provocation in an attack where more than one dog participated in the attack; or
      (8)   The dog poses a danger to the public's health, safety or welfare.
In determining whether the dog poses a danger to the public's health, safety or
welfare, the following factors may be considered:
         (a)   The dog weighs more than 20 pounds;
         (b)   The strength of the dog, including jaw strength;
         (c)   The dog's tolerance for pain;
         (d)   The dog's tendency to refuse to terminate an attack;
         (e)   The dog's propensity to bite humans or other domestic animals;
         (f)   The dog's potential for unpredictable behavior;
         (g)   The dog's aggressiveness; and
         (h)   The likelihood that a bite by the dog will result in serious
injury.
   (L)   Concealing of dogs. No person may harbor, hide or conceal a dog that
the city has the authority to seize or that has been ordered into custody for
destruction or other proper disposition.
   (M)   Dog ownership prohibited.
      (1)   Except as provided below, a person shall not own a dog if the
person has been:
         (a)   Convicted of a third or subsequent violation of divisions (D),
(E) or (F) above or similar ordinance in another jurisdiction, or M.S. §§
347.51, 347.515 or 347.52, as they may be amended from time to time;
         (b)   Convicted of 2nd degree manslaughter due to negligent or
intentional use of a dog under M.S. § 609.205 (4), as it may be amended from
time to time; or
         (c)   Convicted of gross misdemeanor harm caused by a dog under M.S. §
609.226, subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   Any person who owns a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog and is
found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this section or had owned
a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog but never achieved compliance with
this section may be prohibited from ownership or custody of another dog for a
period of five years after the original declaration. Any dog found to be in
violation, may be impounded until due process is completed, pursuant to
division (J) above.
      (3)   If any member of a household is prohibited from owning a dog in
divisions (M)(1) or (M)(2) above, unless specifically approved with or without
restrictions by the city, no person in the household is permitted to own a dog.
   (N)   Dog ownership prohibition review. Beginning three years after a
conviction under division (M)(1) above that prohibits a person from owning a
dog, and annually thereafter, the person may request in writing to the Sheriff
or Animal Control Officer that the city review the prohibition.
      (1)   The city may consider such facts as the seriousness of the
violation or violations that led to the prohibition, any criminal convictions,
or other facts that the city deems appropriate. The city may rescind the
prohibition entirely or rescind it with limitations. The city also may
establish conditions a person must meet before the prohibition is rescinded,
including, but not limited to, successfully completing dog training or dog
handling courses.
      (2)   If the city rescinds a person's prohibition and the person
subsequently fails to comply with any limitations imposed by the city or the
person is convicted of any animal violation involving unprovoked bites or dog
attacks, the city may permanently prohibit the person from owning a dog in this
state.
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.13 BASIC CARE.
   Animals must receive from their owners or keepers kind treatment, housing in
the winter and sufficient food and water for their comfort. It is unlawful to
not treat an animal in a humane manner.
(Prior Code, § 911.25) (Ord. 00-04, passed 12-1-2000) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.14 BREEDING MORATORIUM.
   A female dog or female cat in heat must be confined in a building or other
enclosure in a manner that it cannot come in contact with another dog or cat,
except for planned breeding. Upon capture and failure to reclaim the animal, a
dog or cat prior to being transferred to a new owner must be neutered or spayed
at the expense of the new owner.
(Prior Code, § 911.27) (Ord. 00-04, passed 12-1-2000) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.15 ENFORCEMENT; POUND.
   (A)   The Council must appoint an Animal Control Officer to enforce the
provisions of this chapter. The Animal Control Officer may, with the consent of
the Council, designate assistants.
(Prior Code, § 911.29)
   (B)   The Council will annually, prior to January 15, designate an official
pound to which animals found in violation of this chapter will be taken for
safe treatment, and, if necessary, for destruction.
(Prior Code, § 911.31)
   (C)   (1)   It is unlawful to molest, hinder or interfere with any person
authorized by the Council to capture dogs, cats or other animals and convey
them to the pound while engaged in the operation.
      (2)   It is unlawful to break open the pound or attempt to do so, or take
or attempt to take from any agent any animal taken up by an authorized person
in compliance with this chapter, or in any other manner to interfere with or
hinder the authorized person in the discharge of the person’s duties.
(Prior Code, § 911.33)
(Ord. 00-04, passed 12-1-2000) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.16 APPLICATION OF STATE LAW.
   (A)   M.S. §§ 343.20 to 343.40, as they may be amended from time to time,
relating to cruelty of animals is adopted by reference.
   (B)   (1)   The provisions of this chapter relating to dangerous or
potentially dangerous dogs are intended to be the fullest exercise of the
city’s authority on the subject that is permitted by M.S. §§ 347.50 to 347.565,
as they may be amended from time to time, and are adopted as if stated herein.
      (2)   If there is a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and
those statutes, the provisions of the statutes prevail.
(Prior Code, § 911.37) (Ord. 00-04, passed 12-1-2000; Ord. 02-01, passed 4-3-
2002; Ord. 2008-16, passed 11-19-2008)
§ 90.17 KEEPING HONEY BEES.
   (A)   Definitions. The following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed in this section unless the context of their usage indicates another
usage.
      APIARY. The assembly of one or more colonies of bees at any one location.
      BEEKEEPER. A person who owns or has charge of one or more colonies of
bees.
      BEEKEEPING EQUIPMENT. Anything used in the operation of an apiary, such
as hive bodies, supers, frames, top and bottom boards, and extractors.
      COLONY. An aggregate of bees consisting principally of workers, but
having, when perfect, one queen and at times drones, brood, combs, and honey.
      HIVE. The receptacle inhabited by a colony that is manufactured for that
purpose.
      HONEYBEE. All life stages of the common domestic honey bee, Apis
mellifera. (African subspecies and Africanized hybrids are not allowed.)
      LOT. A contiguous parcel of land under common ownership.
   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish certain
requirements for beekeeping within the city, and to avoid issues that might
otherwise be associated with beekeeping in populated areas.
   (C)   Standards of practice.
      (1)   Honey bee colonies shall be kept in hives with removable frames,
which must be kept in sound and usable conditions.
      (2)   Beekeepers:
         (a)   Must ensure that a convenient source of water is available
within ten feet of each colony at all times that it remain active outside the
hive;
         (b)   Must ensure that no wax comb or other material that might
encourage robbing by other bees are left upon the grounds of the apiary lot.
Once removed from the site, such materials shall be handled and stored in
sealed containers, or placed within a building or other vermin-proof container;
         (c)   Shall maintain beekeeping equipment in good condition, including
keeping the hives painted if they have been painted but are peeling or flaking,
and securing unused equipment from weather, potential theft, vandalism, and
occupancy by swarms.
      (3)   Bee colonies may be kept on the following zoning districts:
         (a)   Traditional Residential District;
         (b)   Suburban Residential District;
         (c)   Public Recreation and Open Space District;
         (d)   Other districts where an existing residential home exists.
   (D)   Hives:
      (1)   Are not permitted in a front yard or in a street side yard;
      (2)   Shall be located at least ten feet from all interior property lines
and ten feet from an alley right-of-way;
      (3)   Shall be at least 25 feet from a principal building on an abutting
lot.
      (4)   In each instance where a colony is kept less than 25 feet from a
property line of the lot upon which the apiary is located, the beekeeper shall
establish and maintain a flyway barrier six feet in height as follows:
         (a)   The flyway barrier must extend ten feet in either direction from
the hive along the property line;
         (b)   Barriers may be made of a wall, fence, or dense vegetation. A
combination of these things are permissible.
      (5)   A fence permit is required. See §
163.006 of the city code.
      (6)   Sale of honey and hive products from the beekeeper’s residence is
permitted in accordance with the home occupation provisions of city code, and
the following provisions.
         (a)   The beekeeper must live on the property containing the apiary.
         (b)   The honey and hive products are from hives owned by the
beekeeper.
         (c)   In any instance in which a colony exhibits unusually aggressive
behavior, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to promptly take
appropriate action to address the behavior.
   (E)   Colony density. The following numbers of colonies are permitted:
      (1)   Lots less than 21,780 square feet (one-half acre): two colonies;
      (2)   Larger than one-half acre: four colonies.
   (F)   Permit required. Beekeeping may occur on any property in the city, in
accordance with this code, upon issuance of an annual permit to the beekeeper
on that specific property, which shall expire on December 31 of each year.
      (1)   A beekeeping permit will be issued:
         (a)   If the requirements of this section have been met;
         (b)   If notices have been mailed to all property owners within 150
feet of the applicant’s property lines;
         (c)   If objections are received within ten days of mailing the
notices, the City Council shall consider the application.
      (2)   If there are no objections received within ten days of mailing the
notices, the permit application will be processed by city staff.
      (3)   Permits are non-transferable and do not run with the land.
      (4)   By signing the permit, the beekeeper acknowledges that he/she shall
defend and indemnify the city against any and all claims arising out of keeping
the bees on the premises.
      (5)   The City Council shall establish the permit fee. For each
subsequent permit (renewal), there shall be no fee, unless there are
substantial changes to the apiary or there is a new beekeeper.
      (6)   If the standards of practice are not maintained subsequent to
issuance of a beekeeping permit, the permit may be revoked by the city.
      (7)   Sales of honey or hive products from the home must be stated on the
permit, and a separate home occupation permit must be obtained.
   (G)   Penalty or violation.
      (1)   Violations of this section make the permit subject to revocation.
Any beekeeping hive(s) found to be in violation of this section may be
impounded by the city, and, after being so impounded for five days or more
without being reclaimed by the owner, may be destroyed or sold.
      (2)   Any person reclaiming the impounded beekeeping hive(s) shall pay
the costs of impounding and boarding the hive(s) at the time of its release.
The owner may also be proceeded against for violation of this chapter, and his
or her permit may be revoked. Any person who violates any provision of this
code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, as defined by state law, and subject to
the penalties thereof.
(Ord. 20240417-01, passed 4-17-2024)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for
any crime which is a misdemeanor under this chapter, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more
than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
   (C)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time, in
either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
   (D) The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
   (E)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if any
person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this code,
the City Council or any city official designated by it may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
   (F)   (1)   Unless stated otherwise, any person who violates a provision of
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
      (2)   Any person who is convicted of a second or subsequent violation of
any provision of §
90.12(D), (E), or (F) is guilty of a gross misdemeanor.
      (3)   Any person who violates §
90.12(M), whether an owner or household member, is guilty of a gross
misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 911.35) (Ord. 00-04, passed 12-1-2000; Ord. 01-02, passed - -;
Ord. 2008-16, passed 11-19-2008)
CHAPTER 91: HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
91.001   Assessable current services
   
91.002   Tree diseases and shade tree pest control
Nuisances
   
91.015   Public nuisance
   
91.016   Public nuisances affecting health
   
91.017   Public nuisances affecting morals and decency
   
91.018   Public nuisances affecting peace and safety
   
91.019   Nuisance parking and storage
   
91.020   Inoperable motor vehicles
   
91.021   Building maintenance and appearance
   
91.022   Duties of city officers
   
91.023   Abatement
   
91.024   Recovery of cost
Weeds
   
91.035   Short title
   
91.036   Jurisdiction
   
91.037   Definitions; exclusions
   
91.038   Owners responsible for trimming, removal and the like
   
91.039   Filing complaint
   
91.040   Notice of violations
   
91.041   Appeals
   
91.042   Abatement by city
   
91.043   Liability
   
91.044   Noxious weeds
Open Burning
   
91.060   Definitions
   
91.061   Prohibited materials
   
91.062   Permit required for open burning
   
91.063   Purposes allowed for open burning
   
91.064   Permit application for open burning; permit fees
   
91.065   Permit process for open burning
   
91.066   Permit holder responsibility
   
91.067   Revocation of open burning permit
   
91.068   Denial of open burning permit
   
91.069   Burning ban or air quality alert
   
91.070   Rules and laws adopted by reference
   
91.071   External solid fuel-fired heating devices (outdoor wood burning
stoves)
Repeat Nuisance Service Calls
   
91.085   Purpose and intent; scope, application
   
91.086   Definition
   
91.087   Notice
   
91.088   Nuisance service call fee
   
91.089   Right to appeal repeat nuisance service call fees
   
91.090   Waiver of right to appeal
   
91.091   Applicability of repeat nuisance service call fee
   
91.092   Legal remedies non-exclusive
Junked, Abandoned and Unlicensed Vehicles
   
91.105   State law adopted by reference
   
91.106   Policy; purpose; findings
   
91.107   Definitions
   
91.108   Storing or parking vehicles prohibited
   
91.109   Impounding vehicles
   
91.110   Notices
   
91.111   Right to reclaim
   
91.112   Disposition of vehicle
 
   
91.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.001 ASSESSABLE CURRENT SERVICES.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CURRENT SERVICE. Shall mean one or more of the following: snow, ice or
rubbish removal from sidewalks; weed elimination from street grass plots
adjacent to sidewalks or from private property; removal or elimination of
public health or safety hazards from private property, excluding any hazardous
building included in M.S. §§ 463.15 through 463.26, as they may amended from
time to time; installation or repair of water service lines or sewer service
lines; street sprinkling, street flushing, light street oiling or other dust
treatment of streets; repair of sidewalks and alleys; trimming and care of
trees and removal of unsound and insect-infected trees from the public streets
or private property; and the operation of a street lighting system.
   (B)   Snow, ice, dirt and rubbish.
      (1)   Duty of owners and occupants. The owner and the occupant of any
property adjacent to a public sidewalk shall use diligence to keep the walk
safe for pedestrians. No owner or occupant shall allow snow, ice, dirt or
rubbish to remain on the walk longer than 24 hours after its deposit thereon.
Failure to comply with this section shall constitute a violation.
      (2)   Removal by city. The Community Service Partner or other person
designated by the City Council may cause removal from all public sidewalks all
snow, ice, dirt and rubbish as soon as possible beginning 24 hours after any
matter has been deposited thereon or after the snow has ceased to fall. The
Community Service Partner or other designated person shall keep a record
showing the cost of removal adjacent to each separate lot and parcel.
   (C)   Public health and safety hazards. When the city removes or eliminates
public health or safety hazards from private property under the following
provisions of this chapter, the administrative officer responsible for doing
the work shall keep a record of the cost of the removal or elimination against
each parcel of property affected and annually deliver that information to the
Deputy Clerk.
   (D)   Installation and repair of water service lines or sewer lines.
Whenever the city installs or repairs water service lines or sewer service
lines serving private property under Chapter 52 of this code, the Deputy Clerk
shall keep a record of the total cost of the installation or repair against the
property.
   (E)   Damage to public property. Any person driving any vehicle, equipment,
object or contrivance upon any street, road, highway or structure shall be
liable for all damages which the surface or structure thereof may sustain as a
result of any illegal operation, or driving or moving of the vehicle, equipment
or object or contrivance; or as a result of operating, driving or moving any
vehicle, equipment, object or contrivance weighing in excess of the maximum
weight permitted by statute or this code.
      (1)   When the driver is not the owner of the vehicle, equipment, object
or contrivance, but is operating, driving or moving it with the express or
implied permission of the owner, then the owner and the driver shall be jointly
and severally liable for any such damage.
      (2)   Any person who willfully acts or fails to exercise due care and by
that act damages any public property shall be liable for the amount thereof,
which amount shall be collectable by action or as a lien under M.S. § 514.67,
as it may be amended from time to time.
Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.002 TREE DISEASES AND SHADE TREE PEST CONTROL.
   (A)   Declaration of policy. The health of the trees in the city is
threatened by shade tree pests, and the loss or ill health of trees growing
upon public and private property substantially depreciates the value of
property within the city and impairs the safety, good order, general welfare
and convenience of the public. In addition to and in accordance with M.S. §§
89.001, 89.01 and 89.51 through 89.64, as those sections may be amended from
time to time, the provisions of this section are adopted to attempt to control
and prevent the spread of these shade tree pests.
   (B)   Jurisdiction. The city shall have control of all street trees, shrubs
and other plantings now or hereafter in any street, park, public right-of-way
or easement or other public place within the city limits, and shall have the
power to plant, care for, maintain, remove and replace such trees, shrubs and
other plantings.
   (C)   Declaration of a shade tree pest. The City Council may declare any
vertebrate or invertebrate animal,   plant pathogen, or plant threatening to
cause significant damage to a shade tree or community forest as defined by M.S.
§ 89.001, as it may be amended from time to time, to be a shade tree pest and
prescribe control measures to effectively eradicate, control or manage the
shade tree pest including necessary time lines for action.
   (D)   Public nuisances declared. A shade tree pest declared by City Council
occurring within a declared control zone is a public nuisance.
   (E)   Shade tree pest nuisances are unlawful. It is unlawful for any person
to permit any public nuisance as defined in this section to remain on any
premises the person owns or controls within the city. The nuisance may be
abated as provided in this section.
   (F)   Definition of control areas. Upon declaring a shade tree pest, the
City Council may define one or more locations within the geographic boundaries
of the city to be within a shade tree pest control area provided such locations
are characterized by biologic, composition, environmental and size factors
favorable to successful application of the control measures prescribed by City
Council.
   (G)   Tree Inspector. The City Council may appoint a Tree Inspector to
coordinate the activities of the city relating to the control and prevention of
damage by shade tree pests. The Tree Inspector will recommend to the City
Council the details of any program for the declaration, control and prevention
of shade tree pests. The Tree Inspector is authorized to enforce or cause to be
enforced the tasks incident to such a program adopted by the Council. The term
TREE INSPECTOR includes any person designated by City Council or the Tree
Inspector to carry out activities authorized in this section.
   (H)   Abatement of shade tree pest nuisances.
      (1)   In abating a nuisance declared by ordinance under divisions (B) and
(C), the organism, condition or plant and any tree, wood or material identified
as injurious to the health of shade trees shall be removed or effectively
treated so as to destroy and prevent as fully as possible the spread of the
shade tree pest. Such abatement procedures shall be carried out in accordance
with the control measures and areas prescribed by ordinance according to
divisions (C) and (K) and (O) .
      (2)   In addition, should the appropriate abatement procedure be removal
and the tree(s) and/or hedge(s) be within the limits of a highway in a rural
area within the city's jurisdiction, M.S. § 160.22, as it may be amended from
time to time, shall be complied with as necessary.
   (I)   Reporting discovery of shade tree pest. Any owner or occupier of land
or any person engaged in tree trimming or removal who becomes aware of the
existence of public nuisance caused by a shade tree pest as defined under
division (C) shall report the same to the city.
   (J)   Registration of tree care firms. Any person, firm or corporation that
provides tree care, tree trimming or removal of trees, limbs, branches, brush
or shrubs for hire must be registered with the Minnesota Commissioner of
Agriculture under M.S. § 18G.07, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (K)   Inspection and application of control measures.
      (1)   The Tree Inspector is authorized to inspect premises and places
within the city to determine whether shade tree pests exist thereon and to
investigate all reported incidents of shade tree pests. The Tree Inspector is
authorized to take all reasonable measures to prevent the maintenance of public
nuisances and may enforce the provisions relating to abatement in this section.
Diagnosis of shade tree pests may be by the presence of commonly recognized
symptoms or by tests as may be recommended by the Commissioner of the Minnesota
Department of Agriculture or the Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources or other reliable means.
      (2)   Except in situations of imminent danger to human life and safety,
the Tree Inspector shall not enter private property for the purpose of
inspecting or preventing maintenance of public nuisances without the permission
of the owner, resident or other person in control of the property, unless the
Tree Inspector has obtained a warrant or order from a court of competent
jurisdiction authorizing the entry.
      (3)   No person, firm or corporation shall interfere with the Tree
Inspector acting under his or her authority while engaged in activities
authorized by this section.
   (L)   Standard abatement procedure. Except as provided in divisions (M) and
(O), whenever a Tree Inspector determines with reasonable certainty that a
public nuisance as described by this section is being maintained or exists on
premises in the city, the Tree Inspector is authorized to abate a public
nuisance according to the following procedure.
      (1)   The Tree Inspector will notify, in writing, the owner of record or
occupant of the premises of such fact and order that the nuisance be terminated
or abated. The notice may be given in person or by mail. Failure of any party
to receive the mail does not invalidate the service of the notice. A copy of
the notice shall be filed with the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer.
      (2)   The notice of abatement shall state that unless the public nuisance
is abated by the owner or occupant, it will be abated by the city at the
expense of the owner or occupant. The notice shall specify the control measures
to be taken to abate the nuisance, and provide a reasonable amount of time to
abate the nuisance. The notice will also state that the owner or occupant has
the right to appeal the determination that a public nuisance exists by
submitting a request in writing to the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer
within seven days after service of the notice, or before the date by which
abatement must be completed, whichever comes first.
      (3)   If no timely appeal is submitted, and the notice of abatement and
its prescribed control measures are not complied with within the time provided
by the notice or any additional time granted, the Tree Inspector or designated
person shall have the authority to obtain permission or an administrative
search warrant, enter the property and carry out abatement in accordance with
the notice of abatement.
   (M)   High cost abatement. If the Tree Inspector determines that the cost of
abating a nuisance will exceed $5,000 based on a reasonable, good faith
estimate, the written notice referred to in division (L) above must provide
that if the nuisance is not abated within the reasonable amount of time
provided, the matter will be referred to the City Council for a hearing. The
date, time and location of the hearing must be provided in the notice.
   (N)   Appeal procedure. If the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer receives a
written request for a hearing on the question of whether a public nuisance in
fact exists, the City Council shall hold a hearing within seven calendar days
following receipt by the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer of the written
request. At least three days’ notice shall be given to the individual who made
the written request for the hearing. The Council may modify the abatement
notice or extend the time by which abatement must be completed. Each owner,
agent of the owner, occupant and lienholder of the subject property or
properties in attendance, if any, shall be given the opportunity to present
evidence at the hearing. After holding the hearing, the City Council may issue
an order requiring abatement of the nuisance.
   (O)   Abatement procedure in event of imminent danger.
      (1) If the Tree Inspector determines that the danger of infestation to
other shade trees is imminent and delay in control measures may put public
health, safety or welfare in immediate danger, the Tree Inspector may provide
for abatement without following (L) or (M). The Tree Inspector must reasonably
attempt to notify the owner or occupant of the affected property of the
intended action and the right to appeal the abatement and any cost recovery at
the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the city, without notice or
other process, from immediately abating any condition which poses an imminent
and serious hazard to human life or safety.
   (P)   Recovery of cost of abatement; liability and assessment.
      (1)   The owner of premises on which a nuisance has been abated by the
city shall be personally liable for the cost to the city of the abatement,
including administrative costs. As soon as the work has been completed and the
cost determined, the City Deputy or other official shall prepare a bill for the
cost and mail it to the owner. Thereupon the amount shall be immediately due
and payable at the office of the City Deputy.
      (2)   After notice and hearing as provided in M.S. § 429.061, as it may
be amended from time to time, the City Deputy may list the total unpaid charges
along with all other charges as well as other charges for current services to
be assessed under M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time,
against each separate lot or parcel to which the charges are attributable. The
City Council may then certify the charges against the property under that
statute and other pertinent statutes to the County Auditor for collection along
with current taxes the following year or in annual installments as the City
Council may determine in each case.
   (Q)   Declared shade tree pests, control measures and control areas.
      (1)   Oak Wilt is declared a shade tree pest and is defined as any living
or dead tree, log, firewood, limb, branch, stump or other portion of a tree
from any species of the genus Quercus existing within the control area defined
that has bark attached and that exceeds three inches in diameter or ten inches
in circumference and contains to any degree any spore or reproductive
structures of the fungus Ceratocystis fagacearum. Control measures prescribed
for abating Oak Wilt Disease are as follows.
         (a)   A root graft barrier can be ordered installed to prevent the
underground spread of Oak Wilt Disease. The city will mark the location of the
root graft barrier. The barrier disrupts transmission of the fungus within the
shared vascular systems of root grafted trees. The barrier is created by
excavating or vibratory plowing a line at least 42 inches deep between any oak
tree infected with Oak Wilt Disease and each nearby and apparently healthy oak
tree within 50 feet of the infected tree.
         (b)   On property that is zoned residential and commercial the city
may mark for removal trees that have the potential to produce spores of the
fungus Ceratocvstis fagacearum. After, and in no case before the installation
of the root graft barrier and no later than May 1 of the year following
infection, all marked trees must be felled. The stump from such felled trees
must not extend more than three inches above the ground or, if taller, must be
completely debarked. If, however, after the city prescribes the location for a
root graft barrier, the city determines that installation of the barrier is
impossible because of the presence of pavement or obstructions such as a septic
system or utility line, the city may mark for removal all oak trees whether
living or dead, infected or not, and located between an infected tree and the
marked barrier location. These marked trees must be felled and disposed of no
later than May 1 of the year following infection. The stump from such felled
trees must not extend more than three inches above the ground or, if taller,
must be completely debarked.
         (c)   On all other property the city may mark for removal all oak
trees whether living or dead, infected or not, and located between an infected
tree and the marked barrier location. These marked trees must be felled and
disposed of no later than May 1 of the year following infection. The stump from
such felled trees must not extend more than three inches above the ground or,
if taller, must be completely debarked.
         (d)   All wood more than three inches in diameter or ten inches in
circumference from such felled trees must be disposed of by burying, debarking,
chipping or sawing into wane-free lumber or by splitting into firewood,
stacking the firewood and immediately covering the woodpile with unbroken four-
millimeter or thicker plastic sheeting that is sealed into the ground until
October 1 of the calendar year following the calendar year in which the tree
was felled or by burning before May 1 of the year following infection. Wood
chips from infected trees may be stockpiled or immediately used in the
landscape.
         (e)   The control area for Oak Wilt Disease is defined as all lands
within the boundaries of the city.
      (2)   Emerald Ash Borer is declared a shade tree pest and is defined as
an insect that attacks and kills ash trees. The adults are small, iridescent
green beetles that live outside of trees during the summer months. The larvae
are grub or worm-like and live underneath the bark of ash trees.
         (a)   Control measures prescribed for abating Emerald Ash Borer are
those provided in the document entitled “Guidelines to Slow the Growth and
Spread of Emerald Ash Borer” from the State Department of Agriculture.
         (b)   The control area for Emerald Ash Borer is defined as all lands
within the boundaries of the city.
      (3)   Dutch Elm Disease is declared a shade tree pest and is defined as a
disease of elm trees caused by the fungus Ophiostoma ulmi or Ophiostoma novo-
ulmi, and includes any living or dead tree, log, firewood, limb, branch, stump
or other portion of a tree from any species of the genus Ulmus existing within
the control area defined that has bark attached and that exceeds three inches
in diameter or ten inches in circumference, and could contain bark beetles or
any spore or reproductive structures of the fungus Ophiostoma ulmi or
Ophiostoma novo-ulmi.
         (a)   Control measures prescribed for abating Dutch Elm Disease are:
            1.   Fungicides may be effective in preventing Dutch elm disease
when injected into living trees that do not already show symptoms of Dutch elm
disease. Fungicide injections on private lands are optional and, if performed,
are at the landowner's expense.
            2.   Prompt removal of diseased trees or branches reduces breeding
sites for elm bark beetles and eliminates the source of Dutch elm disease
fungus. Trees that wilt before July 15 must be removed within 20 days of
detection (alternatively 30 days). Trees that wilt after July 15 must be
removed by April 1 of the following year. Diseased trees not promptly removed
will be removed by the city at the landowner's expense. Wood may be retained
for use as firewood or sawlogs if it is de-barked or covered from April 15 to
October 15 with four-millimeter plastic. The edges of the cover must be buried
or sealed to the ground.
         (b)   The control area for Dutch Elm Disease is defined as all lands
within the boundaries of the city.
NUISANCES
§ 91.015 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   A person must not act or fail to act in a manner that is or causes a public
nuisance. For purpose of this chapter, a person who does any of the following
is guilty of maintaining a public nuisance, which is a misdemeanor:
   (A)   Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures or
endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort or repose of any considerable
number of members of the public;
   (B)   Interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous for passage any public
highway or right-of-way, or waters used by the public; or
   (C)   Does any other act or omission declared by law or §§
91.086,
91.087 or
91.088, or any other part of this code to be a public nuisance and for which no
sentence is specifically provided.
Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.016 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.
   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health:
   (A)   Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or vegetable
matter;
   (B)   All diseased animals running at large;
   (C)   All ponds or pools of stagnant water;
   (D)   Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours after
death;
   (E)   Accumulations of manure, refuse or other debris;
   (F)   Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent-free or fly-tight
or which are so maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to emit foul and
disagreeable odors;
   (G)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake, canal or
body of water by sewage, industrial waste or other substances;
   (H)   All noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation upon public or
private property;
   (I)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders, in unreasonable
quantities;
   (J)   All public exposure of people having a contagious disease;
   (K)   Any offensive trade or business as defined by statute not operating
under local license; and
   (L)   All unnecessary and annoying vibrations.
Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.017 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY.
   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public morals
and decency:
   (A)   All gambling devices, slot machines and punch boards, except as
otherwise authorized and permitted by federal, state or local law;
   (B)   Betting, bookmaking and all apparatus used in those occupations;
   (C)   All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual
intercourse, gambling houses, houses of ill fame and bawdy houses;
   (D)   All places where intoxicating liquor is manufactured or disposed of in
violation of law or where, in violation of law, people are permitted to resort
for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor, or where intoxicating liquor
is kept for sale or other disposition in violation of law, and all liquor and
other property used for maintaining that place. For the purposes of this
section, INTOXICATING LIQUOR shall mean any ethyl alcohol, distilled,
fermented, spirituous, vinous or malt beverage containing more than 0.5%
alcohol by volume; and
   (E)   Any vehicle used for the unlawful transportation of intoxicating
liquor, or for promiscuous sexual intercourse, or any other immoral or illegal
purpose.
Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.018 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.
   The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and
safety:
   (A)   All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks 24 hours after the
snow or other precipitation causing the condition has ceased to fall;
   (B)   All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent
people from having a clear view of all traffic approaching an intersection;
   (C)   All wires and limbs of trees which are so close to the surface of a
sidewalk or street as to constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles;
   (D)   All obnoxious noises in violation of Minn. Rules Ch. 7030, as they may
be amended from time to time which are hereby incorporated by reference into
this code;
   (E)   The discharging of the exhaust or permitting the discharging of the
exhaust of any stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat, motor
vehicle, motorcycle, all terrain vehicle, snowmobile or any recreational device
except through a muffler or other device that effectively prevents loud or
explosive noises therefrom and complies with all applicable state laws and
regulations;
   (F)   (1)   The using or operation or permitting the using or operation of
any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, paging system, machine
or other device for producing or reproduction of sound in a distinctly and
loudly audible manner so as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of any
person nearby.
      (2)   Operation of any device referred to above between the hours of 10:
00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner so as to be plainly audible at the property
line of the structure or building in which it is located, or at a distance of
50 feet if the source is located outside a structure or building shall be prima
facie evidence of violation of this section.
   (G)   (1)   No person shall participate in any party or other gathering of
people between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. giving rise to noise,
unreasonably disturbing the peace, quiet or repose of another person.
      (2)   When a police officer determines that a gathering is creating such
a noise disturbance, the officer may order all persons present, other than the
owner or tenant of the premises where the disturbance is occurring, to disperse
immediately.
      (3)   No person shall refuse to leave after being ordered by a police
officer to do so.
      (4)   Every owner or tenant of such premises who has knowledge of the
disturbance shall make every reasonable effort to see that the disturbance is
stopped;
   (H)   Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary public use of
streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds except under conditions as are
permitted by this code or other applicable law;
   (I)   Radio aerials or television antennae erected or maintained in a
dangerous manner;
   (J)   Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use
of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather,
obstructing traffic and the free use of the street or sidewalk;
   (K)   All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures over streets
and sidewalks, so situated so as to endanger public safety, or not constructed
and maintained as provided by ordinance;
   (L)   The allowing of rain water, ice or snow to fall from any building or
structure upon any street or sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk;
   (M)   Any barbed wire fence less than six feet above the ground and within
three feet of a public sidewalk or way;
   (N)   All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so situated
or operated on private property as to attract the public;
   (O)   Waste water cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or other
public properties;
   (P)   Accumulations in the open of discarded or disused machinery, household
appliances, automobile bodies or other material in a manner conducive to the
harboring of rats, mice, snakes or vermin, or the rank growth of vegetation
among the items so accumulated, or in a manner creating fire, health or safety
hazards from accumulation;
   (Q)   Any well, hole or similar excavation which is left uncovered or in
another condition as to constitute a hazard to any child or other person coming
on the premises where it is located;
   (R)   Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or a
public street drain, gutter or ditch with trash or other materials;
   (S)   The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk or other public
property of any glass, tacks, nails, bottles or other substance which may
injure any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire when passing over the
substance;
   (T)   The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public right-of-way or on
adjacent private property;
   (U)   All other conditions or things which are likely to cause injury to the
person or property of anyone;
   (V)   Reflected glare or light from private exterior lighting exceeding 0.5
footcandles as measured on the property line of the property where the lighting
is located when abutting any residential parcel, and one footcandle when
abutting any commercial or industrial parcel;
   (W)   General noises, including the following types and conditions.
      (1)   No person shall make or cause to be made any distinctly and loudly
audible noise that unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the
comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, or welfare of any person or precludes
their enjoyment of property or affects their property's value. This general
prohibition is not limited by the specific restrictions of this section.
      (2)   No person shall use any vehicle so out of repair or so loaded as to
create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise.
      (3)   No person shall create loud or excessive noise in loading,
unloading, or unpacking any vehicle.
      (4)   No person shall use or operate or permit the use or operation of
any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, paging system, machine
or other device for the production or reproduction of sound in a distinct and
loudly audible manner as to unreasonably disturb the peace, quiet and comfort
of any person nearby. Operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph,
machine or other device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a
manner as to be plainly audible at the property line of the structure or
building in which it is located, in the hallway or apartment adjacent, or at a
distance of 50 feet if the source is located outside a structure or building,
shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
      (5)    No person shall create any excessive noise on a street, alley or
public grounds adjacent to any school, institution of learning, place of
worship or hospital when the noise unreasonably interferes with the working of
the institution or disturbs or unduly annoys its occupants or residents and
when conspicuous signs indicate the presence of such institution.
      (6)   No person shall operate a power lawn mower, power hedge clipper,
chain saw, mulcher, garden tiller, edger, drill or other similar domestic power
maintenance equipment except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on
any weekday or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any weekend or
holiday. Snow removal equipment is exempt from this provision.
      (7)   No person shall collect or remove garbage or refuse in any
residential district except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on
any weekday or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any weekend or
holiday.
      (8)   No person shall engage in or permit construction activities
involving the use of any kind of electric, diesel or gas-powered machine or
other power equipment except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on
any weekday or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any weekend or
holiday.
      (9)   (a)   The City Council may require any person applying for a change
in zoning classification or a permit or license for any structure, operation,
process, installation or alteration or project that may be considered a
potential noise source to submit a noise impact statements on a form prescribed
by the City Council.
         (b)   It shall evaluate each such statement and take its evaluation
into account in approving or disapproving the license or permit applied for or
the zoning change requested.
(Ord. 20231115-03, passed 11-15-2023) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.019 NUISANCE PARKING AND STORAGE.
   (A)   Declaration of nuisance. The outside parking and storage on
residentially-zoned property of large numbers of vehicles and vehicles,
materials, supplies or equipment not customarily used for residential purposes
in violation of the requirements set forth below is declared to be a public
nuisance because it:
      (1)   Obstructs views on streets and private property;
      (2)   Creates cluttered and otherwise unsightly areas;
      (3)   Prevents the full use of residential streets for residential
parking;
      (4)   Introduces commercial advertising signs into areas where commercial
advertising signs are otherwise prohibited;
      (5)   Decreases adjoining landowners' and occupants' enjoyment of their
property and neighborhood; and
      (6)   Otherwise adversely affects property values and neighborhood
patterns.
   (B)   Unlawful parking and storage.
      (1)   A person must not place, store, or allow the placement or storage
of ice fish houses, skateboard ramps, playhouses or other similar non-permanent
structures outside continuously for longer than 24 hours in the front-yard area
of residential property unless more than 100 feet back from the front property
line.
      (2)   A person must not place, store or allow the placement or storage of
pipe, lumber, forms, steel, machinery or similar materials, including all
materials used in connection with a business, outside on residential property,
unless shielded from public view by an opaque cover or fence.
      (3)   A person must not cause, undertake, permit or allow the outside
parking and storage of vehicles on residential property unless it complies with
the following requirements.
         (a)   No more than four vehicles per lawful dwelling unit may be
parked or stored anywhere outside on residential property, except as otherwise
permitted or required by the city because of nonresidential characteristics of
the property. This maximum number does not include vehicles of occasional
guests who do not reside on the property.
         (b)   Vehicles that are parked or stored outside in the front-yard
area must be on a paved or graveled parking surface or driveway area.
         (c)   Vehicles, watercraft and other articles stored outside on
residential property must be owned by a person who resides on that property.
Students who are away at school for periods of time but still claim the
property as their legal residence will be considered residents on the property.
Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.020 INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   Any motor vehicles described in this section constitute a hazard to
the health and welfare of the residents of the community in that such vehicles
can harbor noxious diseases, furnish a shelter and breeding place for vermin
and present physical danger to the safety and well-being of children and
citizens; and vehicles containing fluids which, if released into the
environment, can and do cause significant health risks to the community.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to keep, park, store or abandon any motor vehicle
which is not in operating condition, partially dismantled, used for repair of
parts or as a source of repair or replacement parts for other vehicles, kept
for scrapping, dismantling or salvage of any kind, or which is not properly
licensed for operation with the state, pursuant to M.S. § 168.13, as it may be
amended from time to time.
   (C)   This section does not apply to a motor vehicle enclosed in a building
and/or kept out of view from any street, road or alley, and which does not
foster complaint from a resident of the city. A privacy fence is permissible.
Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.021 BUILDING MAINTENANCE AND APPEARANCE.
   (A)   Declaration of nuisance. Buildings, fences and other structures that
have been so poorly maintained that their physical condition and appearance
detract from the surrounding neighborhood are declared to be public nuisances
because they:
      (1)   Are unsightly;
      (2)   Decrease adjoining landowners and occupants’ enjoyment of their
property and neighborhood; and
      (3)   Adversely affect property values and neighborhood patterns.
   (B)   Standards. A building, fence or other structure is a public nuisance
if it does not comply with the following requirements.
      (1)   No part of any exterior surface may have deterioration, holes,
breaks, gaps, loose or rotting boards or timbers.
      (2)   Every exterior surface that has had a surface finish such as paint
applied must be maintained to avoid noticeable deterioration of the finish. No
wall or other exterior surface may have peeling, cracked, chipped or otherwise
deteriorated surface finish on more than 20% of:
         (a)   Any one wall or other flat surface; or
         (b)   All door and window moldings, eaves, gutters, and similar
projections on any one side or surface.
      (3)   No glass, including windows and exterior light fixtures, may be
broken or cracked, and no screens may be torn or separated from moldings.
      (4)   Exterior doors and shutters must be hung properly and have an
operable mechanism to keep them securely shut or in place.
      (5)   Cornices, moldings, lintels, sills, bay or dormer windows and
similar projections must be kept in good repair and free from cracks and
defects that make them hazardous or unsightly.
      (6)   Roof surfaces must be tight and have no defects that admit water.
All roof drainage systems must be secured and hung properly.
      (7)   Chimneys, antennae, air vents and other similar projections must be
structurally sound and in good repair. These projections must be secured
properly, where applicable, to an exterior wall or exterior roof.
      (8)   Foundations must be structurally sound and in good repair.
Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.022 DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.
   (A)   For purposes of §§ 91.22 and 91.23, the Police Department, or Sheriff
or person designated by the City Council under §
10.20, if the city has, at the time, no police department, may enforce the
provisions relating to nuisances. Any peace officer or designated person shall
have the power to inspect private premises and take all reasonable precautions
to prevent the commission and maintenance of public nuisances.
   (B)   Except in emergency situations of imminent danger to human life and
safety, no police officer or designated person shall enter private property for
the purpose of inspecting or preventing public nuisances without the permission
of the owner, resident or other person in control of the property, unless the
officer or person designated has obtained a warrant or order from a court of
competent jurisdiction authorizing the entry, as provided in §
10.20.
§ 91.023 ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Notice. Written notice of violation, notice of the time, date, place
and subject of any hearing before the City Council, notice of City Council
order, and notice of motion for summary enforcement hearing shall be given as
set forth in this section.
      (1)   Notice of violation. Written notice of violation shall be served by
a peace officer or designated person on the owner of record or occupant of the
premises either in person or by certified or registered mail. If the premises
is not occupied, the owner of record is unknown, or the owner of record or
occupant refuses to accept notice of violation, notice of violation shall be
served by posting it on the premises.
      (2)   Notice of City Council hearing. Written notice of any City Council
hearing to determine or abate a nuisance shall be served on the owner of record
and occupant of the premises either in person or by certified or registered
mail. If the premises is not occupied, the owner of record is unknown, or the
owner of record or occupant refuses to accept notice of the City Council
hearing, notice of City Council hearing shall be served by posting it on the
premises.
      (3)   Notice of City Council order. Except for those cases determined by
the city to require summary enforcement, written notice of any City Council
order shall be made as provided in M.S. § 463.17 (the Hazardous and Substandard
Building Act), as it may be amended from time to time.
      (4)   Notice of motion for summary enforcement. Written notice of any
motion for summary enforcement shall be made as provided for in M.S. § 463.17
(the Hazardous and Substandard Building Act), as it may be amended from time to
time.
   (B)   Procedure. Whenever a peace officer or designated person determines
that a public nuisance is being maintained or exists on the premises in the
city, the officer or person designated may notify in writing the owner of
record or occupant of the premises of such fact and order that the nuisance be
terminated or abated. The notice of violation shall specify the steps to be
taken to abate the nuisance and the time within which the nuisance is to be
abated. If the notice of violation is not complied with within the time
specified, the officer or designated person shall report that fact forthwith to
the City Council. Thereafter, the City Council may, after notice to the owner
or occupant and an opportunity to be heard, determine that the condition
identified in the notice of violation is a nuisance and further order that if
the nuisance is not abated within the time prescribed by the City Council, the
city may seek injunctive relief by serving a copy of the City Council order and
notice of motion for summary enforcement or obtain an administrative search and
seizure warrant and abate the nuisance.
   (C)   Emergency procedure; summary enforcement.
      (1)   Special cases. In cases of emergency, where delay in abatement
required to complete the notice and procedure requirements set forth in
divisions (A) and (B) above will permit a continuing nuisance to unreasonably
endanger public health, safety or welfare, the City Council may order summary
enforcement and abate the nuisance.
      (2)   Endangerment. To proceed with summary enforcement, the officer or
designated person shall determine that a public nuisance exists or is being
maintained on premises in the city and that delay in abatement of the nuisance
will unreasonably endanger public health, safety or welfare.
      (3)   Notice. The officer or designated person shall notify, in writing,
the occupant or owner of the premises of the nature of the nuisance and of the
city’s intention to seek summary enforcement and the time and place of the City
Council meeting to consider the question of summary enforcement.
      (4)   Determination. The City Council shall determine whether or not the
condition identified in the notice to the owner or occupant is a nuisance,
whether public health, safety or welfare will be unreasonably endangered by
delay in abatement required to complete the procedure set forth in division (A)
above, and may order that the nuisance be immediately terminated or abated. If
the nuisance is not immediately terminated or abated, the City Council may
order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance.
   (D)   Immediate abatement. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city,
without notice or other process, from immediately abating any condition which
poses an imminent and serious hazard to human life or safety.
Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.024 RECOVERY OF COST.
   (A)   Personal liability. The owner of premises on which a nuisance has been
abated by the city or a person who has caused a public nuisance on a property
not owned by that person shall be personally liable for the cost to the city of
the abatement, including administrative costs. As soon as the work has been
completed and the cost determined, the City Deputy or other official shall
prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner. Thereupon the amount
shall be immediately due and payable at the office of the City Deputy.
   (B)   Assessment. 
      (1)   After notice and hearing as provided in M.S. § 429.061, as it may
be amended from time to time, if the nuisance is a public health or safety
hazard on private property, the accumulation of snow and ice on public
sidewalks, the growth of weeds on private property or outside the traveled
portion of streets, or unsound or insect-infected trees, the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall, on or before September 1 next following
abatement of the nuisance, list the total unpaid charges along with all other
charges as well as other charges for current services to be assessed under M.S.
§ 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, against each separate lot or
parcel to which the charges are attributable.
      (2)   The City Council may then spread the charges against the property
under that statute and other pertinent statutes for certification to the County
Auditor and collection along with current taxes the following year or in annual
installments, not exceeding ten, as the City Council may determine in each
case.
Penalty, see §
91.999
WEEDS
§ 91.035 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be cited as the “Weed Ordinance”.
§ 91.036 JURISDICTION.
   This subchapter shall be in addition to any state statute or regulation or
county ordinance presently in effect, subsequently added, amended or repealed.
§ 91.037 DEFINITIONS; EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DESTRUCTION ORDER. The notice served by the City Council or designated
city official, in cases of appeal, on the property owner of the ordinance
violation that shall conform to M.S. § 18.83, subd. 2, as it may be amended
from time to time.
      MEADOW VEGETATION. Grasses and flowering broad-leaf plants that are
native to, or adapted to, the state of Minnesota, and that are commonly found
in meadow and prairie plant communities, except weeds as defined herein.
      PROPERTY OWNER. The person occupying the property, the holder of legal
title or a person having control over the property of another, such as a right-
of-way, easement, license or lease.
      WEEDS, GRASSES and RANK VEGETATION.
         (a)   Includes but is not limited to the following:
            1.   Alum (allium), Buckthorn, Bur Cucumber, Canada Thistle,
Corncockle, Cressleaf Groundsel, Curly Dock, Dodder, Field Bindweed, French
Weed, Hairy Whitetop, Hedge Bindweed, Hoary Cress, Horsenettle, Johnsongrass,
Leafy Spurge, Mile-A-Minute Weed, Musk Thistle, Oxeye Daisy, Perennial
Sowthistle, Poison Hemlock, Purple Loosestrife, Quackgrass, Russian Knapweed,
Russian Thistle, Serrated Tussock, Shatter Cane, Sorghum, Wild Carrot, Wild
Garlic, Wild Mustard, Wild Onion or Wild Parsnip;
            2.   Grapevines when growing in groups of 100 or more and not
pruned, sprayed, cultivated or otherwise maintained for two consecutive years;
            3.   Bushes of the species of tall, common or European barberry,
further known as berberis vulgaris or its horticultural varieties;
            4.   Any weeds, grass or plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers
or other ornamental plants, growing to a height exceeding 12 inches, or have
gone or are about to go to seed;
            5.   Rank vegetation includes the uncontrolled, uncultivated growth
of annuals and perennial plants; and
            6.   Any other weed designated by M.S. § 18.77, subd. 8, as it may
be amended from time to time, as noxious.
         (b)   The term WEEDS does not include shrubs, trees, cultivated plants
or crops.
   (B)   In no event shall cultivated plants or crops include plants which have
been defined by state statute or administrative rule as being noxious or
detrimental plants.
§ 91.038 OWNERS RESPONSIBLE FOR TRIMMING, REMOVAL AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   All property owners shall be responsible for the removal, cutting or
disposal and elimination of weeds, grasses and rank vegetation or other
uncontrolled plant growth on their property, which at the time of notice, is in
excess of 12 inches in height. Vegitation debris shall not be directed to or
left on city right-or-way and shall not interfere with the public storm watch
system.
   (B)   These provisions shall not apply to an area established with meadow
vegetation if:
      (1)   The prior vegetation is eliminated and the meadow vegetation is
planted through transplanting or seed by human or mechanical means; and
      (2)   A sign is posted on the property in a location likely to be seen by
the public, advising that a meadow or prairie is being established. This sign
must be no smaller than ten inches square, no larger than one square foot and
no higher than three feet tall.
Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.039 FILING COMPLAINT.
   Any person, including the city, who believes there is property located
within the corporate limits of the city which has growing plant matter in
violation of this subchapter shall make a complaint with the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer. If the city makes the complaint, an employee,
officer or Council Member of the city shall file the complaint in all respects
as set out above.
§ 91.040 NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Upon receiving notice of the probable existence of weeds in
violation of this subchapter, a person designated by the City Council shall
make an inspection and prepare a written report to the City Council regarding
the condition.
      (2)   The City Council, upon concluding that there is a probable belief
that this subchapter has been violated, shall forward written notification in
the form of a destruction order to the property owner or the person occupying
the property as that information is contained within the records of the city.
The notice shall be served in writing by certified mail.
      (3)   The notice shall provide that within seven regular business days
after the receipt of the notice that the designated violation shall be removed
by the property owner or person occupying the property.
   (B)   (1)   All notices are to be in writing and all filings are to be with
the city.
      (2)   Certified mailing to the city or others is deemed filed on the date
of posting to the United States Postal Service.
§ 91.041 APPEALS.
   (A)   The property owner may appeal by filing written notice of objections
with the City Council within 48 hours of the notice, excluding weekends and
holidays, if the property owner contests the finding of the City Council. It is
the property owner’s responsibility to demonstrate that the matter in question
is shrubs, trees, cultivated plants or crops or is not otherwise in violation
of this subchapter, and should not be subject to destruction under the
subchapter.
   (B)   An appeal by the property owner shall be brought before the City
Council and shall be decided by a majority vote of the Council members in
attendance and being at a regularly scheduled or special meeting of the City
Council.
§ 91.042 ABATEMENT BY CITY.
   In the event that the property owner shall fail to comply with the
destruction order within seven regular business days and has not filed a notice
within 48 hours to the City Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer of an intent to
appeal, the City Council may employ the services of city employees or outside
contractors and remove the weeds to conform to this subchapter by all lawful
means.
§ 91.043 LIABILITY.
   (A)   The property owner is liable for all costs of removal, cutting or
destruction of weeds as defined by this subchapter. The property owner is
responsible for all collection costs associated with weed destruction,
including but not limited to court costs, attorney’s fees and interest on any
unpaid amounts incurred by the city. If the city uses municipal employees, it
shall set and assign an appropriate per hour rate for employees, equipment,
supplies and chemicals which may be used.
   (B)   All sums payable by the property owner are to be paid to the city and
to be deposited in a general fund as compensation for expenses and costs
incurred by the city. All sums payable by the property owner may be collected
as a special assessment as provided by M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended
from time to time.
§ 91.044 NOXIOUS WEEDS.
   (A)   General rule; urban wildlife landscape design.
      (1)   For purposes of this subchapter, the term WEEDS means noxious weeds
as defined by state law and all such useless and troublesome plants as are
commonly known as weeds to the general public.
      (2)   The Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer is directed to prepare a list of
wildflowers and native plants that will be exempt from division (A) above as
part of the city’s urban wildlife landscape design program.
(Prior Code, § 640.01)
   (B)   Declaration of nuisance. Weeds or growing grass upon any lot or parcel
of land in the city in excess of one foot in height, or which have gone or are
about to go to seed, are hereby declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to the
health, safety and good order of the city.
(Prior Code, § 640.03)
   (C)   Notice. When the owner or occupant of a premises permits a nuisance to
exist in violation of division (B) above, the Weed Inspector must serve a
notice on the owner, occupant or agent of the owner of the lot or parcel of
land ordering the person to have the weeds or grass cut and removed or
otherwise eradicated or removed within ten days after the service of the
notice. The notice must also state that in event of non-compliance, removal
will be done by the city at the owner’s expense. When no owner, occupant or
agent of the owner can be found, notice must be sent by certified mail to the
person who is listed on the records of the County Auditor or County Treasurer
as the owner. Service will be complete with mailing.
(Prior Code, § 640.05)
   (D)   Assessment.
      (1)   If a person fails to comply with the notice within ten days after
service, or if no owner, occupant or agent can be found, the Weed Inspector may
have the weeds cut and removed or otherwise eradicated.
      (2)   A record showing the cost of the work attributable to each separate
lot or parcel will be delivered by the Weed Inspector to the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer. On or before August 1 of each year, the amount
so charged against the lot or parcel of land, together with a description of
the premises and the name of last known owner will be reported by the
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer to the City Council.
      (3)   The Council must then spread the costs against each property as a
special assessment for collection as other special assessments in the following
year, all as authorized by M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to
time.
(Prior Code, § 640.07)
   (E)   Weed Inspector. The Mayor is the Weed Inspector as provided by law.
The Mayor may assign the duty to the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 640.09)
   (F)   Conflict. Where the provisions of this section conflict with the
provisions of §§
91.035 through
91.043, the provisions of §§
91.035 through
91.043 shall prevail.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-7-2010)
OPEN BURNING
§ 91.060 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIRE CHIEF, FIRE MARSHAL and ASSISTANT FIRE MARSHALS. The Fire Chief, Fire
Marshal, and Assistant Fire Marshals of the Fire Department which provides fire
protection services to the city.
   OPEN BURNING. The burning of any matter if the resultant combustion products
are emitted directly to the atmosphere without passing through a stack, duct or
chimney, except a “recreational fire” as defined herein. Mobile cooking devices
such as manufactured hibachis, charcoal grills, wood smokers and propane or
natural gas devices are not defined as OPEN BURNING.
   RECREATIONAL FIRE. A fire set with approved starter fuel no more than three
feet in height, contained within the border of a RECREATIONAL FIRE SITE using
dry, clean wood; producing little detectable smoke, odor or soot beyond the
property line; conducted with an adult tending the fire at all times; for
recreational, ceremonial, food preparation for social purposes; extinguished
completely before quitting the occasion; and respecting weather conditions,
neighbors, burning bans and air quality so that nuisance, health or safety
hazards will not be created. No more than one RECREATIONAL FIRE is allowed on
any property at one time.
   RECREATIONAL FIRE SITE.
      (1)   An area of no more than a three-foot diameter circle (measured from
the inside of the fire ring or border); completely surrounded by non-
combustible and non-smoke or odor producing material, either of natural rock,
cement, brick, tile or blocks or ferrous metal only and which area is depressed
below ground, on the ground or on a raised bed. Included are permanent outdoor
wood burning fireplaces.
      (2)   Burning barrels are not a RECREATION FIRE SITE as defined herein.
RECREATIONAL FIRE SITES shall not be located closer than 25 feet to any
structure or combustible material.
   RUNNING FIRE. An attended fire allowed to spread through surface vegetative
matter under controlled conditions for the purpose of vegetative management,
forest management, game habitat management or agricultural improvement.
   STARTER FUELS. Dry, untreated, unpainted, kindling, branches, cardboard or
charcoal fire starter. Paraffin candles and alcohols are permitted as STARTER
FUELS and as aids to ignition only. Propane gas torches or other clean gas
burning devices causing minimal pollution must be used to start an open burn.
   VEGETATIVE MATERIALS. Dry leaves, dry grass clippings, twigs, branches, tree
limbs, untreated or unpainted wood that contains no glues or resins and other
similar materials. Paper and cardboard are not considered VEGETATIVE MATERIALS.
   WOOD. Dry, clean fuel only such as twigs, branches, limbs, manufactured
fireplace logs, charcoal, cord wood or untreated dimensional lumber. WOOD does
not include wood that is green with leaves or needles, rotten, wet, oil soaked
or treated with paint, glue or preservatives. Clean pallets may be used for
recreational fires when cut into three-foot lengths.
§ 91.061 PROHIBITED MATERIALS.
   (A)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of oils,
petroleum fuels, rubber, plastics, chemically treated materials or other
materials which produce excessive or noxious smoke such as but not limited to,
tires, railroad ties, treated, painted or glued wood composite shingles, tar
paper, insulation, composition board, sheet rock, wiring, paint or paint
fillers.
   (B)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of, hazardous
waste or materials from salvage operations, solid waste generated from an
industrial or manufacturing process, materials from a service or commercial
establishment or building material generated from demolition of commercial or
institutional structures.
   (C)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of discarded
material resulting from the handling, processing, storage, preparation, serving
or consumption of food.
   (D)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of any leaves or
grass clippings.
Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.062 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR OPEN BURNING.
   No person shall start or allow any open burning on any property in the city
without first having obtained an open burn permit, except that a permit is not
required for any fire which is a recreational fire as defined in § 91.60.
Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.063 PURPOSES ALLOWED FOR OPEN BURNING.
   (A)   Open burn permits may be issued only for the following purposes:
      (1)   Elimination of fire or health hazard that cannot be abated by other
practical means;
      (2)   Ground thawing for utility repair and construction;
      (3)   Disposal of vegetative matter for managing forest, prairie or
wildlife habitat, and in the development and maintenance of land and rights-of-
way where chipping, composting, landspreading or other alternative methods are
not practical;
      (4)   Disposal of diseased trees generated on-site, diseased or infected
nursery stock, diseased bee hives;
      (5)   Disposal of unpainted, untreated, non-glued lumber and wood shakes
generated from construction, where recycling, reuse, removal or other
alternative disposal methods are not practical; or
      (6)   Running fires.
   (B)   Fire training permits can only be issued by the State Department of
Natural Resources.
   (C)   Permits for the operation of permanent tree and brush burning sites
may only be issued by the State Department of Natural Resources (DNR).
Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.064 PERMIT APPLICATION FOR OPEN BURNING; PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Open burning permits shall be obtained by making application on a form
prescribed by the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and adopted by the Fire
Department. The permit application shall be presented to the Fire Chief, Fire
Marshal and Community Service Partner for reviewing and processing those
applications.
   (B)   An open burning permit shall require the payment of a fee. Permit fees
shall be in the amount established in the ordinance establishing fees and
charges (§
36.02), authorized by § 30.11, as it may be amended from time to time.
Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.065 PERMIT PROCESS FOR OPEN BURNING.
   (A)   If the established criteria for the issuance of an open burning permit
are not met, the application will be denied.
   (B)   Upon receipt of the completed open burning permit application and
permit fee, the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal or Assistant Fire Marshals, if he or
she reasonably believes necessary, may require a preliminary site inspection to
locate the proposed burn site, note special conditions, and set dates and time
of permitted burn and review fire safety considerations.
§ 91.066 PERMIT HOLDER RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Prior to starting an open burn, the permit holder shall be responsible
for confirming that no burning ban or air quality alert is in effect. Every
open burn event shall be constantly attended by the permit holder or his or her
competent representative. The open burning site shall have available,
appropriate communication and fire suppression equipment as set out in the fire
safety plan.
   (B)   The open burn fire shall be completely extinguished before the permit
holder or his or her representative leaves the site. No fire may be allowed to
smolder with no person present. It is the responsibility of the permit holder
to have a valid permit, as required by this subchapter, available for
inspection on the site by the Police Department, Fire Department, MPCA
representative or DNR forest officer.
   (C)   The permit holder is responsible for compliance and implementation of
all general conditions, special conditions, and the burn event safety plan as
established in the permit issued. The permit holder shall be responsible for
all costs incurred as a result of the burn, including but not limited to fire
suppression and administrative fees.
Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.67 REVOCATION OF OPEN BURNING PERMIT.
   An open burning permit is subject to revocation at the discretion of DNR
forest officer, the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal or Assistant Fire Marshals.
Reasons for revocation include, but are not limited to, a fire hazard existing
or developing during the course of the burn, any of the conditions of the
permit being violated during the course of the burn, pollution or nuisance
conditions developing during the course of the burn, or a fire smoldering with
no flame present.
Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.068 DENIAL OF OPEN BURNING PERMIT.
   If established criteria for the issuance of an open burning permit are not
met during review of the application, it is determined that a practical
alternative method for disposal of the material exists, or a pollution or
nuisance condition would result, or if a burn event safety plan cannot be
drafted to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal or Assistant Fire
Marshals, these officers may deny the application for the open burn permit.
§ 91.069 BURNING BAN OR AIR QUALITY ALERT.
   (A)   The designated fire official is authorized to determine when
conditions make open burning potentially hazardous and declare a burning ban
within the city.
   (B)   No recreational fire or open burn will be permitted when the city or
DNR has officially declared a burning ban due to potential hazardous fire
conditions or when the MPCA has declared an air quality alert.
Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.070 RULES AND LAWS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The provisions of M.S. §§ 88.16 through 88.22, as these statutes may be
amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of
this subchapter as if fully set forth at this point.
§ 91.071 EXTERNAL SOLID FUEL-FIRED HEATING DEVICES (OUTDOOR WOOD BURNING
STOVES).
   (A)   Definitions.
      (1)   EXTERNAL SOLID FUEL-FIRED HEATING DEVICE. A device designed for
external solid fuel combustion so that usable heat is derived for the interior
of a building, and includes solid fuel-fired stoves, solid fuel-fired cooking
stoves and combination fuel furnaces or boiler which burn solid fuel. Solid
fuel-fired heating devices do not include natural gas-fired fireplace logs or
wood-burning fireplaces or wood stoves in the interior of a dwelling.
      (2)   PERSON. An individual, partnership, corporation, company or other
association.
      (3)   STACKS OR CHIMNEYS. Any vertical structure incorporated into a
building and enclosing a flue or flues that carry off smoke or exhaust from a
solid fuel-fired heating device, especially, the part of such a structure
extending above a roof.
   (B)   Requirements for operation.
      (1)   Any dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders, in
unreasonable quantities, or any use of an external solid fuel-fired heating
device to burn solid fuels other than those solid fuels for which the external
solid fuel-fired heating device was designed, is declared a public nuisance.
      (2)   No person may install, use or operate an external solid fuel fired
heating device on a lot less than four acres in size.
      (3)   All stacks or chimneys must be so constructed to withstand high
winds or other related elements and in accordance to the specifications of the
manufacturer of the external solid fuel-fired heating device. The stack height
shall be a minimum of 25 feet above ground level, but shall also extend at
least as high as the height of the roofs of residents within 500 feet. All
stacks or chimneys must be of masonry or insulated metal with a minimum six-
inch flue.
      (4)   All external solid fuel-fired heating devices must be setback a
minimum of 50 feet from all property lines.
      (5)   All external solid fuel-fired heating devices must be setback a
minimum of ten feet from any principal or accessory structure.
   (C)   Fuels.
      (1)   Only fuels designed for burning in an external solid fuel-fired
heating device may be burned. No garbage may be burned in an external solid
fuel-fired heating device.
      (2)   The only fuel permitted to be burned is untreated fuel. Wood may
not be treated, processed, stained, finished or painted; specifically
prohibited woods include plywood, particle board and similar products. Other
fuels, such as corn, shall not contain any additives, treatments or chemicals.
No petroleum products or processed materials of any kind may be burned.
REPEAT NUISANCE SERVICE CALLS
§ 91.085 PURPOSE AND INTENT; SCOPE, APPLICATION.
   (A)   Purpose and intent.
      (1)   The City Council recognizes that the city has limited staff and
resources and finds that properties requiring responses to repeated nuisance
service calls, as defined herein, present a burden to the community at large
because they limit the availability of law enforcement and public safety
protection services to other residents of the city.
      (2)   The purpose of this subchapter is to protect the public safety,
health and welfare and to prevent and abate repeat nuisance service calls to
the same property or location which prevents public safety services from being
available to other residents of the city.
      (3)   It is the intent of the city to impose and collect a repeat
nuisance service call fee from the owner, occupant or responsible party of
property to which the city officials must repeatedly respond for any repeat
nuisance event or activity that generates extraordinary costs to the city. The
repeat nuisance service call fee is intended to cover the city’s cost over and
above its cost of providing normal law enforcement services and public safety
protection city-wide.
   (B)   Scope and application. This subchapter applies to owners, occupants
and responsible parties of private property that is the subject or location of
repeat nuisance service calls. This subchapter applies to repeat nuisance
service calls made by owners, occupants and responsible parties to the County
Sheriff’s Department for responses to locations within the city.
(Prior Code, § 907.01) (Ord. 06-06, passed 12-29-2006)
§ 91.086 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NUISANCE SERVICE CALL. An activity, conduct or condition occurring upon
private property within the city which will, or will tend to alarm, anger or
disturb others or provoke the breach of the peace to which the County Sheriff’s
Department is required to respond including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Any conduct, activity or condition constituting a violation of
state laws prohibiting or regulating prostitution, gambling, controlled
substances or use of firearms; or
      (2)   Any conduct, activity or condition constituting disorderly conduct
under M.S. Chapter 609, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 907.03) (Ord. 06-06, passed 12-29-2006)
§ 91.087 NOTICE.
   (A)   A repeat nuisance service call fee may not be imposed against an
owner, occupant or responsible party of property without the city first
providing the owner, occupant or responsible party with written notice of the
two previous nuisance service calls which are the basis for the fee. Upon
receiving information from the County Sheriff’s Department that it has rendered
services or responded to a property within the city on two or more occasions
within a period of 365 days in response to nuisance service calls, the city
will notify the owner, occupant or responsible party that it will impose a
repeat nuisance service call fee upon receiving notice from the County
Sheriff’s Department that it has responded to a third nuisance service call
within that 365-day period.
   (B)   The written notice must state:
      (1)   The nuisance conduct, activity or condition that is or has occurred
or is maintained or permitted on the property;
      (2)   The dates of the nuisance conduct, activities or conditions; and
      (3)   The owner, occupant or responsible party may be subject to a repeat
nuisance service call fee; if a third nuisance service call is rendered to the
property for the same nuisance within a period of 365 days which will be in
addition to the city’s right to seek other legal remedies or actions for
abatement of the nuisance or compliance with the law.
   (C)   The notice must be served personally or by United States mail upon the
owner, occupant or responsible party at the last known address.
(Prior Code, § 907.05) (Ord. 06-06, passed 12-29-2006)
§ 91.088 NUISANCE SERVICE CALL FEE.
   (A)   Upon receiving information from the County Sheriff’s Department that
it has rendered services or responded to a property within the city on three or
more occasions within a period of 365 days in response to nuisance service
calls, the city will impose a repeat nuisance service call fee upon the owner,
occupant or responsible party by mailing an invoice.
   (B)   The repeat nuisance service call fee under this subchapter will be an
amount as set forth in a City Council resolution.
   (C)   (1)   Repeat nuisance service call fees imposed and charged against
the owner, occupant or responsible party under this subchapter will be deemed
delinquent if payment is not received 30 days after the city’s mailing of the
invoice.
      (2)   Delinquent payment of the repeat nuisance service call fee will be
subject to a 10% late penalty of the amount due.
   (D)   Where the city issues a license, failure to pay a repeat nuisance
service call fee will result in the city not issuing a license until the
outstanding repeat nuisance service call fee is paid.
(Prior Code, § 907.07) (Ord. 06-06, passed 12-29-2006)
§ 91.089 RIGHT TO APPEAL REPEAT NUISANCE SERVICE CALL FEES.
   (A)   Upon the imposition of a repeat nuisance service call fee, the city
must inform the owner, occupant or responsible party of the right to a hearing
on the alleged repeat nuisance service call fee. The owner, occupant or
responsible party upon whom the fee is imposed may request a hearing by serving
upon the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer within ten business days of the
mailing of the fee invoice, inclusive of the day the invoice is mailed, a
written request for a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted by the City
Council or its appointed hearing officer within 14 days of the date the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer receives the owner, occupant or responsible
party’s request for a hearing.
   (B)   The hearing will be conducted in an informal manner and the Minnesota
Rules of Civil Procedure and the Rules of Evidence are not to be strictly
applied. The hearing need not be transcribed, but may be transcribed at the
sole expense of the party who requests the transcription. The owner, occupant
or responsible party must be given the opportunity to be heard and present
witnesses and evidence.
   (C)   After considering all evidence submitted and witness testimony, the
City Council or hearing officer will make written findings of fact and
conclusions on the issue of whether the County Sheriff’s Department responded
to or rendered services for nuisance service calls of the same or similar kind
on three or more occasions within a 365-day period. The findings and
conclusions must be served upon the owner, occupant or responsible party by
United States mail within five days of the notice of hearing.
(Prior Code, § 907.09) (Ord. 06-06, passed 12-29-2006)
§ 91.090 WAIVER OF RIGHT TO APPEAL.
   An owner, occupant or responsible party’s right to a hearing will be deemed
waived if the owner, occupant or responsible party fails to serve a written
request for hearing as required herein or fails to appear at the scheduled
hearing date. Upon waiver of the right for a hearing, or upon the City Council
or hearing officer’s written findings of fact and conclusions that the repeat
nuisance service call fee is properly imposed, the owner, occupant or
responsible party must forthwith pay the fee imposed.
(Prior Code, § 907.11) (Ord. 06-06, passed 12-29-2006)
§ 91.091 APPLICABILITY OF REPEAT NUISANCE SERVICE CALL FEE.
   The city may not impose a repeat nuisance service call fee against an owner,
occupant or responsible party for a response by the County Sheriff’s Department
related to emergency assistance, including, but not limited to, domestic,
spousal or child abuse.
(Prior Code, § 907.13) (Ord. 06-06, passed 12-29-2006)
§ 91.092 LEGAL REMEDIES NON-EXCLUSIVE.
   Nothing in this subchapter is to be construed to limit the city’s other
available legal remedies for any violation of the law that may constitute a
nuisance service call hereunder, including criminal, civil, injunctive or
otherwise. Nothing in this subchapter is to be construed to require that formal
charges be brought in order for conduct, or an activity or condition, to
qualify as a nuisance service call.
(Prior Code, § 907.15) (Ord. 06-06, passed 12-29-2006)
JUNKED, ABANDONED AND UNLICENSED VEHICLES
§ 91.105 STATE LAW ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   M.S. Chapter 168B, as it may be amended from time to time, is, except as
modified by this subchapter, hereby adopted by reference and is as much a part
of this code as if fully set forth herein. A violation of the statutes adopted
herein by reference is a violation of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 1316.01) (Ord. 00-06, passed 12-6-2000-; Ord. 2008-08, passed 7-
16-2008; Ord. 2011-03, passed 2-6-2011)
§ 91.106 POLICY; PURPOSE; FINDINGS.
   The City Council has found and determined:
   (A)   The presence of junk, abandoned, unlicensed and unauthorized vehicles
on public and private property in the city constitutes a public health and
safety hazard;
   (B)   In many instances junk, abandoned, unlicensed and unauthorized
vehicles are kept on private property by the owners of the property themselves
or by others with the consent of the property owner; and
   (C)   It is necessary to adopt regulations for the removal of junk,
abandoned, unlicensed and unauthorized vehicles from property that are more
stringent than those contained in M.S. Chapter 168B, as it may be amended from
time to time.
(Prior Code, § 1316.03) (Ord. 00-06, passed 12-6-2000; Ord. 2008-08, passed 7-
16-2008; Ord. 2011-03, passed 2-6-2011)
§ 91.107 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. As defined in M.S. § 168B.011, as it may be amended from
time to time.
   JUNK VEHICLE. As defined in M.S. § 168B.011, as it may be amended from time
to time.
   UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLE. A vehicle that is subject to removal and impoundment
pursuant to M.S. §§ 168B.04 or 168B.035, as they may be amended from time to
time, but is not a junk vehicle or an abandoned vehicle.
   UNLICENSED VEHICLE. A vehicle which is not properly licensed for operation.
(Prior Code, § 1316.05) (Ord. 00-06, passed 12-6-2000; Ord. 2008-08, passed 7-
16-2008; Ord. 2011-03, passed 2-6-2011)
§ 91.108 STORING OR PARKING VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to park, store or leave any abandoned,
unlicensed, unauthorized or junk vehicle, upon any public or private property
within the city, or for any person, as an owner of or occupant having control
of private property within the city to permit the parking, storing or leaving
of any abandoned, unlicensed, unauthorized or junk vehicle upon the private
property, unless the vehicle is within an enclosed building or structure
lawfully situated upon private property or is so parked, stored or left upon
private property lawfully zoned and operated as junkyard.
(Prior Code, § 1316.07) (Ord. 00-06, passed 12-6-2000; Ord. 2008-08, passed 7-
16-2008; Ord. 2011-03, passed 2-6-2011) Penalty, see § 91.99
§ 91.109 IMPOUNDING VEHICLES.
   The city may take into custody and impound any abandoned, unlicensed,
unauthorized or junk vehicles that are being stored or parked in violation of
this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 1316.09) (Ord. 00-06, passed 12-6-2000; Ord. 2008-08, passed - -
2008; Ord. 2011-03, passed 2-6-2011)
§ 91.110 NOTICES.
   (A)   When an abandoned, unlicensed, unauthorized or junk vehicle is taken
into custody and impounded, the city must give mailed written notice of its
taking to the registered vehicle owner and any lien holders within five days,
excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. If it is impossible to
determine with reasonable certainty the identity and address of the registered
owner and all lien holders, the notice shall be published once in a newspaper
of general circulation in the area where the motor vehicle was towed from or
abandoned. The notice must include all information required by M.S. § 168B.06,
as it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 1316.11)
   (B)   If an unauthorized vehicle remains unclaimed after 30 days from the
date the notice was sent under this subchapter, a second notice must be sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the registered owner, if any, of
the unauthorized vehicle and to all readily identifiable lien holders of
record.
(Prior Code, § 1316.13)
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 2-6-2011)
§ 91.111 RIGHT TO RECLAIM.
   With the exception of unauthorized vehicles, the owner or any lien holder of
an impounded vehicle has the right to reclaim the vehicle from the city upon
payment of all towing and storage charges resulting from the taking of the
vehicle into custody within 15 days after the date of the notice required by
this subchapter. The owner of an unauthorized vehicle has the right to reclaim
the vehicle from the city upon payment of all towing and storage charges
resulting from the taking of the vehicle into custody within 45 days after the
date of the notice required by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 1316.15) (Ord. 2011-03, passed 2-6-2011)
§ 91.112 DISPOSITION OF VEHICLE.
   If a vehicle is not reclaimed within the time period set forth in this
subchapter, the city may dispose of or sell the vehicle at auction or sale in
accordance with the procedures set forth in M.S. Chapter 168B, as it may be
amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 1316.17) (Ord. 2011-03, passed 2-6-2011)
§ 91.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed
for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this chapter, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more
than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
      (3)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time,
in either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
      (4) The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
      (5)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if any
person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this code,
the City Council or any city official designated by it may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
   (B)   Violation of any provision of this chapter, including maintaining a
nuisance after being notified in writing by first class mail of a violation of
any provision of this chapter, shall be a misdemeanor and punished as provided
in §
10.99 and division (A) above.
   (C)   A person who fails or neglects to cut and remove or otherwise
eradicate weeds or grass as directed in §
91.044 of this chapter, or who fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the
provisions of any notice provided herein, or who violates the provisions of §
91.044 of this chapter, or who resists or obstructs the Weed Inspector in the
cutting, removal or eradication of weeds or grass, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
Each day on which the violation continues is a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 640.11)
CHAPTER 92: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Violations
   
92.03   Parks; rules and regulations
   
92.04   Enforcement
   
92.05   Park closing
   
92.06   Liquor and beer in parks
   
92.07   Robinson Park; commercial use; permit required
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL USE. Any use or activity where a person or entity provides
equipment, materials, programs or services for any fee, reimbursement or
compensation, including, without limitation, any rental, any transportation,
shuttling or delivery services, any guide or instruction services, any
demonstration or other opportunities with a contemplated purchase or rental, or
any put-in or take-out services.
   PARK. Public park, playground, beach, swimming pool, recreation center or
other area or facility operated by the city for recreational purposes pursuant
to Council designation.
(Prior Code, § 815.01) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 2-4-2015)
§ 92.02 VIOLATIONS.
   It is unlawful to violate any of the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 815.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.03 PARKS; RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Closing hours. The closing hour for parks is 10:00 p.m., and
parks must remain closed until sunrise. A person may not remain in a park after
the closing hour, except as provided in division (A)(2) below. This division
(A) does not apply to persons who, without delay, are traveling through a park
or upon established walks, paths or drives within a park. The closing hour for
activities authorized as part of the city’s recreation program may be modified
by the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer in accordance with §
92.04 of this chapter. The City Council may by resolution further limit the
hours for the conduct of specific activities within parks.
      (2)   Group activities; camping.
         (a)   A group, association or organization wishing to remain in a park
after the closing hour may apply to the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer for
a special permit for that purpose specifying the nature of the activity
proposed, the hours during which it is conducted, and such other information as
the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer may reasonably request. The application must
be accompanied by a bond, or other undertaking, in form and substance
satisfactory to the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer and the City Attorney,
holding the city harmless from liability of any kind growing out of the
permitted activity. The Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer may grant the permit if,
in the Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer’s judgment, the purposes of this chapter
will not be adversely affected thereby, and if all licenses required by law or
the code have been obtained. The Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer’s decision to
grant or deny the application may be appealed to the City Council by the
applicant or by any resident of the city.
         (b)   Overnight camping in Robinson Park is permitted in areas
designated by the city as primitive campsites. Camping is limited to the area
designated by the city as a campsite. No person shall camp at a campsite for
any period longer than seven consecutive nights. The City Council may adopt a
policy relating to campsite reservations.
      (3)   Motor vehicles.
         (a)   Motorized vehicles or machines of any kind, except those
operated by and for the city may not drive on or across any park, except as
specifically authorized pursuant to the city code. Motor vehicles must be
parked in spaces designated therefor pursuant to §
70.31 of this code of ordinances, with the exception that one motor vehicle may
be parked at each campsite in Robinson Park.
         (b)   There may not be parking of motor vehicles in a park or in a
parking area in a park after the closing hour, with the exception of vehicles
belonging to persons camping in Robinson Park.
      (4)   Fires. Picnic fires may not be made or lit in a park except in
places or containers designated for such purposes. It is unlawful to leave a
picnic fire before the fire has been completely extinguished or before all
trash and refuse has been placed in receptacles provided or, if no receptacles
are provided, the trash and refuse must be carried away from the park and
properly disposed of elsewhere.
      (5)   Equipment; marking; defacing. It is unlawful to mark, deface or
disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove, any building, bridge,
table, bench, waste receptacle, fireplace, railing, paving or paved notice or
placecard whether temporary or permanent, monument, stake, post or other
boundary marker, or other structure, equipment or park property or park
appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal. Notices of park activity may
be posted with the permission of the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer.
      (6)   Refuse in city parks and waters.
         (a)   It is unlawful to throw discharge, or otherwise place or cause
to be placed in the water of any foundation, pond, lake, stream, bay or other
body of water in or adjacent to any park or in any tributary, stream, storm
sewer or drain flowing into the water, any substance, matter or thing, liquid
or solid; nor may any person bring in or dump, deposit, or leave any bottles,
broken glass, ashes, paper boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse
or any other trash, in any park or portion thereof, or in any waters in or
contiguous to any park.
         (b)   All such refuse or trash must be placed in the proper
receptacles; where proper receptacles are not provided, all the refuse or trash
must be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence
and properly disposed of elsewhere.
      (7)   Liquor and beer. The presence of liquor and beer in parks is
prohibited, except as permitted under §
92.06 of this chapter.
      (8)   Animal wildlife. It is unlawful to injure or destroy any bird or
animal nest within the limits of any park, nor must any person air or discharge
any air gun, sling shot, arrow or other weapon, or throw any stone or other
projectile at, any bird or animal within any park, nor in any manner capture,
kill or harm in any way any bird or animal therein.
      (9)   Public sales. It is unlawful to, within any park or property,
expose or offer for sale, rent or hire any article or thing. Excepted are those
who have obtained a special permit to so operate from the City Administrator/
Clerk-Treasurer, and who have obtained all licenses and permits required by law
or the city code. It is unlawful to announce, advertise or call the public
attention to any article or service for sale or hire in any way.
      (10)   Sports. Organized or unorganized sport activity and games may be
conducted only in designated areas within parks. All other casual recreational
activity must be conducted in a manner as not to interfere with the reasonable
enjoyment of the park by other persons or with the reasonable right of
adjoining property owners. Golf play in parks is prohibited, but golf practice
with light plastic balls is permitted in designated areas.
      (11)   Dogs. Dogs in parks must be effectively leashed by a leash not in
excess of six feet in length. Persons conducting leashed dogs must have in
their possession suitable utensils for the removal of animal excrement and must
promptly and effectively remove all excrement deposited by the animal under
their control.
      (12)   Plant life. It is unlawful to willfully and without authority cut,
pluck or otherwise injure any flowers, shrubs or trees growing in or around any
public park, or on other public grounds.
      (13)   Natural material. It is unlawful to willfully and without
authority remove any natural material in or around any public park or on other
public grounds.
(Prior Code, § 815.05)
   (B)   Other provisions of the city code governing conduct in public places
within the city apply to parks.
(Prior Code, § 815.11)
(Ord. 2011-07, passed 6-15-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.04 ENFORCEMENT.
   This chapter is enforced by the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer. It is
unlawful for any person to disobey an order given pursuant to this chapter. The
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer may prepare and publicize further regulations not
inconsistent with this chapter for conduct within parks.
(Prior Code, § 815.07)
§ 92.05 PARK CLOSING.
   (A)   The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer may close any public park,
parkway, beach or drive, and for the period as deemed necessary, in order to
protect or restore order or terminate or prevent breaches of the peace and
order of the city.
   (B)   A person having been informed of such an order closing any such area
may not remain in the area longer than is necessary to leave the closed area.
(Prior Code, § 815.09)
§ 92.06 LIQUOR AND BEER IN PARKS.
   (A)   General rule. Except as otherwise permitted by this section, the use,
consumption, display and presence of intoxicating liquor (liquor) and 3.2% malt
liquor (beer) as those terms are defined in
Chapter 110 of this code of ordinances, is prohibited in parks and related
facilities including vehicle parking facilities immediately adjoining a park.
   (B)   Special permits. The Council may on the recommendation of the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer issue a special permit for the use, consumption
and display of liquor and beer in a park or a related facility in the park.
   (C)   Eligible persons. A special permit may be issued to persons in
connection with a social event conducted by a family, an employee group, a club
or a charitable, religious or other non-profit organization solely for the
enjoyment of the persons invited to the event by the applicant for the permit.
A special permit will not be issued to a person holding a license to sell
liquor or beer, except as provided in §
110.02 of this code of ordinances.
   (D)   Duration. The special permit allows the presence of liquor and beer in
the park or related facility only during the time specified in the permit which
time may not exceed 12 consecutive hours in one calendar day.
   (E)   Rules and regulations. The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer is
directed to prepare further regulations for the conduct in parks of a person
issued a special permit under this section.
   (F)   Application. The application for a special permit is prepared by the
Deputy Clerk. The application must specify the purpose of the social event, the
nature of the activity proposed, the hours during which it is to be conducted,
the maximum number of persons expected to attend and such other information as
the Clerk reasonably requests. The application must be accompanied by a bond or
other undertaking in form and substance satisfactory to the City Administrator/
Clerk-Treasurer and City Attorney, holding the city and its officers, employees
and agents from liability of any kind arising out of the permitted activity. If
the applicant is a business partnership, club, corporation or non-profit
association the application must be accompanied by a certificate of insurance
showing current liability insurance naming the city as an additional insured
party under the insurance policy.
   (G)   Fee. There is no fee for a special permit issued under this section.
   (H)   Special condition.
      (1)   The use, consumption, display and presence of liquor and beer in
parks and related park facilities is a matter of special concern to the city as
such activity relates to the peace and good order of the city. For that reason,
the issuance of a special permit under this section is determined to be a
matter within the sole discretion of the City Council, and its determination to
issue or not to issue a special permit is final. The Council may impose
additional conditions in the granting of a special permit.
      (2)   The application for the special permit must be accompanied by:
         (a)   A copy of this section;
         (b)   An acknowledgment by the applicant that the section has been
read and is understood by the applicant; and
         (c)   That applicant agrees not to challenge or in any way contest the
determination of the City Council with regard to the issuance of the special
permit.
(Prior Code, § 815.13)
§ 92.07 ROBINSON PARK; COMMERCIAL USE; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Any commercial use of Robinson Park shall require an annual permit from the
city. A permit fee in amount set forth in the city’s fee schedule must be paid
prior to issuance of the permit by the city. No permit is required for
commercial uses taking place in Robinson Park as part of a special event;
provided that, a special event permit from the city has been issued.
(Prior Code, § 815.13) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 2-4-2015)
CHAPTER 93: CEMETERIES
Section
   
93.01   Location
   
93.02   Sale of lots
   
93.03   Handling of funds
   
93.04   Superintendent of Cemetery; city sexton; duties
   
93.05   General regulations and prohibitions
   
93.06   Interments
   
93.07   Disinterments
   
93.08   Lot purchase; conditions
   
93.09   Transfer of lots
   
93.10   Monuments, markers and foundations
   
93.11   Vaults and mausoleums
   
93.12   Care and improvements
   
93.13   Actuary
   
93.14   Lot prices and charges
   
93.15   Hours of operation
   
93.16   City Council authority
   
93.17   Funds
   
93.18   Winter burials
§ 93.01 LOCATION.
   (A)   The Spring Park Cemetery has been established and is continued upon
land owned by the city legally described as follows: start on the 40 line,
802.3 feet west of the northeast corner of the southwest quarter of southeast
quarter, Section 16, the point being on the westerly line of the Spring Park
Cemetery; thence deflect to the left an angle of 79.03 feet and going southerly
on the cemetery line a distance of 372 feet to the southwest corner of the
cemetery for the point of beginning; thence continue southerly on the last
course a distance of 304 feet; thence deflect to the left an angle of 87
degrees 46 feet and going easterly a distance of 571 feet more or less to west
right-of-way line of Government Road; thence going northerly along the road
right-of-way a distance of 303.9 feet more or less to the southeasterly corner
of the cemetery; thence going westerly to beginning a distance of 576.4 feet
more or less - 16-42-20 - four acres. A plat of the cemetery, as prepared by
surveyor, and placed on file in the office of the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer, is adopted as the official plat of the cemetery.
   (B)   It is unlawful to lay out or establish any cemetery, or use any lot of
land within the city for the burial of the dead, except in the Spring Park
Cemetery, or some other tract of land duly designated as a cemetery by
ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 520.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.02 SALE OF LOTS.
   The prices of cemetery lots and other services are determined by Council
resolution and filed with the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer. Any person paying
the price thus fixed for a lot is entitled to a deed conveying the same
executed by the Mayor and City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer. The purchaser
must expressly agree in the deed that the rights conferred are subject to the
reasonable rules and regulations as the Council may adopt relative to the use
of the cemetery.
(Prior Code, § 520.03)
§ 93.03 HANDLING OF FUNDS.
   Money received from the sale of lots and other services must be paid to the
Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer who must give a receipt therefor. A deed to any
cemetery lot may not be issued, nor any services be performed until a receipt
showing payment to the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer of the cost thereof is
exhibited to the person whose duty it is to give the deed or perform the
services. Money received from the sale of lots and for the performance of
services must be placed in the Cemetery Fund. The fund is to be used for the
payment of the purchase price of grounds, or for maintenance and improvements
and for no other purpose. The Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer must keep an
account of all receipts and disbursements of money belonging to the Cemetery
Fund and pay money out of the fund only on orders signed by the authorized
signators, specifying that the money be paid from the Cemetery Fund. The
Council may designate funds for use by and for the cemetery as authorized by
M.S. Chapter 306, as it may be amended from time to time. These funds will be
held in the Cemetery Fund. Monies in the Cemetery Fund may be invested in any
security that is an authorized investment for the city.
(Prior Code, § 520.05)
§ 93.04 SUPERINTENDENT OF CEMETERY; CITY SEXTON; DUTIES.
   The City Council will appoint a sexton. The sexton is responsible for
management and control of the cemetery under the supervision of the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer. The City Council is responsible for maintenance
and improvement activities.
(Prior Code, § 520.07)
§ 93.05 GENERAL REGULATIONS AND PROHIBITIONS.
   It is unlawful to:
   (A)   Discharge a firearm or have possession of any firearm within the
cemetery grounds without prior permission from the sexton;
   (B)   Remove any object from any place in the cemetery or make any
excavation without the consent of the sexton;
   (C)   Obstruct any drive or path in the cemetery or in any way injure,
deface or destroy any structure, grave, flower, tree or other thing in the
cemetery;
   (D)   Drive any vehicle faster than five mph within the cemetery, nor drive
over any path or roadway not authorized by the sexton;
   (E)   Disturb the quiet of the cemetery by noise or improper conduct of any
kind;
   (F)   Enter or leave the cemetery except at the gates provided;
   (G)   Use the cemetery grounds or any road therein as a public thoroughfare,
nor drive any vehicle through the cemetery ground, except for purposes relating
to the cemetery;
   (H)   Permit a child under the age of 14 within the cemetery unless
accompanied by a person over the age of 21;
   (I)   Allow any domestic animal to run at large within the cemetery; and
   (J)   Loiter at any time, nor be in the cemetery without prior permission of
the cemetery sexton at any time between the hours of sunset and 7:00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 520.09) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.06 INTERMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   Interments in lots are restricted to members of the immediate
family of the lot owner. Permission in writing from a lot owner must accompany
requests for permits to bury the bodies of persons not members of the lot
owner. The permission may not be for remuneration. Excavations must be made
under the direction of the sexton.
      (2)   Graves must be dug by the sexton, at least 24 hours’ notice must be
given, and the outside dimensions of the cement grave box to be used and the
location must be specified. Interment may not be made in the cemetery unless
all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations regarding interments have been
complied with and until the purchase price of the lot to be used, except as
specified in §
93.08(B) of this chapter, and all burial fees are paid.
   (B)   Burials must be made with a cement grave box.
(Prior Code, § 520.11) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.07 DISINTERMENTS.
   Before any grave may be opened, written permission of the lot owner and the
next of kin must be filed with the sexton, a permit from the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer must be secured and presented and the required
fees paid. This provision does not apply when disinterment is ordered by duly
authorized public authorities.
(Prior Code, § 520.13)
§ 93.08 LOT PURCHASE; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Lots must be sold subject to this chapter. The purchaser must
expressly agree in the deed conveying the lot that their rights are subject to
the reasonable rules and regulations as the City Council may adopt. A lot may
not be used for any purpose other than the burial of human remains and the
placing of appropriate memorials.
(Prior Code, § 520.15)
   (B)   (1)   Upon full payment of the purchase price of a lot, the Deputy
Clerk will issue a cemetery deed conveying the lot executed by the Mayor and
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer and the deed will be recorded in the records
of the city. If the purchase price is not paid in full, a contract must be
signed by the purchaser and approved by the Council.
      (2)   The contract must state the amount paid and terms for payment of
the balance. Before a burial is permitted, an amount equal to the actual space
used, plus the interment and disinterment charges, must be paid. Deferred
payments will bear interest at the rate of 6% per year from the date of
execution of the contract.
(Prior Code, § 520.17)
§ 93.09 TRANSFER OF LOTS.
   A cemetery lot or fractional lot may not be resold or otherwise disposed of
without the approval of the City Council. The city retains the first option to
repurchase the cemetery lot or fractional lot at the original sale price. A lot
may not be resold, disposed of or otherwise used until the purchase price and
all unpaid charges including charges for permanent or special care have been
paid in full. Lot owners may not allow interments to be made on their lots for
remuneration. Lots, or fractional lots, may not be subdivided without consent
of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 520.19)
§ 93.10 MONUMENTS, MARKERS AND FOUNDATIONS.
   (A)   Markers must be placed in the space shown on the cemetery plat or as
directed by the sexton. A marker may not be placed unless the location has been
approved by the sexton. A marker may not be placed until the price of the space
used for burial and all burial fees have been paid. A marker may not be
constructed of limestone, wood or other material which will not assure relative
permanency. One marker may be set at each grave on a lot or in the single grave
section. Markers hereafter platted must be placed flush with surface and the
ground. The installation of new monuments will hereafter be prohibited in the
second addition, sections D, E, F, G, H, and I in the cemetery.
(Prior Code, § 520.21)
   (B)   Monuments and markers must be placed on foundations of solid masonry
at a depth and size to be determined by the sexton. Markers or the base of
monuments may not extend over the foundations more than one-half inch. The top
of all foundations may not be higher than two inches below the established
grade.
(Prior Code, § 520.23)
   (C)   Persons engaged in placing markers must provide adequate planking to
protect turf and must remove materials, equipment and refuse immediately upon
completion of the work. The lot owner is responsible for any failure to abide
by this regulation and must pay for any charges or damage resulting.
(Prior Code, § 520.25)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.11 VAULTS AND MAUSOLEUMS.
   Vaults and mausoleums may be placed only on cemetery lots designated by the
City Council for the structures.
(Prior Code, § 520.27) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.12 CARE AND IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Permanent care.
      (1)   The general care of the entire cemetery grounds is assumed by the
City Council. The term PERMANENT CARE means the cutting of grass at reasonable
intervals, the raking and cleaning of the lot or grave, the pruning of the
shrubs and trees upon the lot and such work as may be necessary to keep the lot
or grave in a good and neat condition. The City Council is not obligated and
does not assume to maintain, repair or replace any grave stones or monumental
structures erected upon the lot or graves therein, nor to plant or care for
flowers or ornamental plants or shrubs, nor to do any special or unusual work,
nor water the lawns or lots. No wood, iron or wire work, such as trellises,
seats, settees or cranes will be allowed on any lots and should any now located
on lots become broken or unsightly they will be removed by the lot owner upon
notice and if not removed the City Council may remove the same at the expense
of the owner after ten days’ notice by mail to the last known address of the
record owner.
      (2)   Funeral designs or cut flowers placed on lots or graves must be
removed at the direction of the sexton as soon as they wilt or become unsightly
if not removed by the owner. Trees or shrubs may not be removed, cut down or
destroyed within the border of any lot or lots, walks or lawn space without the
approval of the City Council. Shrubs and plants planted in the cemetery by a
lot owner must be first approved in respect to kind and location by the sexton.
If a tree or shrub situated on any lot becomes detrimental to any adjacent lot
or avenue, or unsightly or inconvenient, the City Council may remove the tree
or shrub, or such parts thereof as, in its judgment, are unsightly, detrimental
or inconvenient.
(Prior Code, § 520.29)
   (B)   Improvements. Plants, shrubs and flowers may be placed on cemetery
lots in areas designated by the sexton. Trees or vines may not be planted, nor
may fences be erected. The city reserves the right to remove any tree, shrub,
vine, plant or flower which may become unsightly, dangerous or not in keeping
with the landscape design of the cemetery.
(Prior Code, § 520.31)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.13 ACTUARY.
   (A)   The Deputy Clerk serves as the actuary of the cemetery and must keep a
register of all interments and disinterments as may be required by law.
   (B)   The actuary will also notify the Commissioner of Veteran Affairs of
the interment of a veteran as required by law.
(Prior Code, § 520.33)
§ 93.14 LOT PRICES AND CHARGES.
   The City Council will establish the lot prices and other cemetery charges as
it deems necessary in the public interest.
(Prior Code, § 520.35)
§ 93.15 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   The cemetery will be open to visitors during the hours of daylight.
Permission to enter at other times must be secured from the sexton.
(Prior Code, § 520.37)
§ 93.16 CITY COUNCIL AUTHORITY.
   The City Council may amend these rules, regulations and charges in order to
promote the general objectives and best interest of the cemetery and is not
required to give notice of the intended action. The city may remove all
monuments, markers, flowers, plants, trees, decorations or other similar things
without liability to the owner whenever any of these objects become unsafe or
unsightly.
(Prior Code, § 520.39)
§ 93.17 FUNDS.
   (A)   Cemetery Fund. Moneys received under this chapter are dedicated to the
cemetery within a fund known as the “Cemetery Fund”. Revenues will be derived
from sales of property, permanent (perpetual) care fees, seasonal care fees,
interest or dividends from investment of idle funds, burial fees, gifts,
donations or bequests. Moneys from sales of property or lots will be used for
current cemetery operations. Moneys from the perpetual care fees will be
dedicated to a permanent or perpetual care fund for investment, the interest or
dividends from which may be used for current cemetery purposes. Monies in the
fund may be invested in any security that is an authorized investment for the
city. Property or lots may not be sold or deeded without perpetual care fees
being paid at the same time. Seasonal care fees will be accepted for care and
maintenance of those lots which were sold or deeded before perpetual care fees
were required.
   (B)   Gifts and the like. Gifts, donations or bequests may be accepted at
the discretion of the City Council, but for the purposes stipulated by those
remitting the funds or, in the absence of such stipulation, the funds will be
directed by the City Council. The City Council may amend these rules and
regulations to set fees and charges and to dedicate or direct their uses. All
funds will be received, dedicated, invested, expended or disbursed pursuant to
M.S. Chapter 306, as it may be amended from time to time, and this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 520.41)
§ 93.18 WINTER BURIALS.
   Marking for burials during the winter months of January through March 15
require additional time and effort and, therefore, must be charged accordingly.
Charges for marking of graves during this period will be established by the
City Council and may be amended from time to time as necessary.
(Prior Code, § 520.43)
CHAPTER 94: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
General Provisions
   
94.01   State Fire Code adopted by reference
   
94.02   Bureau of Fire Prevention
   
94.03   Definitions
   
94.04   Storage of flammable liquids, liquified petroleum and explosives
   
94.05   Special use permits
   
94.06   Appeals
   
94.07   Permit fees; enforcement
   
94.08   Fire lanes
   
94.09   Conduct at scene of emergency
   
94.10   Removal of property endangered by fire
   
94.11   Demolition of buildings
   
94.12   Police aid at emergency scene
   
94.13   Commercial cooking ventilation systems; inspection and cleaning
   
94.14   Locked key boxes
   
94.15   Fire alarm systems
Emergency and Fire Protection Services
   
94.30   Purpose and intent
   
94.31   Definitions
   
94.32   Parties affected
   
94.33   Rates
   
94.34   Billing and collection
   
94.35   Mutual aid agreement
   
94.36   Application of collections to budget
Cross-reference:
   Alarm Systems, see
Ch. 95
   Civil Defense; Emergency Management, see
Ch. 33
   Fire Department, see § 31.29
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.01 STATE FIRE CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Minnesota Uniform Fire Code, as promulgated by the state’s Department of
Public Safety, Fire Marshal Division, is adopted and made a part of this code
as if fully set forth herein, except for those provisions as modified, deleted
or amended by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 905.01)
§ 94.02 BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION.
   (A)   Established. The Uniform Fire Code is enforced by the Bureau of Fire
Prevention in the Fire Department, which is operated under the supervision of
the Fire Chief.
   (B)   Inspectors. The Fire Chief may detail members of the Fire Department
as inspectors, as may be necessary.
   (C)   Report. A report of the Bureau of Fire Prevention must be made
annually at the end of each year and transmitted through the Fire Chief of the
Fire Department to the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer. The report must
contain all proceedings under this code, with such statistics as the Fire Chief
may wish to include therein. The Chief must also recommend necessary amendments
to the code.
(Prior Code, § 905.03)
§ 94.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CORPORATION COUNSEL. As used in the Uniform Fire Code, means the “City
Attorney”.
   MUNICIPALITY. As used in the Uniform Fire Code, means the “City of
Sandstone”.
(Prior Code, § 905.05)
§ 94.04 STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS, LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM AND EXPLOSIVES.
   (A)   Flammable or combustible liquids in outside above ground tanks. The
storage of flammable or combustible liquids in outside above ground tanks is
permitted within Industrial Zoning Districts only.
   (B)   Storage of liquefied petroleum gases. The storage of liquefied
petroleum gases is permitted in Industrial Zoning Districts only.
   (C)   Storage of explosives and blasting agents. The storage of explosives
and blasting agents is permitted in Industrial Zoning Districts only.
(Prior Code, § 905.07) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.05 SPECIAL USE PERMITS.
   Storage of flammable liquids in outside above-ground tanks, the
establishment of a bulk plant for flammable liquids, the bulk storage of
liquefied petroleum gases and the storage of explosives and blasting agents is
not permitted within the corporate limits of the city, except in an Industrial
Zoning District, after approval of the Fire Chief, Marshal, Building Official
and the Planning Commission and with a special use permit granted by the
Council.
(Prior Code, § 905.09) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.06 APPEALS.
   (A)   Subject of appeal. An appeal of the following actions may be made by
any party aggrieved to the city in writing within 14 days of the aggrieved
party being notified of the actions:
      (1)   Issuance of fire prevention orders;
      (2)   Refusal of Fire Chief to extend the time limits for compliance with
a fire prevention order issued by the Fire Department;
      (3)   Refusal of the Fire Chief to issue permits authorized in this code;
      (4)   Revocation of a permit pursuant to this code; and
      (5)   Aggrieved party claiming that the provisions of the Uniform Fire
Code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code has been
misconstrued or wrongly interpreted.
   (B)   Review by Council. The aggrieved party may further appeal any decision
to the City Council by notifying the city of such further appeal, in writing,
within 14 days of being notified of the city’s findings.
(Prior Code, § 905.11)
§ 94.07 PERMIT FEES; ENFORCEMENT.
   There is no charge for the issuance of a burning permit. The fee for all
other permits issued under this subchapter is set by §
36.02 of this code of ordinances. Permits expire on December 31 of each
calendar year. No permit may be issued or renewed for any premises that are in
violation of the provisions or requirements of this subchapter. No penalty will
be imposed under this subchapter until after an up-to-date inspection of the
premises has been made by the Fire Chief and the owner or occupant of the
premises has been notified in writing of the deficiencies found in the
inspection and 30 days has been allowed the owner or occupant to correct the
deficiencies after notification thereof.
(Prior Code, § 905.13)
§ 94.08 FIRE LANES.
   It is unlawful to park or leave any motor vehicle in an established fire
lane. An owner or operator of a motor vehicle may not leave or park the vehicle
in a fire lane.
(Prior Code, § 905.15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.09 CONDUCT AT SCENE OF EMERGENCY.
   (A)   Traffic. It is unlawful to drive a vehicle over a fire hose, except at
the direction or command of a police officer or member of the Fire Department.
Upon the approach of any Fire Department vehicle giving signal by bell, siren,
horn or flashing lights, the driver of every other non-emergency vehicle must
immediately drive the same to a position as near as possible and parallel to
the right-hand edge or curb of the street, clear of any intersection, and must
stop and remain in the position unless otherwise directed by a police officer
or member of the Fire Department, and until the Fire Department vehicles have
passed. It is unlawful for the driver of a non-emergency vehicle to follow
closer than 500 feet of any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire
alarm. It is unlawful to drive into or park the vehicle within the block in
which the fire apparatus is stopped in answer to a fire alarm, unless permitted
to do so by a police officer or member of the Fire Department.
   (B)   Spectators at fire. The officer of the Fire Department in command at
the scene of a fire or other emergency may establish a zone of danger, within
which no person, except members of the Fire Department or Police Department,
may enter, unless directed or permitted to do so by the member in command. No
person may enter upon the premises that is the scene of a fire or alarm of
fire, or other emergency, unless and until directed or permitted to do so by
the member of the Fire Department in command of the fire.
   (C)   Utilizing citizens to assist Fire Department. The officer of the Fire
Department in command at the scene of a fire or other emergency may utilize any
citizen in assisting in protecting life and property when an emergency dictates
the necessity of the assistance.
(Prior Code, § 905.17) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.10 REMOVAL OF PROPERTY ENDANGERED BY FIRE.
   The officer of the Fire Department in command at any fire or other
emergency, may remove property, whenever it becomes necessary for the
preservation of the property from fire, or to prevent the spreading of fire, or
to protect adjoining property, and to that end may enter or order any member of
the Fire Department to enter premises involved in danger or endangering other
property.
(Prior Code, § 905.19)
§ 94.11 DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS.
   The officer of the Fire Department in command at the scene of any fire or
other emergency may order the demolition of any building or structure during a
fire or other extreme emergency to prevent a conflagration; provided, however,
that, no building or structure may be blown up or otherwise destroyed for the
purpose of checking the progress of any fire, except in case of necessity, and
then only upon order of the officer of the Department in command at the scene
of the fire.
(Prior Code, § 905.21)
§ 94.12 POLICE AID AT EMERGENCY SCENE.
   It is hereby made the special duty of peace officers on duty at the time, to
respond to all fire alarms and assist the Fire Department in the protection of
life and property of the citizens, and the property of the Fire Department, and
in controlling and regulating traffic and maintaining order.
(Prior Code, § 905.23)
§ 94.13 COMMERCIAL COOKING VENTILATION SYSTEMS; INSPECTION AND CLEANING.
   (A)   Periodic servicing.
      (1)   Commercial cooking ventilation systems, hoods, filters, grease
removal devices and ducts must be periodically cleaned prior to surfaces
becoming heavily contaminated with combustible grease deposits.
      (2)   Commercial cooking ventilation systems, hoods and ducts must be
cleaned at least annually.
      (3)   Cleaning may be required more often depending on grease build-up.
      (4)   Annual cleaning may be waived after inspection and approval by the
Fire Chief.
   (B)   Permits. A person cleaning a commercial cooking ventilation system or
its components, as referred to in division (A) above for the removal of
combustible grease, must first obtain a permit from the Fire Department.
Permits must be obtained a minimum of three days prior to starting work. Upon
completion of cleaning, the Fire Department must be notified for inspection and
approval of work. The permit fee is fixed in §
36.02 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 905.25) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.14 LOCKED KEY BOXES.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      APARTMENT BUILDING. A multi-unit structure containing three or more
apartments as defined in
Chapter 163 of this code of ordinances.
      COMMERCIAL BUILDING. A structure used for commercial purposes that has a
dial out fire alarm system.
      MULTI-FAMILY BUILDING. A multi-unit structure that contains condominiums,
townhouses, duplexes, triplexes or quadplexes that have a common enclosed
entrance to the units.
   (B)   Ground rule. An apartment building, commercial building or multi-
family building that does not have outside access doors for each unit must have
installed a locked key box in an accessible location on the exterior of the
building or inside an unlocked entryway. The locked key box must:
      (1)   Be of a type approved by the Fire Chief;
      (2)   Contain a key to each unit in the building; and
      (3)   Be uniformly keyed for prompt access by firefighting personnel.
   (C)   Exceptions. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a locked key box shall not
be required for commercial buildings that are occupied 24 hours a day, seven
days a week and have an assigned key holder that has access to all areas of the
building. A locked key box shall also not be required for commercial buildings
that contain businesses, firms or other entities that are legally required to
maintain customer, client, trade or patient confidentiality or that can show
that there is some other substantial security risk that would be caused by
having a locked key box.
   (D)   Exemptions.
      (1)   Any commercial property owner not otherwise exempt from the
provisions of this section, may opt out of the locked key box program if the
owner furnishes the Fire Chief with a letter of understanding stating that:
         (a)   The Fire Department is not authorized to obtain access to the
premises during an emergency by way of a locked key box and the owner is aware
that damage to the premises resulting from a forced emergency entry may occur;
         (b)   The city will not be responsible for providing security for the
premises in the event a forced entry occurs and the owner does not respond
within one hour of being notified of the entry; and
         (c)   In the event it is a false alarm, the owner agrees to pay the
applicable false alarm charges to the city.
      (2)   Additionally, the owner must execute and deliver to the Fire Chief
an agreement, in form and substance required by the City Attorney, indemnifying
and holding the city harmless from any claim resulting from a forced entry or
as a result of the city’s delayed access to the premises.
(Prior Code, § 905.27) (Ord. 2007-11, passed 11-21-2007)
§ 94.15 FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS.
   A property owner that installs a dial out fire alarm system in any building
on his, her or their property shall notify the city of the system upon
completion of the installation.
(Prior Code, § 905.29) (Ord. 2007-11, passed 11-21-2007)
EMERGENCY AND FIRE PROTECTION SERVICES
§ 94.30 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   This subchapter is adopted for the purpose of authorizing the city to charge
for fire and emergency service as authorized by M.S. §§ 366.011, 366.012 and
415.01, as they may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 906.01) (Ord. 2005-01, passed 3-2-2005)
§ 94.31 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIRE SERVICE. The deployment of firefighting personnel or equipment or both
to extinguish a fire or perform any preventative measure in an effort to
protect equipment, life or property in an area threatened by fire. The term
also includes the deployment of firefighting personnel and equipment or both to
provide fire suppression, rescue, vehicle extrication, vehicular accident scene
safety, traffic control and other related services as may be necessary at the
scene of an emergency.
   FIRE SERVICE CHARGE. The charge imposed by the city for providing fire
service.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. A self-propelled vehicle designed and originally manufactured
to operate primarily upon public roads and highways, and not operated
exclusively upon railroad tracks. The term includes semi-trailers, but does not
include snowmobiles, manufactured homes, all-terrain vehicles or park trailers.
   MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT. An agreement between the city and a town or other city
for the city’s Fire Department to provide assistance to the Fire Department of
a town or other city.
(Prior Code, § 906.03) (Ord. 2005-01, passed 3-2-2005; Ord. 2008-04, passed 4-
16-2008)
§ 94.32 PARTIES AFFECTED.
   (A)   Owners of property within the city who receive fire service;
   (B)   Anyone who receives fire service within or outside of the city; and
   (C)   Owners of property in towns to which the city provides fire service
pursuant to a fire protection contract.
(Prior Code, § 906.05) (Ord. 2005-01, passed 3-2-2005; Ord. 2008-04, passed 4-
16-2008)
§ 94.33 RATES.
   The city will annually review rates and place these rates and any changes or
additions to these rates in the city’s annual fee schedule (see §
36.02) adopted by resolution at the city’s annual organizational meeting.
(Prior Code, § 906.07) (Ord. 2005-01, passed 3-2-2005)
§ 94.34 BILLING AND COLLECTION.
   (A)   Parties requesting or receiving fire services may be billed directly
for the costs of these services by the city. Additionally, if the party
receiving fire services did not request services, but a fire or other emergency
situation exists which, at the discretion of the Fire Department personnel in
charge requires fire service, the party will be charged and billed. All parties
will be billed whether or not the fire service is covered by insurance. Any
billable amount of the fire charge not covered by a party’s insurance remains a
debt of the party receiving the fire service.
   (B)   Parties billed for fire service will have 30 days to pay. If the fire
service charge is not paid by that time, it will be considered delinquent and
the city will send a notice of delinquency.
   (C)   If the fire service charge remains unpaid for 30 days after the notice
of delinquency is sent, the city will use all practical and reasonable legal
means to collect the fire service charge. The party receiving fire service will
be liable for all collection costs incurred by the city including, but not
limited to, reasonable attorney fees and court costs.
   (D)   If the fire service charge remains unpaid for 30 days after the notice
of delinquency is sent, the City Council may also, on or before October 15 of
each year, certify the unpaid fire service charge to the County Auditor for
collection with property taxes. The city must give the property owner notice of
its intent to certify the unpaid fire service charge by September 15.
   (E)   False alarms will be billed as a fire call after the third such alarm
within any 12-month period.
(Prior Code, § 906.09) (Ord. 2005-01, passed 3-2-2005; Ord. 2008-04, passed 4-
16-2008)
§ 94.35 MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT.
   When the city’s Fire Department provides fire service to another fire
department pursuant to a mutual aid agreement, the billing will be determined
by the mutual aid agreement.
(Prior Code, § 906.11) (Ord. 2005-01, passed - -2005)
§ 94.36 APPLICATION OF COLLECTIONS TO BUDGET.
   Collected fire charges will be city funds and used to offset the expenses of
the city’s Fire Department in providing fire services.
(Prior Code, § 906.13) (Ord. 2005-01, passed 3-2-2005)
CHAPTER 95: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
95.01   Purpose and scope
   
95.02   Definitions
   
95.03   Use fees
   
95.04   Payment of fees
   
95.05   Alarm report
   
95.06   Administrative rules
   
95.07   Confidentiality
   
95.08   Communications center
 
   
95.99   Penalty
§ 95.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   This chapter regulates the use of burglary and safety alarms,
establishes user fees and establishes a system of administration therefor.
   (B)   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public safety services
of the city from misuse of public safety alarms and to provide for the maximum
possible service to public safety alarm users.
(Prior Code, § 955.01)
§ 95.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM SYSTEM. An alarm installation designed to be used for the prevention
or detection of burglary or robbery on the premises which contain an alarm
installation; automobile alarm devices are not an ALARM SYSTEM.
   ALARM USER. A person in control of any building, structure or facility
wherein an alarm system is maintained.
   FALSE ALARM. An alarm signal eliciting a response by police personnel when a
situation requiring a response does not, in fact, exist, and which is caused by
the activation of the alarm system through mechanical failure, alarm
malfunction, improper installation or the inadvertence of the owner or lessee
of an alarm system: the term does not include alarms caused by climatic
conditions such as tornadoes, thunderstorms, utility line mishaps, violent
conditions of nature or any other conditions which are clearly beyond the
control of the alarm manufacturer, installer or owner.
   POLICE COMMUNICATIONS CENTER. The city facility used to receive emergency
requests for service and general information from the public.
(Prior Code, § 955.03)
§ 95.03 USER FEES.
   User fees are established by the city’s fee schedule, which can be found in
§
36.02 of this code of ordinances. An alarm user that is required by the city to
pay a user fee as the result of a false alarm may make a written appeal of the
false alarm charge to the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer within ten days of
notice by the city of the false alarm charge. Following review and
determination by the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, the decision may be
appealed to the city who will make a final determination as to whether the user
is to be charged with a false alarm.
(Prior Code, § 955.05)
§ 95.04 PAYMENT OF FEES.
   (A)   General. Payment of user fees are paid to the City Administrator/
Clerk-Treasurer within 30 days from the date of notice by the city to the alarm
user. Failure to pay the fee will cause the alarm user to be considered
delinquent and subject to a penalty of an additional 5% of the unpaid fee for
each additional 30-day period that the fee remains unpaid.
   (B)   Unpaid charges. Delinquent charges for user fees will be certified by
the Deputy Clerk who must prepare an assessment roll each year providing for
assessment of the delinquent amounts against the respective properties served.
The assessment roll must be delivered by the Deputy Clerk to the City Council
for adoption on or before October 10 of each year.
(Prior Code, § 955.07)
§ 95.05 ALARM REPORT.
   If an alarm user has incurred five false alarms within one calendar year,
the alarm user must submit a written report to the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer within ten days after being notified of the fifth false alarm,
describing actions taken or to be taken to discover and eliminate the cause of
the false alarms. Failure to submit the written report is a violation of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 955.09)
§ 95.06 ADMINISTRATIVE RULES.
   The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer must prepare rules as are necessary
for the implementation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 955.11)
§ 95.07 CONFIDENTIALITY.
   (A)   General. Information submitted in compliance with this chapter will be
held in confidence and exempt from discovery to the extent permitted by law.
   (B)   Statistics. Subject to requirements of confidentiality, the Chief of
Police may develop and maintain statistics for the purpose of ongoing alarm
systems evaluation.
(Prior Code, § 955.13)
§ 95.08 COMMUNICATIONS CENTER.
   (A)   Automatic dialing devices may not be connected to the police
communications center through any telephone line. Use of automatic dialing
devices is a violation of this chapter.
   (B)   The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer may prepare rules and
regulations for the efficient operation of the police communications center.
(Prior Code, § 955.15)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Failure or omission to comply with any provisions of this chapter is a
petty misdemeanor.
   (B)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed
for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this chapter, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more
than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
      (3)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time,
in either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
      (4) The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
      (5)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if any
person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this code,
the City Council or any city official designated by it may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
(Prior Code, § 955.17)
CHAPTER 96: SPECIAL EVENTS AND GATHERINGS
Section
   
96.01   Purpose
   
96.02   Definition
   
96.03   Permit required; not required
   
96.04   Permit application
   
96.05   Permit review
   
96.06   Permit issuance
   
96.07   Indemnification agreement
   
96.08   Insurance requirements
   
96.09   Cleanup deposit
   
96.10   Permit revocation
   
96.11   Violations
 
   
96.99   Penalty
§ 96.01 PURPOSE.
   This chapter governs the time, place and manner of holding certain special
events on city streets, on city property and on private property when an
event’s impact upon the health, fire, law enforcement, transportation or other
services exceeds those regularly provided to that property. This chapter is
enacted in order to promote the health, safety and welfare of all residents and
visitors of the city by ensuring that special events do not create
disturbances, become nuisances, menace or threaten life, health and property,
disrupt traffic or threaten or damage private or public property. It is not the
intent of the City Council by enacting this chapter to regulate in any manner
the content of speech or infringe upon the right to assemble, except for
regulating the time, place and manner of speech and assembly and this chapter
should not be interpreted or construed otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 960.01) (Ord. 2007-10, passed 7-2-2007; Ord. 2014-01, passed 2-
15-2014; Ord. 20190717-01, passed 7-17-2019)
§ 96.02 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SPECIAL EVENT. Includes, but is not limited to, any concert, theatrical
performance, parade, fair, show, festival, circus, carnival, rally, party,
filming of a movie, video or television show, game or apparatus or device for
which a fee for admission is charged, motorcade, run, street dance, bike-a-
thon, race, walk, athletic event or other attended outdoor entertainment or
celebration that is to be held in whole or in part upon publicly-owned property
or public right-of-way or, if held wholly upon private property, will
nevertheless affect or impact the ordinary and normal use by the general public
of public property or public rights-of-way within the vicinity of the event.
(Prior Code, § 960.03) (Ord. 2007-10, passed 7-2-2007; Ord. 2014-01, passed 2-
15-2014; Ord. 20190717-01, passed 7-17-2019)
§ 96.03 PERMIT REQUIRED; NOT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any person or organization desiring to conduct or sponsor a special
event in the city shall first obtain a special event permit from the city.
(Prior Code, § 960.05)
   (B)   A special event permit is not required for the following types of
events:
      (1)   Funeral processions;
      (2)   Any event involving 75 or fewer people, that is less than three
hours in duration and that does not involve any alcohol sales or consumption;
and
      (3)   The use of traditional public forums as alternative channels of
communication by the public; provided that, the use is for the free exercise of
constitutionally protected activities and does not disrupt or interfere with
traffic on public streets or the use of public places by other members of the
public.
(Prior Code, § 960.07)
(Ord. 2007-10, passed 7-2-2007; Ord. 2014-01, passed 2-15-2014; Ord. 20190717-
01, passed 7-17- 2019)
§ 96.04 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any person or organization desiring to sponsor a special event that is
not exempted by this chapter must apply to the city for a special event permit.
The special event permit application must be filed not less than 30 days in
advance of the date in which the event is to occur if the special event
requires the closure of any street, any detouring of traffic or any significant
impact on city services.
   (B)   Special event applications must include the following information:
      (1)   Type and description of the special event and a list of all
activities to take place at the special event;
      (2)   Name of the sponsoring entity, contact person, address and phone
number;
      (3)   Proposed date(s) of the special event, together with the beginning
and ending times for each date;
      (4)   Proposed location of the special event, including a map of the
proposed area to be used which shows any barricades, street route plans or
perimeter/security fencing;
      (5)   Estimated numbers of special event staff, participants and
spectators;
      (6)   Any public health plans, including supplying water to the site,
solid waste collection and provision of toilet facilities;
      (7)   Any fire prevention and emergency medical service plans;
      (8)   Any security plans;
      (9)   The admission fee, donation or other consideration to be charged or
requested for admission to the special event, if applicable;
      (10)   Whether food or alcohol is to be served or sold at the special
event;
      (11)   Signature of the applicant; and
      (12)   If the event is an event planned within a residential area in
which a street is to be closed, the applicant must collect and submit with the
application a list of signatures from all properties whose vehicular access to
their properties will be affected consenting to the street closure.
(Prior Code, § 960.09) (Ord. 2007-10, passed 7-2-2007; Ord. 2014-01, passed 2-
15-2014; 20190717-01, passed 7-17-2019)
§ 96.05 PERMIT REVIEW.
   (A)   Review. The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall review the
special event permit application and make a determination on whether to issue
the permit or deny it.
   (B)   Denial. The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer may deny an application
for a special event permit if it is determined from a consideration of the
application or other pertinent information, that:
      (1)   The information contained in the application or supplemental
information requested from the applicant is false or non-existent in any
material detail;
      (2)   The applicant fails to supplement the application after having been
notified by the city of additional information or documents needed;
      (3)   The applicant fails to agree to abide or comply with all of the
conditions and terms of the special event permit;
      (4)   The time, route, hours, location or size of the special event will
unnecessarily disrupt the movement of other traffic within the area of the
special event;
      (5)   The special event is of the size or nature that requires the
diversion of too many law enforcement officers to properly police the event,
site and contiguous areas that allowing the special event would unreasonably
deny law enforcement protection to the remainder of the city and its residents;
      (6)   Another special event permit application has already been approved
to hold another special event at the same time and place requested by the
applicant or so close in time and place as to cause undue traffic congestion,
or the city is unable to meet the needs to provide for law enforcement and
other city services for both special events;
      (7)   The location of the special event would cause undue hardship for
adjacent businesses or residents;
      (8)   The location of the special event will substantially interfere with
any construction or maintenance work scheduled to take place upon or along
public property or right-of-way;
      (9)   The special event would endanger public safety or health;
      (10)   The special event would seriously inconvenience the general
public’s use of public property, services or facilities;
      (11)   The applicant fails to comply with the liability insurance
requirements or the applicant’s insurance lapses or is canceled;
      (12)   The special event would create or constitute a public nuisance;
      (13)   The special event would be likely to cause significant damage to
public property or facilities; or
      (14)   The special event would engage in or encourage participants to
engage in illegal acts.
   (C)   Right of appeal. If the special event permit application has been
denied by the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, the applicant may appeal the
decision to the City Council. The applicant must provide the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer with written notice of appeal within five
business days of the date of denial.
   (D)   Permit conditions. The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer may
condition the issuance of a special event permit by imposing reasonable
conditions concerning the time, place and manner of the special event, and such
conditions are necessary to protect the safety of persons and property, and the
control of traffic; provided that, the conditions shall not unreasonably
restrict the right of free speech. The conditions may include, but are not
limited to:
      (1)   Alteration of the date(s), time(s), route or location of the
special event proposed;
      (2)   Elimination of an activity at the special event which cannot be
mitigated to a point as to ensure public safety and welfare, or which causes
undue liability to the city;
      (3)   Requirements concerning the area of assembly and disbanding of a
parade or other events occurring along a route;
      (4)   Requirements concerning the accommodation of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, including restricting the event to only a portion of the
street or right-of-way;
      (5)   Requirements for the use of traffic cones or barricades;
      (6)   Requirements for the use of city personnel and equipment;
      (7)   Requirements for the provision of first aid or sanitary facilities
at the special event;
      (8)   Requirements for the use of special event monitors and providing
notice of the special permit conditions to the events’ participants;
      (9)   Requirements on the number and type of vehicles, animals or
structures to be allowed at the special event and the inspection and approval
of floats, structures and decorated vehicles by the city for safety purposes;
      (10)   Compliance with animal protection ordinances and laws;
      (11)   Requirements for the use of garbage containers and the cleanup and
restoration of any public property;
      (12)   Restrictions on the use of amplified sound and compliance with
noise ordinances, regulations and laws;
      (13)   Requirements to provide notice of the special event to surrounding
property owners and law enforcement; and
      (14)   Restrictions on the sale or consumption of food and alcohol.
(Prior Code, § 960.11) (Ord. 2007-10, passed 7-2-2007; Ord. 2014-01, passed 2-
15-2014; 20190717-01, passed 7-17-2019)
§ 96.06 PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   (A)   The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall issue the special events
permit once the application has been approved and the applicant has agreed to
comply with the terms and conditions of the permit as well as the requirements
of this chapter.
   (B)   The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer will notify the Park and
Recreation Commission and the City Council of the event.
(Prior Code, § 960.13) (Ord. 2007-10, passed 7-2-2007; Ord. 2014-01, passed 2-
15-2014; 20190717-01, passed 7-17-2019)
§ 96.07 INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENT.
   If the event, or any portion of the event is to be held on city property or
right-of-way, prior to the issuance of a special event permit, the permit
applicant and authorizing officer of the sponsoring organization, if any, must
sign an agreement to indemnify, defend and hold the city, its officials,
employees and agents harmless from any claim that arises in whole or in part
out of the special event, except any claims arising solely out of the negligent
acts or omissions of the city, its officials, employees and agents.
(Prior Code, § 960.15) (Ord. 2007-10, passed 7-2-2007; Ord. 2014-01, passed 2-
15-2014; 20190717-01, passed 7-17-2019)
§ 96.08 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Liability insurance required. The applicant or sponsor of a special
event must possess or obtain liability insurance to protect against loss from
liability imposed by law for damages on account of bodily injury or property
damage arising from the special event. A certificate of insurance must be filed
with the city prior to issuance of the special events permit. The certificate
of insurance must name the city, its officials, employees and agents as
additional insureds. Insurance coverage must be maintained for the duration of
the special event.
   (B)   Minimum limits. Insurance coverage must be a commercial general
liability policy. The minimum limits must be at least $1,000,000. If alcoholic
beverages are to be sold or distributed at the special event, the policy must
also include an endorsement for liquor liability. The city may require
additional endorsements depending upon the type of special event and proposed
activities.
   (C)   Waiver or reduction of required limits. The city may waive or reduce
the insurance requirements of this chapter under the following circumstances:
      (1)   The applicant or officer of the sponsoring organization signs a
verified statement that it believes that the special event’s purpose is First
Amendment expression and that the cost of obtaining the insurance is so
financially burdensome that it would constitute an unreasonable burden on the
right of First Amendment expression;
      (2)   The applicant or an officer of the sponsoring organization signs a
verified statement that the insurance coverage required by this chapter is
impossible to obtain; or
      (3)   The city determines that the insurance requirements are in excess
of the reasonable risk presented by the proposed special event.
(Prior Code, § 960.17) (Ord. 2007-10, passed 7-2-2007; Ord. 2014-01, passed 2-
15-2014; 20190717-01, passed 7-17-2019)
§ 96.09 CLEANUP DEPOSIT.
   The applicant or sponsor of the special event involving the sale of food or
beverages for immediate consumption, erection of structures, horses or other
large animals, water aid stations or another activity likely to create a
substantial need for cleanup may be required by the city to provide a cleanup
deposit prior to issuance of the special event perm it. The cleanup deposit
shall be in an amount set by the city. The cleanup deposit will be returned to
the applicant/sponsor if the area used for the special event has been cleaned
and restored to the same condition as it existed prior to the event. If the
property used for the event has not been properly cleaned or restored, the
applicant/sponsor will be billed for the actual cost by the city for the
cleanup and restoration. The cleanup deposit will be applied toward payment of
the bill.
(Prior Code, § 960.19) (Ord. 2007-10, passed 7-2-2007; Ord. 2014-01, passed 2-
15-2014; 20190717-01, passed 7-17-2019)
§ 96.10 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be summarily revoked by the
city’s law enforcement officer at any time when, by reason of disaster, public
calamity, riot or other emergency, the law enforcement officer determines that
the safety of the public or property requires the revocation. The City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer may also summarily revoke any special event
permit issued pursuant to this chapter if the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer
finds that the permit has been issued based upon false information or when the
permittee exceeds the scope of the permit. Notice of the action revoking a perm
it shall be delivered in writing to the permittee by personal service or
certified mail at the address specified by the permittee in its application.
(Prior Code, § 960.21) (Ord. 2007-10, passed 7-2-2007; Ord. 2014-01, passed 2-
15-2014; 20190717-01, passed 7-17-2019)
§ 96.11 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Unlawful to sponsor a special event without a permit. It is unlawful
for any person to sponsor or conduct a special event requiring a permit
pursuant to this chapter unless a valid special event permit has been issued
for the event.
   (B)   Unlawful to exceed the scope of the permit. The special event permit
authorizes the special event permittee or sponsor to conduct only such a
special event as is described in the permit, and in accordance with the terms
and conditions of the permit. It is unlawful for the permittee or sponsor to
willfully violate the terms and conditions of the permit.
(Prior Code, § 960.23) (Ord. 2007-10, passed 7-2-2007; Ord. 2014-01, passed 2-
15-2014; 20190717-01, passed 7-17-2019) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person convicted of violating this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine or imprisonment as specified by
state statute. Each day in which a violation continues to occur shall
constitute a separate offense. Violation of any provision of this chapter shall
also be grounds for revocation of the special event permit.
   (B)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed
for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this chapter, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more
than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
      (3)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time,
in either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
      (4) The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
      (5)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if any
person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this code,
the City Council or any city official designated by it may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
(Prior Code, § 960.23) (Ord. 2007-10, passed 7-2-2007; Ord. 2014-01, passed 2-
15-2014; 20190717-01, passed 7-17-2019)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
111.   NEWSRACKS
      
112.   JUNK YARDS, SALVAGE AND RECYCLING FACILITIES
      
113.   SOLICITATIONS
      
114.   AMUSEMENTS AND LEISURE
      
115.   ADULT BUSINESSES
      
116.   FOOD AND BEVERAGE BUSINESSES
      
117.   MOVING BUILDINGS
      
118.   RENTAL HOUSING
CHAPTER 110: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   Minors
   
110.03   Sales and consumption restrictions
   
110.04   Consumption and display permits
   
110.05   Entertainment in licensed premises
   
110.06   Outdoor alcohol service and consumption endorsement
Licensing Conditions and Procedures
   
110.20   License required
   
110.21   Qualifications of applicant
   
110.22   Restrictions on issuance
   
110.23   License procedure
   
110.24   Investigation of license applicants
   
110.25   Notice of operation
   
110.26   Hearing and issuance
   
110.27   Fees; reductions; refunds
   
110.28   Failure to disclose or make false statements
   
110.29   Number of licenses
   
110.30   License year and renewal
   
110.31   Types of licenses
   
110.32   Temporary licenses
   
110.33   Community festival liquor permits
   
110.34   Transfer of license
   
110.35   License revocation or suspension
   
110.36   License posting
   
110.37   Conditions of license
Cross-reference:
   Drugs, Alcohol and Other Substances, see
Chapter 132
   Liquor and beer in parks, see §
92.06
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   3.2% MALT LIQUOR. A malt liquor that contains not more than 3.2% of alcohol
by weight and not less than 0.5% alcohol by volume.
   CLUB. Any corporation duly organized under the laws of the state for civic,
fraternal, social or business purposes or for intellectual improvements or for
the promotion of sports, or a congressionally chartered veterans organization,
which must have more than 50 members, and which must for more than a year have
owned, hired or leased a building or space in a building of an extent and
character as may be suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable
accommodation of its members and whose affairs and management are conducted by
a board of directors, executive committee or other similar body chosen by the
members at a meeting held for that purpose, none of whose members, officers,
agents or employees are paid directly or indirectly any compensation by way of
profit from the distribution or sale of beverages to the members of the CLUB,
or to its guests, beyond the amount of a reasonable salary or wages as may be
fixed and voted each year by the directors or other governing body.
   EXCLUSIVE LIQUOR STORE.
      (1)   An on-sale or off-sale or combination on-sale or off-sale
establishment used exclusively for the sale of intoxicating liquor at retail
and under the control of an individual owner or manager and as an incident
thereof may also sell ice, all forms of tobacco, 3.2% malt beverages, soft
drinks and all other items that are set forth in M.S. § 340A.412, subd. 14, as
it may be amended from time to time, at retail.
      (2)   An EXCLUSIVE LIQUOR STORE includes an on-sale or combination on-
sale and off-sale establishment operating a restaurant or selling food for
consumption on the premises.
   HOTEL. Any establishment having a resident proprietor or administrator,
where in consideration of payment therefor food or lodging are regularly
furnished to transients and which maintains for the use of its guests not less
than ten guest rooms, with bedding and other suitable and necessary furnishings
in each room, and which is provided with a suitable lobby, desk and office for
registration of its guests, on the ground floor, and which employs an adequate
staff to provide suitable and usual service, and which maintains under the same
management and control as the rest of the establishment and as an integral part
thereof a dining room with appropriate facilities for seating not less than 30
guests at one time, where the general public is, in consideration of payment
therefor, served with meals at tables.
   INTOXICATING LIQUOR and LIQUOR. Ethyl alcohol, distilled, fermented,
spirituous, vinous and malt liquors containing in excess of 3.2% of alcohol by
weight.
   MANUFACTURER. A person who, by a process of manufacture, fermenting,
brewing, distilling, refining, rectifying, blending or by the combination of
different materials, prepares or produces intoxicating liquor.
   MINOR. A person under the age specified in M.S. § 340A.503, as it may be
amended from time to time.
   OFF-SALE. The sale of liquor or 3.2% malt liquor in original package in
retail stores for consumption off the licensed premises only.
   ON-SALE. The sale of liquor or 3.2% malt liquor for consumption on the
premises only.
   ON-SALE WINE. The sale of wine not exceeding 14% alcohol by volume in
premises licensed under this section which meet the qualifications of M.S. §
340A.404, subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time, and this chapter. A
holder of an ON-SALE WINE license who is also licensed to sell 3.2% malt liquor
at on-sale pursuant to M.S. § 340A.411, as it may be amended from time to time,
and whose gross receipts are at least 60% attributable to the sale of food, may
sell intoxicating malt liquors at on-sale without an additional license.
   PACKAGE or ORIGINAL PACKAGE. Any container or receptacle holding liquor or
3.2% malt liquor, which container or receptacle is corked or sealed.
   RESTAURANT. Any establishment, other than a hotel, under the control of a
single proprietor or manager, having appropriate facilities for the serving of
meals to not less than 30 guests at one time and where meals are regularly
furnished at tables to the general public and which employs an adequate staff
to provide the usual and suitable service to its guests, and the principal part
of the business of which is the serving of foods.
   SALE, SELL and SOLD. All barters, and all manners or means, of furnishing
intoxicating liquor and including such furnishing in violation or evasion of
law.
   SUNDAY SALE. The sale of liquor by the glass for consumption on the
premises, in conjunction with the serving of food by the licensee, pursuant to
a special license therefor issued by the city as authorized by state law.
   TAVERN. A place other than a bona fide club that in addition to serving its
guests 3.2% malt liquor, the premises is used, maintained, advertised or held
out to the public to be where:
      (1)   Music of any kind whatsoever is played that is live or recorded by
a band or orchestra or by a machine or device of any kind whatsoever; or
      (2)   There is singing, dancing, vaudeville, stage shows or any other
amusement of any kind whatsoever.
   WHOLESALER. A person who sells alcoholic beverages to persons to whom sale
is permitted under M.S. § 340A.310, as it may be amended from time to time,
from a stock maintained in a warehouse in the state.
   WINE. The product made from the normal alcoholic fermentation of grapes,
including still wine, sparkling and carbonated wine, wine made from condensed
grape must, wine made from other agricultural products than sound, ripe grapes,
imitation wine, compounds sold as wine, vermouth, cider, perry and sake, in
each instance containing not less than 0.5%, nor more than 24%, alcohol by
volume for non-industrial use. WINE does not include distilled spirits.
(Prior Code, § 1200.01)
§ 110.02 MINORS.
   The provisions of M.S. § 340A.503, as it may be amended from time to time,
are adopted by reference. No person under the age of 18 years may be employed
in any room constituting the place in which intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt
liquor is sold at retail on-sale; except that, persons under the age of 17 may
be employed as musicians or to perform the duties of a bus person, host or
dishwashing services in places defined as a restaurant, hotel or other multi-
purpose building serving food in rooms in which intoxicating liquor or 3.2%
malt liquor is sold at retail on-sale. No person under the age of 21 years may
enter a licensed establishment, except to work, consume meals on premises that
qualify as a restaurant or attend social functions that are held in a portion
of the premises where liquor is not sold.
(Prior Code, § 1200.39) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.03 SALES AND CONSUMPTION RESTRICTIONS.
   The hours of operation and days of sale shall be as follows.
   (A)   3.2% malt liquor. No sale of 3.2% malt liquor may be made between 1:00
a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the days of Monday through Saturday, nor between 1:00
a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Sunday.
   (B)   Intoxicating liquor; on-sale. No sale of intoxicating liquor for
consumption on the licensed premises may be made:
      (1)   Between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the days of Monday through
Saturday; and
      (2)   After 2:00 a.m. on Sunday, except as provided in division (C)
below.
   (C)   Intoxicating liquor; Sunday sales; on-sale. A restaurant, club,
bowling center or hotel that holds a Sunday sale license may sell intoxicating
liquor for consumption on the premises in conjunction with the sale of food
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sundays and 2:00 a.m. on Mondays.
   (D)   Intoxicating liquor off-sale. No sale of intoxicating liquor may be
made by an off-sale licensee:
      (1)   Before 11:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. on Sundays;
      (2)   Before 8:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday;
      (3)   On Thanksgiving Day;
      (4)   On Christmas Day, December 25; or
      (5)   After 8:00 p.m. on Christmas Eve, December 24.
   (E)   Drinking, consuming, remaining after closing time.
      (1)   No person shall consume, nor shall any on-sale licensee permit, any
consumption of intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor in an on-sale licensed
premises more than 15 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.
      (2)   No on-sale licensee shall permit any glass, bottle or other
container containing intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor to remain upon any
table, bar stool or other place where customers are served, more than 15
minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.
      (3)   No person, other than the licensee and any employee of the
licensee, shall remain on the on-sale licensed premises more than 15 minutes
after the time when a sale can legally occur.
(Prior Code, § 1200.41) (Ord. 17-03, passed 6-7-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.04 CONSUMPTION AND DISPLAY PERMITS.
   (A)   General. The proprietor of any club or business establishment, that is
not a holder of an on-sale intoxicating liquor license may permit the
consumption or display of intoxicating liquors upon the premises if authorized
by M.S. § 340A.414, as it may be amended from time to time, and a consumption
and display permit is issued by the Commissioner of Public Safety. Consumption
and display permits must be approved by the City Council before they are
effective. The serving or providing of the serving of liquids for the purpose
of mixing with intoxicating liquor, is prima facie evidence that intoxicating
liquor is being permitted to be consumed or displayed contrary to the
provisions of this section.
   (B)   Additional fees. There is imposed upon holders of consumption and
display permits issued pursuant to M.S. § 340A.414, as it may be amended from
time to time, an additional fee of $300 per annum. All permits expire on March
31 of each year. The fee must be paid to the city on or before March 31 of each
year and a receipt given thereof; provided, however, upon commencement of a new
permit period under the state perm it, if a portion of the year has elapsed
when payment is made, a pro rata fee shall be paid, but no pro rata fee shall
be less than $150, or another such amount as shall be set by the City Council
from time to time. In computing the fee, an unexpired fraction of a month is
counted as one month. The receipt must be posted in some conspicuous place upon
the premises alongside the state consumption and display permit.
   (C)   Inspections. A club or business establishment allowing the consumption
or display of intoxicating liquor must be open at reasonable hours for
inspection by the Department of Public Safety and authorized city officials.
Refusal to permit the inspection is a violation of this section. Intoxicating
liquor sold, served or displayed in violation of law may be seized and may be
disposed of under M.S. § 297G.20, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (D)   Hours of consumption and display. The hours of consumption and display
of intoxicating liquor are those specified in M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be
amended from time to time. A holder of a consumption and display permit who
wishes to allow the consumption and display of intoxicating liquor between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. must obtain authorization to do so from the
Commissioner of Public Safety. A person who holds a consumption and display
permit and who also holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages at on-sale at
the same location is not required to obtain an authorization from the
Commissioner.
   (E)   One-day city permits. Pursuant to M.S. § 340A.414, subd. 9, as it may
be amended from time to time, the city may issue a one-day permit for the
consumption and display of intoxicating liquor to a non-profit organization in
conjunction with a social activity in the city sponsored by the organization.
The permit must be approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety and is valid
only for the day indicated on the permit. The fee for the permit shall be set
forth in the city’s fee schedule. The city may not issue more than ten permits
in any one year.
(Prior Code, § 1205.01) (Ord. 2014-02, passed 3-5-2014)
§ 110.05 ENTERTAINMENT IN LICENSED PREMISES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      LICENSE. Any of the licenses issued by the city pursuant to this chapter:
      LICENSED PREMISES. The compact and contiguous area of real estate for
which a license is issued.
      NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area,
buttocks or anus with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of the
female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple;
the exposure of any device, costume, perineum anal region or pubic hair region;
or the exposure of any device worn as a cover over the nipples and/or areola of
the female breast, which device simulates and gives the realistic appearance of
nipples or areola; or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even
if completely and opaquely covered.
(Prior Code, § 1220.01)
   (B)   Purpose. The City Council finds that it is in the best interests of
the public health, safety and general welfare of the people of the city that
nudity is prohibited as provided in this section on any licensed premises. This
is to protect and assist the owners, operators and employees of the
establishment, as well as patrons and the public in general, from harm stemming
from the physical immediacy and combination of alcohol, nudity and sex. The
Council especially intends to prevent any subliminal endorsement of sexual
harassment or activities likely to lead to the possibility of various criminal
conduct, including prostitution, sexual assault and disorderly conduct. The
City Council also finds that the prohibition of nudity on the premises of any
licensed premises, as set forth in this section, reflects the prevailing
community standards of the city.
(Prior Code, § 1220.03)
   (C)   Prohibited acts.
      (1)   General rule. It is unlawful for the licensee or owner to permit or
allow nudity on the licensed premises.
      (2)   Revocation and suspension. The Council may suspend or revoke a
license for violation of this section. A suspension or revocation does not take
effect until the licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing
pursuant to this chapter. This section does not preclude other civil remedies,
including injunctive relief, pending the outcome of the hearing.
(Prior Code, § 1220.05)
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 3-5-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.06 OUTDOOR ALCOHOL SERVICE AND CONSUMPTION ENDORSEMENT.
   (A)   Special endorsement. A special endorsement may be issued by the City
Council to the holder of an on-sale intoxicating liquor or an on-sale 3.2% malt
liquor license to allow sales and consumption of alcohol outdoors when the
outdoor service area is immediately adjacent to and contiguous with the
licensed premises. If the special endorsement is approved by the City Council,
the city shall file it with the state’s Department of Public Safety, Alcohol
Enforcement Division.
(Prior Code, § 1225.01)
   (B)   Application and issuance. The licensee shall make application for the
special endorsement to the city and provide site plans which illustrate and
specifically describe the proposed outdoor service area. The special
endorsement may be issued by the City Council to the licensee by resolution
after a public hearing on the special endorsement is held.
(Prior Code, § 1225.03)
   (C)   Outdoor service area requirements. The following requirements shall be
applicable to all outdoor service areas.
      (1)   Service in the outdoor service area shall be provided only at
tables, however, this shall not prohibit patrons from being able to carry
beverages from an inside area in the establishment to the outdoor service area.
      (2)   No bar shall be located in the outdoor service area, except a
service bar for the exclusive use of the establishment’s employees.
      (3)   The outdoor service area shall not reduce the number of off-street
parking spaces which would be required if the licensed premises together with
the outdoor service area were to be newly constructed in conformance with the
city’s Zoning Code.
      (4)   All new and remodeled outdoor service areas shall be handicap
accessible. All existing outdoor service areas shall comply with building codes
relating to handicap accessibility. No outdoor service area shall reduce
existing handicap accessibility.
      (5)   Access to and egress from the outdoor service area shall only be
through a door connecting the area to the licensed premises.
      (6)   The licensee shall pick up trash or litter generated by the
operation of the outdoor service area within a reasonable distance from the
area.
(Prior Code, § 1225.05)
(Ord. 2007-14, passed 11-21-2007; Ord. 2014-02, passed 3-5-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
LICENSING CONDITIONS AND PROCEDURES
§ 110.20 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Except as provided in this chapter, no person may, directly or indirectly,
on any pretense or by any device, sell, barter, keep for sale, charge for
possession or otherwise dispose of intoxicating liquor, wine or 3.2% malt
liquor without having obtained the required license or permit.
(Prior Code, § 1200.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.21 QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANT.
   A license may not be issued to the following persons:
   (A)   A person who is not of good moral character and repute;
   (B)   A person who, within five years prior to the application for the
license, has been convicted of a willful violation of any law of the United
States, or the State of Minnesota, or any local ordinance, with regard to the
manufacture, sale, distribution or possession for sale or distribution of an
alcoholic beverage within five years of the license application;
   (C)   A minor;
   (D)   A person who has in his or her possession a federal wholesale liquor
dealer’s tax stamp;
   (E)   A person who has had an intoxicating liquor license revoked within
five years of the license application or a 3.2% malt liquor license revoked
within one year of the license application;
   (F)   A person who has a direct or indirect interest in a manufacturer,
brewer or wholesaler; or
   (G)   A person who has been convicted of a felony or a willful violation of
a federal or state law or local ordinance governing the manufacture, sale,
distribution or possession for sale or distribution of an alcoholic beverage
within five years of the license application.
(Prior Code, § 1200.05)
§ 110.22 RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Premises only. Each license shall be issued only to the applicant for
the premises described in the application.
   (B)   Multiple ownership. Not more than one license shall be directly or
indirectly issued within the city to any one person.
   (C)   Delinquent financial claims. No license or permit shall be granted for
operation on any premises on which taxes, assessments, utility charges, service
charges or other financial claims of the city are delinquent or unpaid.
   (D)   Licensee must be proprietor. A 3.2% malt liquor license may not be
granted to an applicant unless that person is the actual owner or proprietor of
the premises where the 3.2% malt liquor is to be sold.
   (E)   Federal tax stamp holder. A 3.2% malt liquor license may not be
granted to a holder of a federal retail dealer’s special tax stamp for the sale
of intoxicating liquor at any place, unless the holder also has a license to
sell intoxicating liquor at that location.
   (F)   Proximity to schools and religious institutions. An intoxicating or
3.2% malt liquor license may not be granted for a building or place within 300
feet of any school building or religious institution without 60 days’ prior
notification given by the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer to the entity or
organization operating the school or religious institution.
   (G)   Revoked license. An intoxicating or 3.2% malt liquor license may not
be granted to a premises where a 3.2% malt liquor license has been revoked for
any reason until at least one year has elapsed from the date of the revocation.
(Prior Code, § 1200.07)
§ 110.23 LICENSE PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Individuals.
      (1)   New applicants. A person desiring a license from the city must file
with the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer a verified written application on a
form provided by the city and include the information required by the
Commissioner of Public Safety. Every application for a new license shall
include the following information:
         (a)   Name and age of the applicant;
         (b)   The exact street address or legal description of the premises
where the licensed business is to be conducted;
         (c)   The name or names of all persons owning or having an interest in
and the extent of the interest in the licensed business, including their ages,
occupations, residence addresses and place of business;
         (d)   A list of all leases or subleases of the premises where alcohol
is to be sold;
         (e)   A list of all alcohol businesses in which the applicant has an
interest in and the extent of the interest; and
         (f)   Any other information deemed necessary by the city.
      (2)   Applicants renewing a license. Applicants that are renewing a
license are required to provide the information listed in divisions (A)(1)(a),
(A)(1)(b), (A)(1)(c) and (A)(1)(f) above only.
   (B)   Partnerships; corporations.
      (1)   New applicants. If the applicant is a corporation or partnership,
the applicant must supply the information listed in division (A)(1) above for
the manager of the licensed premises and must also list the name and general
purpose of the corporation or partnership and the state under which it is
incorporated or organized. The following information is also required:
         (a)   The names and addresses of all partners if a partnership and the
names of all officers, directors and stockholders, and their addresses if a
corporation;
         (b)   Each individual’s interest in the license and the extent of the
interest;
         (c)   The name or names of the individual or individuals having the
controlling interest in the corporation or partnership; and
         (d)   The name of any municipality in the state in which the applicant
has held or presently holds a license for the sale of alcohol.
      (2)   Partnerships and corporations renewing a license. Partnerships and
corporations that are renewing a license are required to provide the
information listed in division (A)(2) above and are not required to provide the
information set forth in division (B)(1) above; provided that, no information
that is required in division (B)(1) above has changed since the previous
application. If any of the information has changed, the applicant shall provide
this information in its renewal application.
      (3)   Notification of change. If, at any time during the term of a
license held by a corporation or partnership, the manager of the licensed
premises is changed, the licensee must promptly notify the City Administrator/
Clerk-Treasurer and submit the information required by division (A)(1) above on
the new manager.
   (C)   Financial responsibility. Prior to the issuance of a license, the
applicant must file with the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer satisfactory
evidence of adequate financial responsibility in the amount of the insurance
coverage and subject to the conditions specified in M.S. § 340A.409, as it may
be amended from time to time. This proof must be filed with the city and the
Commissioner of Public Safety. Any liability insurance policy filed as proof of
financial responsibility under this division (C) shall conform to M.S. §
340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time. The city must be named as an
additional insured on the insurance policies. If the event is to be held on
city-owned property or right-of-way, the license holder shall sign an agreement
to hold the city harmless and indemnify and defend the city for acts of the
license holder. Operation of a business licensed under this section without
having in effect, and having evidence on file with the city of, the financial
responsibility required by this division (C) is grounds for revocation or
suspension of the license.
(Prior Code, § 1200.09) (Ord. 2014-13, passed 7-16-2014)
§ 110.24 INVESTIGATION OF LICENSE APPLICANTS.
   (A)   Preliminary background and financial investigation. A new or renewal
application for a license will be referred to the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer to conduct a preliminary background and financial investigation of
the applicant or the city may contract with the Commissioner of Public Safety
for the investigation. Every individual or person having any beneficial
interest in the license must be so investigated. The results of the preliminary
investigation must be sent to the Commissioner of Public Safety if the
application is for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license or an on-sale wine
license.
   (B)   Comprehensive background and financial investigation. If the results
of the preliminary investigation warrant, in the sound discretion of the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, a comprehensive background and financial
investigation, the city may conduct the investigation itself or contract with
the Commissioner of Public Safety for the investigation. The results of the
comprehensive investigation shall be sent to the Commissioner of Public Safety
if the application is for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license or an on-sale
wine license.
(Prior Code, § 1200.11)
§ 110.25 NOTICE OF OPERATION.
   (A)   The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer must give mailed notice of the
Council consideration of application for a new on-sale intoxicating liquor
license to property owners and residents of residential properties within 500
feet of the location of the licensed premises.
   (B)   The notice must:
      (1)   Be mailed at least ten days prior to the date of Council
consideration;
      (2)   State the date, time and place of the Council meeting;
      (3)   The address of the licensed premises; and
      (4)   The name of the applicant and the proposed name of the licensed
premises.
   (C)   Failure to give the notice does not affect the validity of the
license.
(Prior Code, § 1200.13)
§ 110.26 HEARING AND ISSUANCE.
   The City Council shall investigate all facts set out in the application and
not investigated in the preliminary or comprehensive background and financial
investigations. Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or
against the granting of the license. After the investigation and hearing, the
Council shall, in its sound discretion, grant or deny the application. No
license shall become effective until the proof of financial security has been
approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety, if required by M.S. Chapter
340A, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 1200.15)
§ 110.27 FEES; REDUCTIONS; REFUNDS.
   (A)   Fees. Every new applicant must pay to the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer the investigation and license fees set by the city’s fee schedule.
The investigation fees must be paid for each individual when more than one
individual has a beneficial interest in the license whether a partnership,
corporation or a group by whatever arrangement, to pay for the cost of
investigation of each additional individual having a beneficial interest in a
license regardless of the nature and extent of the interest. If the cost of the
investigation is less than the investigation fee that is charged, the unused
balance will be returned to the applicant.
   (B)   License fee reduction. The annual fee for an off-sale intoxicating
liquor license shall be reduced by $100, or another such amount as shall be set
by the City Council from time to time, if at the time of application and before
any renewal, the licensee:
      (1)   Agrees to have a private vendor approved by the city train all of
its employees within 60 days of hire and annually thereafter in laws pertaining
to the sale of alcohol, the rules for identification checks and the
responsibilities of establishments serving intoxicating liquors;
      (2)   Posts a policy requiring identification checks for all persons
appearing to be 30 years old or less; and
      (3)   Establishes a written cash award and incentive program to award
employees who catch underage drinkers and a written penalty program to punish
employees in the event of a failed compliance check.
   (C)   License fee refunds. A refund of a pro rata share of an annual license
fee may occur only if authorized by M.S. § 340A.408, subd. 5, as it may be
amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 1200.17)
§ 110.28 FAILURE TO DISCLOSE OR MAKE FALSE STATEMENTS.
   In the event that the applicant for a license, or a holder of an existing
license fails to make full disclosure to the Council or Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer, makes a false statement on the license application or fails to
promptly produce books, records, leases or subleases or to promptly correct any
deficiency in the operation or management of the premises as requested, then
the action may be sufficient grounds of itself for denial of the new license,
revocation or suspension of an existing license or refusal to renew an existing
license.
(Prior Code, § 1200.19)
§ 110.29 NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   The city has the authority to issue five on-sale and four off-sale
intoxicating liquor licenses.
(Prior Code, § 1200.21) (Ord. 2014-13, passed 7-16-2014)
§ 110.30 LICENSE YEAR AND RENEWAL.
   Pro rata licenses may be issued to new licensees for a partial year. A
period of less than one month that the license is in effect will be considered
and computed as one month for the payment of the pro rata fee, except as
provided in this section. Licenses expire on June 30 of each year. The Council
may, in its discretion, provide by resolution for an increase or decrease in
the financial security, if permitted by law, or the payment of an “on-sale” or
“on-sale wine” license fee in two equal installments payable on or before
December 1 and June 30 of each license year. Licenses commence on July 1 of
each year. Failure to pay license fees or installments thereof terminates the
license, and the license may be reinstated only after at least ten days’ notice
and hearing before the Council. A change of license fee or change in proof of
financial responsibility requirements is effective immediately for new
licenses, but for renewal licenses the changes are effective at the expiration
of the current license year in which the increase or decrease was approved by
the Council. At least 90 days before a license issued under this chapter is to
be renewed, an application for renewal must be filed with the city. The
decision whether or not to renew a license rests within the sound discretion of
the Council. No licensee has a right to have the license renewed.
(Prior Code, § 1200.23)
§ 110.31 TYPES OF LICENSES.
   The Council may issue the following types of licenses:
   (A)   Off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses which may be issued only to
exclusive liquor stores;
   (B)   On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued to the
following establishments as defined by this section and M.S. § 340A.101, as it
may be amended from time to time:
      (1)   Hotels;
      (2)   Restaurants;
      (3)   Bowling centers;
      (4)   Theaters;
      (5)   Clubs which may be issued only with the approval of the
Commissioner of Public Safety;
      (6)   Congressionally chartered veterans organizations; and
      (7)   Exclusive liquor stores.
   (C)   3.2% malt liquor on-sale licenses, which may be issued only to the
following establishments:
      (1)   Golf courses;
      (2)   Restaurants;
      (3)   Hotels;
      (4)   Clubs;
      (5)   Bowling centers; and
      (6)   Establishments used exclusively for the sale of 3.2% malt liquor
with the incidental sale of tobacco and soft drinks.
   (D)   3.2% malt liquor off-sale licenses;
   (E)   Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses which may be issued only
to a restaurant, club, bowling center or hotel which has table seating capacity
of at least 30 persons, which holds an on-sale intoxicating liquor license, and
which serves liquor only in conjunction with the service of food. Food service
must be provided continuously during operating hours. The food preparation area
of the establishment and the food service staff must be capable and adequate to
prepare and serve the presented menu. The menu must consist of not less than a
selection of pizza, sandwiches, hot dogs and snacks;
   (F)   Combination on-sale/off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses;
   (G)   On-sale wine licenses, with the approval of the Commissioner of Public
Safety to:
      (1)   Theaters that meet the criteria of M.S. § 340A.404(b), as it may be
amended from time to time;
      (2)   Restaurants that have facilities for seating at least 25 guests at
one time and meet the criteria of M.S. § 340.404A, subd. 5, as it may be
amended from time to time;
      (3)   Licensed bed and breakfast facilities which meet the criteria of
M.S. § 340A.4011, subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time; and
      (4)   A holder of an on-sale wine license who also holds an on-sale 3.2%
malt liquor license is authorized to sell malt liquor with a content over 3.2%
(strong beer) without an additional license.
   (H)   (1)   Culinary class limited on-sale licenses which may be issued to a
business establishment not otherwise eligible for an on-sale intoxicating
liquor license that, as part of its business, conducts culinary or cooking
classes for which payment is made by each participant or advance reservation
required.
      (2)   The license authorizes the licensee to furnish to each participant
in each class, at no additional cost to the participant, up to a maximum of six
ounces of wine or 12 ounces of intoxicating malt liquor, during and as part of
the class, for consumption on the licensed premises only;
   (I)   Brew pub on-sale intoxicating liquor or on-sale 3.2% malt liquor
licenses may be issued by the city to a brewer who operates a restaurant in its
place of manufacture and who meets the criteria established in M.S. § 340A.24,
as it may be amended from time to time. Sales under this license at on-sale may
not exceed 3,500 barrels per year. If a brew pub licensed under this division
(I) possesses a license for off-sale under division (J) below, the brew pub’s
total combined retail sales at on-sale or off-sale may not exceed 3,500 barrels
per year; provided that, off-sales may not total more than 750 barrels; and
   (J)   Brewer off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, with the approval of the
Commissioner of Public Safety, may be issued to a brew pub that holds a brew
pub on-sale intoxicating liquor license or a brew pub that holds a 3.2% malt
liquor license for the off-sale of malt liquor produced and packaged on the
licensed premises.
      (1)   Off-sale malt liquor shall be limited to the hours and days of the
set sale forth for on-sale intoxicating liquor establishments set forth in §
110.03 of this chapter. The malt liquor sold off-sale must be removed from the
premises before the required closing time for exclusive liquor stores as set
forth in §
110.03 of this chapter.
      (2)   All malt liquor sold off-sale must comply with the packaging
requirements set forth in M.S. § 340A.285, as it may be amended from time to
time. A pub’s total retail sales at or on- or off-sale may not exceed 3,500
barrels per year; provided that off-sales may not total more than 750 barrels.
(Prior Code, § 1200.25)
§ 110.32 TEMPORARY LICENSES.
   (A)   Types of temporary licenses. The following temporary licenses may be
issued in the city:
      (1)   Temporary 3.2% malt liquor licenses which may be issued only to a
club, charitable, religious or non-profit organization;
      (2)   Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses with the approval of
the Commissioner of Public Safety, which may be issued only in connection with
a social event sponsored by a club, charitable, religious or other non-profit
corporation that has existed for at least three years. No license shall be for
longer than four consecutive days, and no more than 12 days’ worth of temporary
licenses to any one organization in one calendar year will be issued;
      (3)   Temporary off-sale wine licenses, with the approval of the
Commissioner of Public Safety, may be issued for the off-sale of wine at an
auction. A license issued under this division (A)(3) authorizes the sale of
only vintage wines of a brand and vintage that is not commonly being offered
for sale by a wholesaler in Minnesota. The license may authorize the off-sale
of wine for not more than three consecutive days provided not more than 600
cases of wine are sold at any auction; and
      (4)   Temporary license for the on-sale of intoxicating liquor to a
brewer who manufactures fewer than 3,500 barrels of liquor in a year or a
microdistillery in connection with a social event within the city sponsored by
the brewer or microdistillery. The terms and conditions for temporary licenses
issued under this section shall apply to a license issued under this division
(A)(4), except that the requirements of M.S. § 340A.409, subd. 1 through 3a, as
they may be amended from time to time, shall apply to the license.
   (B)   Insurance required. A certificate of insurance is required for
temporary liquor licenses. The insurance policy must have at least $1,000,000
in liquor liability coverage. If the license is being issued for an event that
is to be held on city property or city right-of-way, the city must be named as
an additional insured and the license holder must sign an agreement that holds
the city harmless and indemnifies and defends the city for acts of the license
holder.
(Prior Code, § 1200.27)
§ 110.33 COMMUNITY FESTIVAL LIQUOR PERMITS.
   (A)   The holder of an on-sale intoxicating liquor license issued by the
city may sell intoxicating liquor off the licensed premises at a community
festival held within the city if the licensee obtains a community festival
liquor permit from the City Council. A general public hearing is required for
the permits to be issued under this section for all first-time applicants. A
public hearing may be required for previous applicants at the option of the
City Council. The applicant must submit an application to the City Council.
   (B)   The application must include the following information:
      (1)   A description of the event that the applicant proposes to hold,
including whether the event includes musical or other entertainment, games,
athletic contests or other activities, and an estimate of the number of persons
who will attend the event;
      (2)   A security plan that depicts the property where the liquor sales
will occur; the area where liquor will be dispensed and consumed; the location
and placement of any barriers that will be used to separate the dispensing and
consumption area from the remainder of the property; the location of all
entrances to the dispensing and consumption area; the procedures to be used to
prevent sales or consumption of alcoholic beverages by underaged persons, the
number and location of security personnel to be used; the day(s) and hours of
sale; and the location and number of parking spaces available for the event;
and other elements as may be required by the permit review or the public
hearing;
      (3)   If the applicant does not own the property where the sales will
occur, an executed lease for the property;
      (4)   Proof of liquor liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000. If
the community festival is to be held on city property or city right-of-way, the
city must be named as an additional insured and the license holder must sign an
agreement that holds the city harmless and indemnifies and defends the city for
acts of the license holder; and
      (5)   The permit fee as established by the city’s fee schedule.
   (C)   The City Council may grant the liquor permit if the Council determines
that the proposed event will not be detrimental to the health, safety and
welfare of the community and that adequate provisions for security have been
made. Compliance with the provisions of the security plan, as approved by the
City Council, shall be a condition of the permit. If the event meets the
definition of a “special event” pursuant to Chapter 96 of this code of
ordinances, a special event permit for the event is also required.
(Prior Code, § 1200.29)
§ 110.34 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   No license under this chapter may be transferred without approval of the
City Council. Any transfer of stock of a corporate license is deemed to be a
transfer of the license, and a transfer of stock without prior City Council
approval is a ground for revocation of the license. An application to transfer
a license shall be treated the same as an application for a new license, and
all of the provisions of this chapter applying to applications for a license
shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 1200.31) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.35 LICENSE REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   (A)   Violations of law. The Council shall either suspend for a period not
to exceed 60 days or revoke any liquor license upon finding that the licensee
has failed to comply with any applicable statute, regulation or provision of
this chapter relating to liquor. Except in the cases of lapse of proof of
financial responsibility, no suspension or revocation shall take effect until
the licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing.
   (B)   Minimum periods of suspension or when revocation is warranted. The
following are the minimum periods of suspension or when revocation is warranted
which shall be imposed by the City Council for violations of this chapter or
M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, or any rules
promulgated under that chapter:
      (1)   For commission of a felony related to the licensed activity, sale
of alcoholic beverages while the license is under suspension, sale of
intoxicating liquor where the only license is for 3.2% malt liquor or violation
of §
110.05 of this chapter, the license shall be revoked;
      (2)   The license shall be suspended by the City Council after a finding
that the licensee has failed to comply with any applicable statute, rule or
provision of this chapter for at least the minimum periods as follows:
         (a)   For the first violation within any three-year period, at least
one-day suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be
imposed;
         (b)   For the second violation within any three-year period, at least
three-consecutive-days’ suspension in addition to any criminal or civil
penalties which may be imposed;
         (c)   For the third violation within any three-year period, at least
seven-consecutive-days’ suspension in addition to any criminal or civil
penalties which may be imposed; and
         (d)   For a fourth violation within any three-year period, the license
shall be revoked.
   (C)   Effect on Sunday sale licenses. Upon suspension or revocation of an
on-sale liquor license, the suspension will include the automatic revocation or
suspension of Sunday sale license which is held by the suspended on-sale
license holder. Further, the City Council may, at its discretion, suspend or
revoke both the on-sale and Sunday sale licenses, upon any violation or
conviction under the Sunday sale license, or may suspend or revoke the Sunday
sale license only.
(Prior Code, § 1200.33) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.36 LICENSE POSTING.
   Licenses must be posted in a conspicuous place in the premises for which
they are issued.
(Prior Code, § 1200.35) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.37 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Licenses issued under this section are subject to the conditions of
this section. The failure of a licensee to meet any one of the conditions of
the license specified below shall result in a suspension of the license until
the condition is met. The act of any employee on the licensed premises is
deemed the act of the licensee as well and the licensee will be subject to all
penalties provided by this chapter and the law for acts of the licensee’s
employees.
   (B)   Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of the place of business
and the conditions of sobriety and order in it.
   (C)   Every licensee must allow a peace officer, health officer, city
employee or any other person designated by the City Council to conduct
compliance checks and to otherwise enter, inspect and search the premises of
the licensee during business hours and after business hours during the time
when customers remain on the premises without a warrant.
   (D)   No on-sale establishment shall display liquor to the public during
hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited.
   (E)   Compliance with financial responsibility requirements of state law and
this chapter is a continuing condition of any license.
   (F)   Failure by an off-sale intoxicating liquor licensee who has received a
fee reduction pursuant to §
110.27(B) of this chapter to abide by the provisions of that division.
(Prior Code, § 1200.37) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 111: NEWSRACKS
Section
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Restrictions on parkways and sidewalks
   
111.03   Identification
   
111.04   Insurance
   
111.05   Hold harmless agreement
   
111.06   Violations
   
111.07   Appeals
   
111.08   Abandonment
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NEWSRACK. A self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or
other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display and sale of
newspapers or other news periodicals.
   PARKWAY. The area between the sidewalks and the curb of any street and,
where there is no sidewalk, that area between the edge of the roadway and
property line adjacent thereto.
   ROADWAY. The portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel.
   SIDEWALK. Any surface ordinarily used for pedestrian travel.
   STREET. The area dedicated to public use for public street purposes and must
include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks.
(Prior Code, § 820.01)
§ 111.02 RESTRICTIONS ON PARKWAYS AND SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Location in roadways. It is unlawful to install, use or maintain any
newsrack which projects onto, into or over any part of the roadway.
   (B)   Restrictions of parkways and sidewalks. A newsrack that in whole or in
part rests upon, in or over any sidewalk, parkway or public right-of-way
property must comply with the following standards.
      (1)   The newsrack may not exceed five feet in height, 30 inches in width
or two feet in depth.
      (2)   Newsracks placed near the curb must be placed no less than two feet
from the edge of the curb. Newsracks placed adjacent to the wall of a building
must be placed parallel to the wall and not more than six inches from the wall.
      (3)   A newsrack may not be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any
city-owned property. A newsrack may be bolted to parkways; provided that, the
owner of the newsrack must repair any damage done to parkways when the newsrack
is removed.
      (4)   Newsracks may be chained or otherwise attached to one another;
however, no more than three newsracks may be joined together in this manner,
and a space of no less than 18 inches must separate each group of three
newsracks so attached.
      (5)   A newsrack, or group of attached newsracks allowed under division
(B)(4) above, may not weigh, in the aggregate, in excess of 350 pounds when
empty.
      (6)   A newsrack may not be placed, installed, used or maintained:
         (a)   Within five feet of any marked crosswalk;
         (b)   Within 12 feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk;
         (c)   Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call
box or other emergency facility;
         (d)   Within ten feet of any driveway;
         (e)   At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of
pedestrians is reduced to less than five feet unless the passageway is already
restricted by a permanent fixture and the placement of the newsrack will not
reduce the remaining passageway; and/or
         (f)   At a location where the newsrack interferes with or hinders city
removal of snow, ice and debris from the roadway or sidewalk.
      (7)   A newsrack may not be used for advertising signs or publicity
purposes other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the
newspaper or news periodical sold therein.
      (8)   A newsrack must be maintained in a clean and neat condition and in
good repair at all times.
(Prior Code, § 820.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.03 IDENTIFICATION.
   A person who places or maintains a newsrack on the streets of the city must
have the name, address and telephone number of the owner affixed thereto in a
place where the information may be easily seen and must inform the City
Engineer in writing where it has located a newsrack within ten business days
after placing the newsrack on a parkway or sidewalk.
(Prior Code, § 820.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.04 INSURANCE.
   A person placing newsracks in the city must provide proof of liability
insurance in the amounts of $100,000 for any single accident and $25,000 for
property damage in which the city must be named an additional insured, or other
such amounts as shall be set by the City Council from time to time. A
certificate of insurance must be delivered to the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer prior to the placement of the newsrack on a sidewalk or parkway.
(Prior Code, § 820.07)
§ 111.05 HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT.
   A person placing a newsrack in the city must furnish a statement to the City
Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer agreeing to defend and hold the city harmless
from any and all liability, judgments, damages or expense that may arise or
grow out of the installation, maintenance, use, presence or removal of
newsracks.
(Prior Code, § 820.09)
§ 111.06 VIOLATIONS.
   If the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer determines that a newsrack has
been installed, used or maintained in violation of the provisions of this
chapter, the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer must issue a written order to
correct the offending condition to the owner of the newsrack. The order must
specifically describe the offending condition and suggest actions necessary to
correct the condition. Failure by the owner to properly correct the offending
condition within seven days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays)
after the mailing date of the order will result in the newsrack being summarily
removed and processed as unclaimed property under §§
34.20 through
34.24 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 820.11)
§ 111.07 APPEALS.
   A person aggrieved by a finding, determination, notice or action taken under
the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the City Council. The taking of an
appeal to the City Council will stay the removal of any newsrack until the City
Council makes its determination unless, in the judgment of the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, the newsrack presents a clear and present danger
of imminent personal injury or property damage. Nothing contained in this
section is to be interpreted to limit or impair the exercise by the city of its
police power, in the event of an emergency, to remove a newsrack.
(Prior Code, § 820.13)
§ 111.08 ABANDONMENT.
   If a newsrack remains empty for a period of ten continuous days, the
newsrack is deemed abandoned and may be treated in the manner as provided in §
111.06 of this chapter for newsracks found to be in violation of the provisions
of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 820.15)
CHAPTER 112: JUNK YARDS, SALVAGE AND RECYCLING FACILITIES
Section
   
112.01   Purpose and intent
   
112.02   Definitions
   
112.03   License required
   
112.04   License application requirements
   
112.05   Site management plan
   
112.06   General operation practices
   
112.07   Site requirements
   
112.08   Inspections and monitoring
   
112.09   Licenses
   
112.10   Location
   
112.11   Compliance period
   
112.12   Declaration of nuisance; abatement; certification
 
   
112.99   Penalty
§ 112.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   Junk yards, motor vehicle salvage facilities and recycling facilities
process materials and debris contaminated by petroleum and chemical products,
generate waste tires, batteries and other materials requiring special disposal
methods and store accumulations of materials and debris with the potential of
contamination of the soil, ground water and surface waters. It is in the best
interest of the public’s health, safety and welfare to regulate their
operations for the protection of the environment, for the protection of the
public’s health and for protection against the danger of fire.
(Prior Code, § 1100.01) (Ord. 2014-07, passed 5-21-2014)
§ 112.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. The meaning prescribed by M.S. § 116.06, subd. 11, as it
may be amended from time to time.
   JUNK YARD, MOTOR VEHICLE SALVAGE FACILITY and RECYCLING FACILITY.
      (1)   Includes land or buildings where waste, discarded or salvaged
materials are brought, sold, exchanged, stored, cleaned, packed, disassembled
or handled, including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Scrap metal;
         (b)   Rags;
         (c)   Batteries;
         (d)   Paper;
         (e)   Tires and rubber products;
         (f)   Glass products;
         (g)   Lumber products;
         (h)   Junked, dismantled or wrecked motor vehicles, semi-trailers,
trailers, farm machinery, construction equipment or machinery, boats and other
recreational vehicles, appliances or similar items and parts thereof;
         (i)   Three or more inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicles or
trailers; and
         (j)   Iron, steel and other old or scrap ferrous or non-ferrous
material.
      (2)   The term RECYCLING FACILITY shall also have the meaning prescribed
in Minn. Rules part 7035.0300, subpart 88, and M.S. § 115A.03, subd. 25(c), as
it may be amended from time to time.
      (3)   The terms JUNK YARD, MOTOR VEHICLE SALVAGE FACILITY and RECYCLING
CENTER shall not include an area set aside by the city, county or an
organization authorized by the city or county which has containers for persons
to place paper, glass, plastic or metal to be recycled if the recyclables are
removed from the container at least once per month.
(Prior Code, § 1100.03) (Ord. 2014-07, passed 5-21-2014)
§ 112.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   General. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a
junk yard, motor vehicle salvage facility or a recycling facility within the
city without a valid license obtained from the city. Licenses shall not be
assignable or transferable by the licensee.
   (B)   Application. An application for such a license must be made to the
City Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer on a form supplied by the city. The
application fee must accompany the application. The City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer must present the application to the City Council for consideration
and, if approved and granted by the City Council, a license shall be issued by
the City Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer.
   (C)   Investigation. With regard to each application, the City Council shall
make or direct the investigation as it deems necessary.
(Prior Code, § 1100.05) (Ord. 2014-07, passed 5-21-2014)
§ 112.04 LICENSE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General. Each application for a junk yard, motor vehicle salvage
facility or recycling facility license must include the following information:
      (1)   The name, date of birth and street address of the applicant and the
full name of the business under which the facility will operate;
      (2)   The street address and legal description of the premises upon which
the business is to be operated;
      (3)   The purposes for which the applicant is seeking a license;
      (4)   Evidence of the applicant’s sole ownership of the property or the
name, street address and written consent of the owner(s) of the premises
allowing use of the premises for the purposes listed on the application;
      (5)   The date of issuance and status of the conditional or interim use
permit, if applicable, for the use of the premises for the purposes listed in
the application;
      (6)   A copy of a current industrial storm water permit from the state’s
Pollution Control Agency for the site, if applicable;
      (7)   A copy of the appropriate watershed approval, if applicable;
      (8)   A site management plan, as defined in this section;
      (9)   Proof of general liability insurance in an amount of not less than
$1,000,000, or another such amount as shall be set by the City Council from
time to time;
      (10)   A copy of any licenses from the Department of Public Safety for
selling used parts, scrap metal or vehicles, if applicable;
      (11)   Copies of any permits required by state law or regulation, if
applicable;
      (12)   Federal and state sales tax identification numbers; and
      (13)   Any other information required by the city.
   (B)   Waiver of liability. No license shall be issued until the applicant
agrees in writing to hold the city harmless from all damages and claims of
damages which may arise by reason of the use of the property for the purposes
listed in the application and by the reason of any negligence of the applicant
or the applicant’s agents or employees while engaged in the performance of
business for which a license is sought.
(Prior Code, § 1100.07) (Ord. 2014-07, passed 5-21-2014)
§ 112.05 SITE MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   (A)   Each person holding a junk yard, motor vehicle salvage facility or
recycling facility license issued by the city shall maintain a current site
management plan on file with the city. The plan must be updated annually to
accurately reflect the site conditions. The site must also remain in compliance
with all conditions specified in the site’s conditional or interim use permit.
If conditions in the conditional or interim use permit conflict with the site
management plan, the conditional or interim use permit conditions shall apply.
   (B)   At a minimum, the site management plan shall include the following:
      (1)   A site sketch showing the general location and dimensions of all
fire lanes, buildings, storage areas of hazardous, explosive or flammable
materials, waste piles of ten or more tires, location of all fire
extinguishers, and site entrance and exit points;
      (2)   A fluid management plan describing in detail the processing of
hazardous or flammable fluids, to include fluid drainage, storage, proof of
proper disposal and spill containment and clean up;
      (3)   A plan for the storage, processing and disposal of batteries, tires
and parts containing hazardous materials; and
      (4)   The location and depth of all wells located within 1,000 feet of
the property line of the licensed premises.
(Prior Code, § 1100.09) (Ord. 2014-07, passed 5-21-2014)
§ 112.06 GENERAL OPERATION PRACTICES.
   (A)   Any junk yard, motor vehicle salvage facility or recycling facility
within the city must operate in conformance with the following provisions. The
facility must also remain in compliance with all conditions specified in its
conditional or interim use permit.
   (B)   If conditions in the conditional or interim use permit conflict with
the requirements in this chapter, the conditional or interim use permit
conditions shall apply.
      (1)   No such facility shall be allowed to become a nuisance. No such
facility shall be operated in a manner so as to become injurious to the health,
safety or welfare of the community or any residents.
      (2)   The facility operation shall be in compliance with all conditions
of the applicable conditional or interim use permit and all state laws and
regulations.
      (3)   Vehicle crushing shall be conducted on an impermeable surface with
adequate spill control equipment. Waste fluids shall be properly managed
according to the state’s Pollution Control Agency guidelines.
      (4)   Disassembly of any item or component thereof, which allows for the
leakage of fluids must be completed within a covered structure with an
impermeable floor.
      (5)   Draining of fluids must be completed within a covered structure
with an impermeable floor, with spill-control equipment and absorbent material
immediately available to contain any spill which may occur.
      (6)   Parts cleaning operations shall be conducted in accordance with
current State Pollution Control Agency parts-cleaning methods and wastewater
management guidelines.
      (7)   Drained vehicle parts and cores must be stored in closed bins or in
a covered area to minimize exposure to precipitation. Parts which pose a risk
to the environment including, but not limited to, lead parts, mercury switches,
catalytic converters and airbags, must be removed and stored in accordance with
the current State Pollution Control Agency Guidelines and recycled through an
approved recycling facility.
      (8)   All batteries must be stored on a non-reactive, curbed and
impermeable surface without a floor drain and protected from accumulations of
rain, snow and drain water or stored within a covered, non-reactive impermeable
container.
      (9)   Waste tire storage must be kept in one location and shall not
exceed 200 tires.
      (10)   Uncrushed items and vehicles must be stored in piles not exceeding
one vehicle in height and shall be so arranged to permit emergency access.
      (11)   Flammable and hazardous materials shall be stored in compliance
with the state’s Uniform Fire Code in covered and appropriately marked
containers suitable to the contents in storage. Adequate aisle space shall be
provided for access by emergency personnel and for spill containment and
cleanup.
      (12)   Antifreeze shall be collected and recycled, or disposed of through
other State Pollution Control Agency approved methods. Antifreeze shall not be
discharged to land, water, septic systems, or the public sewer system.
      (13)   Refrigerants shall be recovered and recycled or reclaimed by
methods approved by the state’s Pollution Control Agency.
      (14)   Used oil filters shall be recycled, disposed of as hazardous waste
or, after being drained and tested by a professional testing laboratory,
disposed of as solid waste. Oil filters may remain attached to engines or
motors when sold to a second party or transported as scrap, so long as the
receiving person will accept the filter.
      (15)   Lead battery cable ends and heater cores shall be removed from
vehicles prior to crushing and shall be recycled separately, unless accepted as
a vehicle component by a second person.
      (16)   Other recyclables designated by the state’s Pollution Control
Agency must be disposed of as required by the then current State Pollution
Control Agency guidelines and state statutes and rules.
      (17)   On-site disposal of any material is prohibited, except under
proper license or permit.
      (18)   Spills of oil, lubricants or other hazardous material shall be
promptly contained, cleaned up and disposed of in accordance with current State
Pollution Control Agency guidelines.
      (19)   Used oil, including engine oil, transmission fluid, hydraulic oil
and similar petroleum products shall be recycled or disposed of through State
Pollution Control Agency approved methods.
      (20)   Except as otherwise permitted in the license, the premises shall
be designed and constructed to prevent surface drainage through any material
stored on the premises and any residual materials, to control dispersion of the
materials and residual material by wind, to contain any spills or releases that
could harm human health or the environment, to provide for the storage of
materials so as to protect the recyclability of the materials and to provide
for the storage and removal of residuals.
      (21)   A licensee shall effectively control dust, wind-blown material,
vermin population and other nuisance conditions at the facility and shall
remove all putrescible material at least once a week.
      (22)   All materials that are delivered to or stored at a licensed
facility must be removed from the facility within one year of the date of
receipt.
      (23)   A licensee must inspect the facility, by the fifteenth day of each
month, for malfunctions, deterioration or discharges that may result in either
the release of pollutants to the environment or a threat to human health. The
licensee must develop and follow a written schedule for inspecting monitoring
equipment, safety and emergency equipment, security devices and operating and
structural equipment used to prevent, detect or respond to environmental or
human health hazards. The licensee must retain at the facility a copy of the
schedule which must identify the types of problems to look for during the
inspection. The licensee must remedy any deterioration or malfunction of
equipment or structure no later than two weeks after an inspection. If the
licensee is unable to remedy the deterioration or malfunction within two weeks
due to the nature of the problem, availability of materials or other factors
that influence repair efforts, the licensee must remedy the problem as soon as
possible and must keep a current summary report of the incident and the steps
being taken to remedy the situation.
      (24)   The licensee shall prepare and maintain a contingency action plan
for the facility. The plan must address what action the owner or operator will
take if a fire, spill or release occurs at the facility and what back up system
exists if the owner or operator closes the facility for any period of time.
(Prior Code, § 1100.11) (Ord. 2014-07, passed 5-21-2014)
§ 112.07 SITE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   In general. The facility must remain in compliance with all conditions
specified in its conditional or interim use permit. If conditions in the
conditional or interim use permit conflict with the requirements in this
chapter, the conditional or interim use permit conditions shall apply.
   (B)   Fencing. Unless all activities of a facility, including all storage,
are done within an enclosed building, fencing shall be installed on the
perimeter of all junk yards, motor vehicle salvage facilities and recycling
facilities at least eight feet high and not to exceed 20 feet in height. The
enclosure shall be maintained in good condition at all times and constructed so
that no dust or other material may pass through. Any such fence shall not have
more than one opening upon any public street and each opening shall not be more
than 25 feet wide and shall be equipped with a substantial, solid and tight
gate, or door of the same height as the fence or wall, which shall be kept
securely closed at all times when the establishment is not open for business.
Before erecting the fencing, the license holder shall submit to the City
Council for approval, a written description of the material to be used for the
fence, the methods of construction of the fence and a plan showing the proposed
location of the fence. No storage of any description shall be kept, displayed
or exhibited on the outside or protrude above the fence.
   (C)   Access. Adequate access shall be provided on site to ensure fire
protection throughout the site. A minimum of a 20-foot wide access road shall
be provided to within 150 feet to all vehicle or other material storage areas.
The road shall be capable of supporting 35-ton emergency vehicles.
   (D)   Driveway. Sites shall provide a driveway with a surface equal to the
street surface to extend from the street to the required screen fence.
(Prior Code, § 1100.13) (Ord. 2014-07, passed 5-21-2014) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.08 INSPECTIONS AND MONITORING.
   (A)   Inspections. In order to ensure compliance with a license granted
pursuant to this chapter and as a condition for the issuance of a license
granted pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall allow inspections at all
reasonable times by officials and employees of the city or consultants or
agents as the city deems appropriate.
   (B)   Ground water impacts. The City Council may require that any licensee
construct and maintain, at the licensee’s sole expense, ground water monitoring
wells on the premises and conduct tests to determine the impact the facility is
having on the city’s ground water. Where appropriate, soil sampling may be
required in place of or in addition to ground water monitoring. In determining
whether to require monitoring wells, the Council shall:
      (1)   Evaluate the condition of the site, hazardous waste storage and
disposal practices and evidence of spills or vehicle fluid drainage problems;
      (2)   Consider the specific geographic, topographical and other features
of the operation as they pertain to the facilities’ potential to contaminating
the city’s ground water; and
      (3)   Consider the professional recommendation of the City Engineer, or
other qualified individual or firm as to the necessity or desirability of
constructing monitoring wells and the frequency of required tests at the
facility.
   (C)   Notification requirements.
      (1)   It is the duty of all licensees to notify the state’s Pollution
Control Agency of any spill or discharge of a substance in accordance with M.S.
§ 115.061, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   Any person holding a junk yard, motor vehicle salvage facility or
recycling facility license from the city shall also report to the city, in
writing, the type of spill or discharge, the time, date, location, cause and
method of cleanup of any hazardous material spill reported to the state’s
Pollution Control Agency.
(Prior Code, § 1100.15) (Ord. 2014-07, passed 5-21-2014)
§ 112.09 LICENSES.
   (A)   Term. Licenses shall be issued under this chapter for a period not to
exceed one year.
   (B)   Posting. Every license shall be kept conspicuously posted about the
place for which it is issued, along with the telephone numbers of the state’s
Pollution Control Agency Spill Unit and the city’s Fire Department. Licenses
shall be exhibited to any person upon request.
   (C)   License fee. The fee for a junk yard, vehicle salvage facility or
recycling facility license shall be an amount established by the City Council
as set forth in the city’s fee schedule. The fees do not include costs to be
paid by the licensee in the design, supervision and construction of any ground
water monitoring wells required as part of a license.
   (D)   Revocation.
      (1)   A license may be revoked by the City Council for violation of any
provision of this chapter or state law relating to the operation of the
business, after the licensee has been given reasonable notice and the
opportunity to be heard, upon any change in zoning or conditional or interim
use permit status of the premises whereby the facility is prohibited, or if the
licensee is in violation of any of the conditions set forth in the conditional
or interim use permit.
      (2)   There shall be no refund of any license fee, or any portion
thereof, upon revocation.
(Prior Code, § 1100.17) (Ord. 2014-07, passed 5-21-2014)
§ 112.10 LOCATION.
   All junk yards, motor vehicle salvage facilities and recycling facilities
shall meet the applicable setback requirements and other requirements contained
in the city’s Zoning Ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 1100.19) (Ord. 2014-07, passed 5-21-2014) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.11 COMPLIANCE PERIOD.
   (A)   Compliance period. Any person operating a junk yard, motor vehicle
salvage facility or recycling facility within the city on the effective date of
this chapter shall have a period of one year after the effective date of this
chapter to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   License issued during compliance period. Any person operating a junk
yard, motor vehicle salvage facility or recycling facility within the city on
the effective date of this chapter may be given an annual license by the
Council until December 31, 2014 even if not in compliance with the requirements
of this chapter to allow the person time to come into compliance with this
chapter. The city, in granting a license, may include conditions with which the
licensee must comply and which the Council considers necessary to carry out the
purpose and intent of this chapter or to protect the surrounding area, the
environment or the public’s health, safety and general welfare. The Council may
vary conditions from license to license. Any violation of such a condition of a
license is a violation of the license.
(Prior Code, § 1100.21) (Ord. 2014-07, passed 5-21-2014) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.12 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE; ABATEMENT; CERTIFICATION.
   (A)   Nuisance declaration. Any junk yard, motor vehicle salvage facility or
recycling facility that is operated contrary to the terms of this chapter, the
conditions set forth in the conditional or interim use permit or state law is a
public nuisance. When it is determined by the city that such a nuisance exists,
the city may notify the license holder and property owner(s) in writing and
order that the nuisance be terminated and abated. Such a notice shall be
personally served or served by certified mail addressed to the address for the
person as stated in the application or to the person’s last known home address.
Service by mail shall be complete upon mailing. The notice shall specify the
steps to be taken to abate the nuisance and a time in which the nuisance must
be abated. If the notice is not complied with, the City Council may, after
notice to the license holder, the owner(s) of the premises and, after an
opportunity to be heard, abate the nuisance. The city’s notice of its intent to
abate the nuisance shall be served in the same manner as allowed above for the
notice of the existence of the nuisance and shall be served at least five days
before the hearing date.
   (B)   Abatement. If the city abates such a public nuisance, each person to
whom notice of the existence of the nuisance and notice of the city’s intent to
abate was given pursuant to this section shall be jointly and severally liable
to the city for the city’s cost of abatement, including administrative and
legal expenses.
   (C)   Certification. When the city has incurred any cost for the abatement
work, the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer may prepare a bill and mail it to
those persons who are liable to the city for the costs. If the costs are not
paid within 30 days after the mailing of the bill, the City Council may then
spread the costs against the land upon which the facility is located and
certify the amounts to the County Auditor for collection along with taxes for
the following year or in annual installments, as the Council may determine.
(Prior Code, § 1100.21) (Ord. 2014-07, passed 5-21-2014)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for
any crime which is a misdemeanor under this chapter, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more
than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
   (C)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time, in
either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
   (D) The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
   (E)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if any
person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this code,
the City Council or any city official designated by it may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
(Prior Code, § 1100.21) (Ord. 2014-07, passed 5-21-2014)
CHAPTER 113: SOLICITATIONS
Section
Non-Commercial Door-to-Door Advocates,
Peddlers and the Like
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   Modified Green River Ordinance; signs
   
113.03   Registration
   
113.04   Exceptions
 
   
113.99   Penalty
NON-COMMERCIAL DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCATES,
PEDDLERS AND THE LIKE
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HAWKER. A person who sells things outdoors.
   NON-COMMERCIAL DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCATE. A person who goes door-to-door for the
primary purpose of disseminating religious, political, social or other
ideological beliefs. For purposes of this section, the term NON-COMMERCIAL
DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCATE shall include pamphleteering intended for non-commercial
purposes.
   PEDDLER. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, street-to-
street or any other type of place-to-place movement, for the purpose of
offering for sale, displaying or exposing for sale, selling or attempting to
sell and delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares, products,
merchandise or other personal property that the person is carrying or otherwise
transporting.
   PROFESSIONAL FUNDRAISER. Any person, including a corporation or other
entity, who, for compensation, performs any solicitations or other services for
a religious, political, social or other charitable organization.
   SOLICITOR. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-
business, street-to-street or any other type of place-to-place movement, for
the purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares,
products, merchandise, services or other personal property of which the person
may be carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog
or by other means, and for which delivery or performance shall occur at a later
time. The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person from the
scope of this provision if the actual purpose of the person’s activity is to
obtain orders as discussed above.
(Prior Code, § 1150.01) (Ord. 2008-14, passed 11-5-2008)
§ 113.02 MODIFIED GREEN RIVER ORDINANCE; SIGNS.
   No non-commercial door-to-door advocate, peddler, professional fundraiser or
solicitor shall go in or upon private residences or residential properties if
the property has been posted with a sign forbidding non-commercial door-to-door
advocates, peddlers, professional fundraisers or solicitors. The signs shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on the property. A sign posted on the door or
entrance to a residence or residential property shall be deemed “conspicuous”
for purposes of this section.
(Prior Code, § 1150.03) (Ord. 2008-14, passed 11-5-2008) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.03 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Any solicitor or peddler who intends to sell or solicit orders for the
sale of wares, merchandise or services at the private residences or on
residential properties shall register with the city. The registration shall
include the following information:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the solicitor, peddler or
hawker;
      (2)   The name, address and telephone number of solicitor or peddler’s
employer; and
      (3)   A description of the goods, merchandise, wares or services being
offered, including the brand name, if any.
   (B)   If any non-profit corporation intends to sell or solicit orders for
goods, wares, merchandise or services at residences or on residential
properties, it shall provide the following information in its registration:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the non-profit
corporation;
      (2)   A description of the goods, merchandise, wares or services being
offered; and
      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of a person who may be
contacted for information concerning the organization and the selling or
soliciting.
(Prior Code, § 1150.05) (Ord. 2008-14, passed 11-5-2008)
§ 113.04 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to any person who has been
invited to the residence or residential property by the resident thereof.
(Prior Code, § 1150.07) (Ord. 2008-14, passed 11-5-2008)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (A)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision
of this chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed
for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this chapter, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more
than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
      (3)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time,
in either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
      (4) The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
      (5)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if any
person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this code,
the City Council or any city official designated by it may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
   (B)   Any person who provides false information, per §§
113.01 through
113.04 of this chapter, on any registration or who fails to register shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 1150.05) (Ord. 2008-14, passed 11-5-2008)
CHAPTER 114: AMUSEMENTS AND LEISURE
Section
Lawful Gambling
   
114.01   General rule
   
114.02   City review; investigation and action
   
114.03   Eligible organizations
   
114.04   Limit of licenses
   
114.05   Hours of operation
   
114.06   Leases; filing
   
114.07   Investigation fees
LAWFUL GAMBLING
§ 114.01 GENERAL RULE.
   Pursuant to the provisions of M.S. § 340A.410, subd. 5, as it may be amended
from time to time, lawful gambling may be conducted on premises licensed for
the sale of intoxicating liquor by organizations licensed by the Gambling
Control Board (“Board”) under M.S. §§ 349.11 to 349.213, as they may be amended
from time to time, when a premises permit or bingo hall license, if required by
law, therefor has been issued by the Board. Non-profit organizations licensed
by the Board may conduct lawful gambling on the licensed premises or adjoining
rooms of on-sale liquor establishments; provided, the gambling is in compliance
with the law and the requirements of this subchapter are complied with.
(Prior Code, § 1160.01)
§ 114.02 CITY REVIEW; INVESTIGATION AND ACTION.
   (A)   City investigation. Upon receipt of an application for a premises
permit or bingo hall license or renewal thereof and payment of the
investigation fee required by §
114.07 of this chapter, the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer will refer the
application for investigation. The City Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer must as
part of the investigation, obtain from the Board data received by the Board in
the license application and premises permit application of the organization and
other information that the Board may have in its possession relating to the
eligibility and qualifications of the licensed organization to conduct or
continue to conduct lawful gambling at the premises specified in the permit
application.
   (B)   City Council action. The City Council will review the application for
a bingo hall license or premises permit or renewal thereof. If the application
is for the renewal of an existing premises or bingo hall license permit, the
Council may by resolution decline to approve the application if:
      (1)   In its judgment the conduct of lawful gambling at the premises by
the applicant will adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare; or
      (2)   The applicant has engaged in conduct constituting grounds for the
revocation or suspension of an intoxicating liquor license as specified in §
110.35 of this code of ordinances, or both division (B)(1) above and this
division (B)(2), as the case may be.
   (C)   Prior Board approval. The city will not consider an application for a
lawful gambling premises permit or bingo hall license or renewal thereof
unless:
      (1)   The application for the permit or license has been approved by the
Board; or
      (2)   The Board has indicated in writing to the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer that Board approval is granted pending only the approval of the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 1160.03)
§ 114.03 ELIGIBLE ORGANIZATIONS.
   The city will consider for approval only premises permits or bingo hall
licenses by organizations licensed by the Board. When an application is
submitted to the city, the city will presume that the applicant is eligible for
the permit or license under state law, but will make no independent
investigation of that fact.
(Prior Code, § 1160.05)
§ 114.04 LIMIT OF LICENSES.
   (A)   On-sale establishments authorized to allow gambling are limited to one
yearly license at premises licensed for on-sale liquor sales in the city.
   (B)   The City Council may by resolution authorize more than one
organization to conduct lawful gambling activities at various locations for a
limited period in connection with an annual civic celebration.
(Prior Code, § 1160.07)
§ 114.05 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   Lawful gambling may be conducted only during the permitted hours of
operation of the licensed on- sale establishment.
(Prior Code, § 1160.09)
§ 114.06 LEASES; FILING.
   (A)   A copy of the lease agreement between a non-profit organization and an
on-sale licensee must be filed with the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer
within one week after execution of the lease. The lease must provide that the
lessee may operate only after issuance of a license and premises permit from
the Board and be subject to the terms of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1160.11)
   (B)   Organizations conducting lawful gambling in the city must file with
the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer copies of records and reports filed with
the Board pursuant to M.S. Chapter 349, as it may be amended from time to time,
and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
(Prior Code, § 1160.15)
§ 114.07 INVESTIGATION FEES.
   An organization applying for or renewing a premises permit or bingo hall
license to conduct lawful gambling in the city must pay the investigation fee
set by §
36.02 of this code of ordinances. If the fee is not paid, the Council will not
approve the permit or license under §
114.02 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1160.17)
CHAPTER 115: ADULT BUSINESSES
Section
   
115.01   Purpose
   
115.02   Findings
   
115.03   Definitions
   
115.04   Exceptions
   
115.05   License required
   
115.06   Person ineligible
   
115.07   Places ineligible; location
   
115.08   License application
   
115.09   Fees
   
115.10   Granting licenses
   
115.11   Conditions of license
   
115.12   Restrictions and regulations
   
115.13   Suspensions and revocation of license
   
115.14   Sign restrictions
 
   
115.99   Penalty
§ 115.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to prescribe licensing requirements for
sexually oriented businesses to protect the public health, safety and welfare
and to prevent criminal activity and the spread of sexually transmitted
diseases. This chapter is intended to supersede the provisions of M.S. §
617.242, as it may be amended from time to time, and render M.S. § 617.242
inapplicable as authorized by the statute.
§ 115.02 FINDINGS.
   The City Council makes the following findings regarding the effect sexually
oriented businesses have on the character of the city’s neighborhoods. In
making these findings, the City Council accepts the recommendations and
conclusions of the Report of the Attorney General’s Working Group on the
Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses, dated June 6, 1989. This chapter
shall have no force and effect until the City Council accepts these
recommendations by a majority of its members, using the model ordinance
contained in Appendix I of the User’s Guide.
   (A)   Sexually oriented businesses can contribute to an increase in criminal
activity in the area in which such businesses are located, increasing the
demands on city crime-prevention programs and law enforcement services.
   (B)   Sexually oriented businesses can be used as fronts for prostitution
and other criminal activity. The experience of other cities indicates that
proper management and operation of such businesses can minimize this risk.
   (C)   Sexually oriented businesses can increase the risk of exposure to
communicable diseases, including acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS),
for which there is currently no cure. Experiences of other cities indicate that
such businesses can facilitate the spread of communicable diseases by virtue of
the design and use of the premises, endangering not only the patrons of such
establishments but also the general public.
   (D)   Sexually oriented businesses can cause or contribute to public health
problems by the presence of live adult entertainment in conjunction with food
and/or drink on the same premises.
   (E)   A licensing and regulatory scheme as prescribed in this chapter can
facilitate the enforcement of the city’s “anti-blight” regulations, and can aid
in monitoring sexually oriented businesses for adverse secondary effects on the
community.
   (F)   The risk of criminal activity and/or public health problems can be
minimized through a licensing and regulatory scheme as prescribed in this
chapter.
§ 115.03 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and terms have the following meanings when used in this
chapter.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Shall include the following:
      (1)   A business that meets any of the following criteria, measured on a
daily, weekly, monthly or yearly basis:
         (a)   Has more than 25% of its inventory, stock-in-trade or publicly
displayed merchandise in sexually oriented materials;   
         (b)   Devotes more than 25% of its floor area (not including
storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements or any portion of the business
not open to the public) to sexually oriented materials; or
         (c)   Derives more than 25% of its gross revenues from sexually
oriented materials;
      (2)   A business that engages for any length of time in a sexually
oriented use as defined in this section or any other use that has an emphasis
on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED MATERIALS. Visual, printed or aural materials, and other
objects or devices, that:
      (1)   Contain, depict, simulate or describe specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas;
      (2)   Are marketed for use in conjunction with, or are primarily used
only with or during specified sexual activities; or
      (3)   Are designed for sexual stimulation.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE. Any of the following activities and businesses, even
if the activity exists for only a short-time:
      (1)   ADULT BODY PAINTING STUDIO. An establishment or business that
provides the service of applying paint, ink or other substance, whether
transparent or non-transparent, to the body of a patron when the person is
nude.
      (2)   ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment or business used for the barter,
rental, or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides,
records, audiotape, videotape, movies or motion picture film if it meets the
criteria established in the definition of “sexually oriented business”, as
defined in this section.
      (3)   ADULT CABARET. A business or establishment that provides dancing or
other live entertainment distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on:
         (a)   The depiction of nudity, specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas; or
         (b)   The presentation, display or depiction of matter that seeks to
evoke, arouse or excite sexual or erotic feelings or desire.
      (4)   ADULT COMPANIONSHIP ESTABLISHMENT. A business or establishment that
provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or
discussion distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (5)   ADULT CONVERSATION/RAP PARLOR. A business or establishment that
provides the services of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or
discussion distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (6)   ADULT HEALTH/SPORT CLUB. A health/sport club that is distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
      (7)   ADULT HOTEL OR MOTEL. A hotel or motel that presents material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (8)   ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR/HEALTH CLUB. A massage parlor or health club
that provides massage services distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (9)   ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A business or establishment with
a capacity of less than 50 persons that, as a prevailing practice, presents on-
premises viewing of movies, motion pictures, or other material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
      (10)   ADULT MODELING STUDIO. A business or establishment that provides
live models who, with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual
gratification, engage in specified sexual activities or display specified
anatomical areas while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn,
sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted.
      (11)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE. Any place to which the public is
permitted or invited where coin or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically or mechanically controlled or operated still or motion picture
machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are used to show images
to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or
describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (12)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A motion picture theater with a
capacity of 50 or more persons that, as a prevailing practice, presents
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons.
      (13)   ADULT NOVELTY BUSINESS. An establishment or business that has a
variety of items for sale if it meets the criteria established in division (1)
of the definition of “sexually oriented business” defined in this section.
      (14)   ADULT SAUNA. A sauna that excludes minors by reason of age, and
that provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of
bathing, relaxation or reducing, if the service provided by the sauna is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      (15)   ADULT STEAM ROOM/BATHHOUSE FACILITY. A building or portion of a
building used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the
purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation or reducing, if the building or
portion of a building restricts minors by reason of age and if the service
provided by the steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Shall include the following:
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
area, buttocks, anus or female breast below a point immediately above the top
of the areola; and
      (2)   Human male genitals in a state of sexual arousal, whether or not
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Shall include the following:
      (1)   Actual or simulated: sexual intercourse; oral copulation; anal
intercourse; oral-anal copulation; bestiality; direct physical stimulation of
unclothed genitals; flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual
relationship; the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual
relationship; anilingus; coprophagy; coprophilia; cunnilingus; fellatio;
necrophilia; pedophilia; piquerism or zooerastia;
      (2)   Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation,
arousal or tumescence;
      (3)   Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus
or masturbation;
      (4)   Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic regions,
buttocks or female breasts;
      (5)   Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, who
are clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes and engaged in the
flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other physical restraint of any
person;
      (6)   Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually oriented
contact with an animal by a human being; or
      (7)   Human excretion, urination, menstruation or vaginal or anal
irrigation.
§ 115.04 EXCEPTIONS.
   This chapter does not regulate the following:
   (A)   Material with significant literary content or social commentary;
   (B)   A business where sexually oriented materials are sold, bartered,
distributed, leased, furnished or otherwise provided for off-site use or
entertainment, if the sexually oriented material on each item is blocked from
view by an opaque cover as required under M.S. § 617.293, as it may be amended
from time to time, and each item is in an area accessible only by an employee
of the business;
   (C)   A person or organization exempted under M.S. § 617.295, as it may be
amended from time to time;
   (D)   Activity regulated under M.S. § 617.202, as it may be amended from
time to time;
   (E)   Displaying works of art showing specified anatomical areas, so long as
no sexually oriented materials are for sale, and the business does not have a
liquor license; and
   (F)   Movies rated G, PG, PG-13, NC-17 or R.
§ 115.05 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person may own or operate a sexually oriented business within the
city unless the person is currently licensed under this chapter.
   (B)   A license will not be granted for an adult establishment that is not
in full compliance with this code, the city’s Zoning Ordinance, the Building
Code, the Fire Code, the city’s health regulations and all provisions of state
and federal law.
(Prior Code, § 1165.09) (Ord. 99-04, passed - -1999) Penalty, see §
115.05
§ 115.06 PERSON INELIGIBLE.
   No license may be issued to a person who:
   (A)   Is not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien;
   (B)   Is a minor at the time the application is filed;
   (C)   Has been convicted of a crime directly related to the licensed
occupation and has not shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation
and present fitness to perform the duties of the owner, operator or manager of
a sexually oriented business under M.S. § 364.03, subd. 3, as it may be amended
from time to time, or a person not of good moral character and repute;
   (D)   Holds a liquor license under the State Livable City Code of Ordinances
Chapter 112;
   (E)   In the judgment of the licensing authority, is not the real party in
interest or beneficial owner of the business operated under the license; or
   (F)   Has had a license for a sexually oriented business or similar business
revoked anywhere within five years of the license application.
Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.07 PLACES INELIGIBLE; LOCATION.
   (A)   No license may be issued for:
      (1)   A place or a business ineligible for a license under city ordinance
or state law;
      (2)   Operation in an area where the business is not allowed pursuant to
this code;
      (3)   A place or business that is currently licensed as a tattoo
establishment, pawnshop, massage business or establishment that sells alcoholic
beverages; or
      (4)   Operation on a premises on which taxes, assessments or other
financial claims of the city or other government agency are delinquent and
unpaid, unless the non-payment is not under the control of the applicant.
   (B)   Adult establishments are permitted only in the zoning districts not
zoned for or reserved for residential purposes or activities, subject to the
following conditions.
      (1)   An adult establishment may not be located closer than 1,000 feet
from any other adult establishment in the city. Measurements are to be made in
a straight line without regard to city boundaries, intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest point from the actual business premises of the adult
establishment business to the nearest point of the actual business of any other
establishment.
      (2)   An adult establishment may not be located closer than 1,000 feet
from any residential lot line, place of worship, school, public park, open
space, licensed family day care home, licensed group day care home, public
library, licensed child care or day care center in the city. Measurements will
be made in a straight line without regard to city boundaries, intervening
structures or objects, from the nearest point of the actual business premise of
the adult establishment to the nearest property line of the premises or
building used as a dwelling or residence, place of worship, school, public
park, open space, licensed family day care home, licensed group day care home,
public library, licensed child care or day care center.
      (3)   An adult establishment may not be located closer than 1,000 feet
from a residential lot line, residential zoning district or residential planned
unit development in the city. Measurements are to be made in a straight line
without regard to city boundaries, intervening structure objects, from the
nearest point of the actual business premise of the adult establishment to the
nearest residential lot line, boundary of the residential zoning district or
residential planned unit development.
(Prior Code, § 1165.07) (Ord. 99-04, passed - -1999) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.08 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   The application for a sexually oriented business license under this
chapter must be made on a form supplied by the city and must provide the
following information:
      (1)   The business in connection with which the proposed license will
operate;
      (2)   The location of the business premises;
      (3)   The legal description of the premises to be licensed, including a
map of the area for which the license is sought, showing dimensions, locations
of buildings, street access and parking facilities;
      (4)   Whether all real estate and personal property taxes that are due
and payable for the premises to be licensed have been paid, and if not paid,
the years and amounts that are unpaid;
      (5)   Whether the applicant is the owner and operator of the business and
if not, who is;
      (6)   Whether the applicant has ever used or been known by a name other
than his or her true name, and if so, what was the name or names, and
information concerning dates and places where used;
      (7)   Whether the applicant is married or single. If married, the true
name, place and date of birth and street address of applicant’s spouse;
      (8)   Street address at which the applicant and spouse have lived during
the preceding ten years;
      (9)   Kind, name and location of every business or occupation the
applicant and spouse have been engaged in during the preceding ten years;
      (10)   Names and addresses of the applicant’s and spouse’s employers and
partners, if any, for the preceding ten years;
      (11)   Whether the applicant or spouse has ever been convicted of a
violation of a state law or local ordinance, other than a non-alcohol related
traffic offense. If so, the applicant must furnish information as to the time,
place and offense for which convictions were had;
      (12)   Whether the applicant or spouse has ever been engaged as an
employee or in operating a sexually oriented business, massage business, or
other business of a similar nature. If so, the applicant must furnish
information as to the time, place and length of time;
      (13)   Whether the applicant has ever been in military service. If so,
the applicant must, upon request, exhibit all discharges;
      (14)   If the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of all
partners and all information concerning each partner as is required of a single
applicant as above. A managing partner or partners must be designated. The
interest of each partner or partners in the business must be submitted with the
application and, if the partnership is required to file a certificate as to
trade name under the provisions of M.S. Ch. 333, as it may be amended from time
to time, a copy of the certificate must be attached to the application;
      (15)   If the applicant is a corporation or other organization, the
applicant must submit the following:
         (a)   Name, and if incorporated, the state of incorporation;
         (b)   Names and addresses of all officers;
         (c)   The name of the manager or proprietor or other agent in charge
of, or to be in charge of the premises to be licensed, giving all information
about said person as is required in the case of a single applicant; and
         (d)   A list of all persons who, single or together with their spouse,
own or control an interest in said corporation or association in excess of 5%
or who are officers of said corporation or association, together with their
addresses and all information as is required for a single applicant.
      (16)   The amount of the investment that the applicant has in the
business, land, building, premises, fixtures, furniture or stock-in-trade, and
proof of the source of the money;
      (17)   A list of responsible persons, including the names of owners,
managers and assistant managers, who may be notified or contacted by state or
city employees in case of emergency. These persons must be residents of the
state;
      (18)   Whether the applicant holds a current license for a sexually
oriented business or similar business from another governmental unit;
      (19)   Whether the applicant has ever been denied a license for a
sexually oriented business or similar business from another governmental unit;
and
      (20)   Other information that the city deems appropriate.
   (B)   No person may make a false statement or material omission in a license
application or investigation. A false statement or material omission is grounds
for denial, suspension or revocation of a license.
   (C)   Each licensee has the continuing duty to properly notify the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer of a change in the information or facts required
to be furnished on the application for a license. This duty continues
throughout the period of the license. Failure to comply with this section will
constitute cause for revocation or suspension of the license.
   (D)   The application for the renewal of an existing license must be made at
least 90 days prior to the date of the expiration of the license and must be
made on the form which the city provides.
Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.09 FEES.
   (A)   An applicant for a license must pay to the city the investigation fee
specified in the ordinance establishing fees and charges (§
36.02), adopted pursuant to § 30.11 of this code, as that ordinance may be
amended from time to time. This fee will be for the purpose of conducting a
preliminary background and financial investigation of the applicant. If the
city believes that the public interest so warrants, it may require a similar
investigation at the time of renewal of a license. If an investigation is
ordered at the time of license renewal, the applicant must pay the fee
specified above, except that the fee will be the smaller of the stated dollar
amount or the actual cost of the investigation. There will be no refund of the
investigation fee after the investigation has begun.
   (B)   The annual fees for a license are set forth in the ordinance
establishing fees and charges (§
36.02), adopted pursuant to § 30.11 of this code, as that ordinance may be
amended from time to time.
   (C)   Each license expires on December 31 of the year in which it is issued.
Fees for licenses issued during the license year will be prorated according to
the number of months remaining in the year. For this purpose an unexpired
fraction of a month will be counted as a whole month having elapsed.
   (D)   No refund of a fee will be made except as authorized by ordinance.
§ 115.10 GRANTING LICENSES.
   (A)   No license may be issued until the Police Department, or the County
Sheriff, if the city has no Police Department, has conducted an investigation
of the representations set forth in the application, the applicant’s moral
character, and the applicant’s financial status. All applicants must cooperate
with this investigation.
   (B)   No license, except for a renewed license, may be issued for a sexually
oriented business until the City Council has held a public hearing. Notice of
the hearing must be made in the same manner as that specified in Chapter 151 of
this code, for a zoning ordinance amendment affecting district boundaries. The
City Council must grant the license unless the applicant or the location does
not meet the requirements of the city code, the application was incomplete, or
the application contained false information or a material omission. If the
application is denied, the city must notify the applicant with the reason(s)
stated for denial. Notification must be sent certified, United States mail,
return receipt requested, to the address provided on the license application.
If the City Council fails to act on the application within 45 days after
receipt of a complete application, the application will be deemed approved. An
applicant wishing to appeal the action of the City Council may seek a writ of
certiorari before the State Court of Appeals.
   (C)   (1)   The City Council may issue a license before an investigation,
notice and public hearing for an applicant who:
         (a)   Had a license within the previous five years for the
establishment that is specified in the application and that is continuing to
operate under a license;
         (b)   Wishes to resume operation of the business without sufficient
time, through no fault of his or her own, to meet the normal procedural
requirements;
         (c)   Had no criminal license convictions, or license suspensions or
revocations during the prior licensed period; and
         (d)   Otherwise qualifies and meets the requirements for a license.
      (2)   In this situation, the City Council may immediately issue an
interim license to the applicant for a period of no longer than 90 days. The
applicant must then proceed through the specified requirements for an
investigation, notice and public hearing. At the public hearing the City
Council will decide whether the license should continue in effect or be
revoked. The applicant has no greater right to continuation of the license than
he or she would have had to issuance of a new license following the normal
procedure without the interim license.
   (D)   (1)   A license will be issued only to the applicant and for the
premises described in the application. No license may be transferred to another
person or place without application in the same manner as an application for a
new license. Transfer of 25% or more of the stock of a corporation or of a
controlling interest of it, whichever is less, will be deemed a transfer of the
license.
      (2)   If the licensee is a corporation that is wholly owned by another
corporation, the same provisions about the transfer of a stock or a controlling
interest will apply to that parent corporation, any second parent corporation
that wholly owns the parent corporation, and all other similarly situated
parent corporations up through the chain of ownership.
      (3)   Transfer of this amount of stock without prior City Council
approval is a ground for revocation or suspension of the license. In addition,
each day the licensee operates under the license after a transfer has taken
place without obtaining City Council approval will be a separate violation of
this chapter.
   (E)   In the case of the death of a licensee, the personal representative of
a licensee may continue operation of the business for not more than 90 days
after the licensee’s death.
§ 115.11 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   (A)   A license is subject to the conditions in this section, all other
provisions of this chapter, and of other applicable regulations, ordinances or
state laws.
   (B)   A licensee is responsible for the conduct of his or her place of
business and the conditions of order in it. The act of an employee of the
licensed premises is deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the licensee
is liable for all penalties provided by this chapter equally with the employee,
except criminal penalties.
   (C)   The license must be posted in a conspicuous place in the premises for
which it is used.
   (D)   Any designated inspection officer of the city may enter, inspect and
search the premises of a licensee during business hours. An adult establishment
may not sell or dispense beer, wine or intoxicating liquors, nor may it be
located in a building that contains a business that sells or dispenses beer,
wine or intoxicating liquors.
(Prior Code, § 1165.09) (Ord. 99-04, passed - -1999)
§ 115.12 RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS.
   A sexually oriented business is subject to the following restrictions and
regulations.
   (A)   No owner, manager or employee may allow sexually oriented materials or
entertainment to be visible or perceivable in any manner, including aurally, at
any time from outside of the business.
   (B)   No owner, manager or employee may allow a person under the age of 18
to enter the business.
   (C)   No owner, manager or employee may allow a person under the age of 18
to have access to sexually oriented materials, whether by sight, purchase,
touch or other means.
   (D)   No owner or manager may employ a person under the age of 18 on the
licensed premises.
   (E)   No owner, manager, or employee may have been convicted of a sex crime,
as identified in M.S. §§ 609.293 to 609.352, 609.746 to 609.749, 609.79 or
518B.01, as they may be amended from time to time, or related statute dealing
with sexual assault, sexual conduct, harassment, obscenity or domestic abuse
within the past five years.
   (F)   No business may exceed 10,000 square feet in gross floor area.
   (G)   No owner, manager or employee may allow a patron, employee or other
person on the premises to physically contact, in public view, a specified
anatomical area of himself or herself or of another person, except that a live
performer may touch himself or herself.
   (H)   A live performer must remain at all times a minimum distance of ten
feet from members of the audience, and must perform on a platform intended for
that purpose, that must be raised at least two feet from the level of the floor
on which the audience is located. No performer may solicit or accept money, a
tip, or other item from a member of the audience.
   (I)   No business may have booths, stalls, partitioned portions of a room or
individual rooms, except as follows:
      (1)   Restrooms are allowed as long as they are no larger than reasonably
necessary to serve the purposes of a restroom, no other activities are provided
or allowed in the rooms and there are no chairs, benches or reclining surfaces
in the rooms; and
      (2)   Storage rooms and private offices are allowed, if the storage rooms
and offices are used solely for running the business and no person other than
the owner, manager and employees is allowed in them.
   (J)   A licensee must not be open for business to the public:
      (1)   Between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the days of Monday through
Saturday; and
      (2)   Between 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Sundays.
Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.13 SUSPENSIONS AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Delinquent taxes. The City Council may suspend or revoke a license
issued under this chapter for operation on a premises on which real estate
taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the city or of the state are
due, delinquent or unpaid, unless the non-payment is not under the control of
the licensee. If an action has been commenced under M.S. Ch. 278, as it may be
amended from time to time, questioning the amount or validity of taxes, the
City Council may on application by the licensee waive strict compliance with
this provision; no waiver may be granted, however, for taxes, or a portion of
them, that remain unpaid for a period exceeding one year after becoming due,
unless the one-year period is extended through no fault of the licensee.
   (B)   Violations. 
      (1)   The City Council may either suspend for up to 60 days or revoke a
license for a violation upon a finding that the licensee or an agent or
employee of the licensee has failed to comply with an applicable statute,
regulation or ordinance relating to the subject matter of this chapter or
violated the statutes in division (B)(2) of this section. No suspension or
revocation will take effect until the licensee has been afforded an opportunity
for a hearing pursuant to M.S. §§ 14.57 through 14.69, as they may be amended
from time to time, with the exception of the suspension provided for in
division (B)(2) of this section.
      (2)   Conviction of a sex crime, as identified in M.S. §§ 609.293 to
609.352, 609.746 to 609.749, 609.79 or 518B.01, as they may be amended from
time to time, or related statute dealing with sexual assault, sexual conduct,
harassment, obscenity or domestic abuse by the licensee will result in the
immediate suspension pending a hearing on revocation of a license issued under
this chapter.
   (C)   Prompt judicial review. Prompt and final judicial review shall be
provided to any applicant or licensee when a license is denied, suspended or
revoked.
§ 115.14 SIGN RESTRICTIONS.
   The following sign regulations apply to adult entertainment use and sexually
orientated businesses in the city. These regulations are to protect children
from exposure to sexually orientated or shocking signs and materials, and to
preserve the value of property near adult use and sexually orientated
businesses. These regulations are in addition to any other provision of the
city code.
   (A)   (1)   Signs must be flat, wall or freestanding signs.
      (2)   Signs may not be located on the roof or contain any flashing
lights, moving elements or electronically or mechanically changing messages.
   (B)   The city’s sign regulations for the zoning district where the business
is located regulate the amount of allowable sign area and the number of allowed
signs for an adult use or sexually orientated business.
   (C)   Merchandise, photos or pictures of the products or entertainment on
the premises may not be displayed in window areas or in any area where these
items can be viewed from the sidewalk or public right-of-way, adjoining the
building or structure in which the adult entertainment use or sexually
orientated business is located.
   (D)   (1)   Signs may not be placed in a window.
      (2)   A one-foot square sign may be placed on the door to state hours of
operation and admittance to adults only.
(Prior Code, § 1165.11) (Ord. 99-04, passed - -1999) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   Except as otherwise provided by state law, a person violating a provision of
this chapter is subject to the penalties established in §
10.99. A fine or sentence imposed does not affect the right of the city to
suspend or revoke the license of the licensee as the City Council deems
appropriate.
CHAPTER 116: FOOD AND BEVERAGE BUSINESSES
Section
Mobile Food Units and Carts
   
116.01   Purpose
   
116.02   Definitions
   
116.03   License required
   
116.04   Exemptions
   
116.05   License conditions
   
116.06   Suspension or revocation of license
MOBILE FOOD UNITS AND CARTS
§ 116.01 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter is designed to permit the reasonable use of mobile food
units and food carts on publicly-owned property, including streets and rights-
of-way, while preventing any adverse consequences to residents, businesses and
public property.
(Prior Code, § 1170.01) (Ord. 20190619-01, passed 6-19-2019)
§ 116.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FOOD CART. A food and beverage service establishment that is a non-motorized
vehicle that is self-propelled by the operator.
   MOBILE FOOD UNIT.
      (1)   A self-contained food service operation, located in a motorized,
wheeled or towed vehicle, that is readily movable without disassembling and
that is used to store, prepare, display or serve food intended for individual
portion service; or
      (2)   A mobile food unit, as defined in M.S. § 157.15, subd. 9, as it may
be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 1170.02) (Ord. 20190619-01, passed 6-19-2019)
§ 116.03 LICENSE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Type of license. Each applicant must indicate whether it is applying
for a temporary license or an annual license for any number of days in the
calendar year. A temporary license allows mobile food unit or food cart
operations in the city for up to seven days total during a calendar year. An
annual license allows mobile food unit or food cart operations in the city for
eight days or more during any calendar year. A licensee will only be issued one
temporary license per calendar year; however, nothing shall prohibit a
temporary licensee from applying for an annual license within the same year.
   (B)   License fees. Fees for both temporary and annual licenses are set
forth in the city’s fee schedule.
   (C)   License application requirements.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to operate a mobile food unit or a
food cart on publicly-owned property in the city, including streets and rights-
of-way, without first obtaining a license from the city. An application for a
license shall be filed, along with the required fee, with the Deputy Clerk.
      (2)   The applicant must be the owner of the mobile food unit or food
cart. The application shall be made on a form supplied by the city and shall
contain information requested by the city, including the following:
         (a)   Name of the owner and operator (if different than the owner) of
the mobile food unit or food cart and permanent and temporary home and business
addresses;
         (b)   The applicant’s full legal name, date of birth and driver’s
license number;
         (c)   A description of the nature of the business, the goods to be
sold and the license plate number and description for any motorized or
unmotorized vehicle to be used in conjunction with the activity;
         (d)   If applying only for a temporary permit, the applicant must
provide the exact dates and locations for each day up to seven days of proposed
mobile food unit or food cart operations;
         (e)   A phone number and email address of the applicant, with a
designation of a preferred mailing address for notices related to the license;
         (f)   The name, address and contact information for the commissary
with which the mobile food unit or food cart is affiliated, if applicable;
         (g)   1.   A certificate of insurance by an insurance company
authorized to do business in the state, evidencing the following forms of
insurance:
               a.   Commercial general liability insurance, with a limit of not
less than $1,000,000 each occurrence. If the insurance contains an annual
aggregate limit, the annual aggregate limit shall be not less than $2,000,000;
               b.   Automobile liability insurance with a limit of not less
than $1,000,000 combined single limit. The insurance shall cover liability
arising out of any auto, including owned, hired and non-owned vehicles;
               c.   Worker’s compensation insurance (statutory limits) or
evidence of exemption from state law; and
               d.   The city shall be endorsed as an additional insured on the
commercial general liability certificate of insurance.
            2.   Coverage afforded under the policies shall not be cancelled
without at least 30 days’ advanced written notice to the city, or ten days’
written notice for non-payment of premium.
         (h)   A signed statement that the licensee shall hold harmless the
city and its officers and employees, and shall indemnify the city and its
officers and employees for any claims for damage to property or injury to
persons which may be occasioned by any activity carried on under the terms of
the license;
         (i)   A site plan that includes: number of off-street parking spaces,
description of food truck or food cart, location on the site where the food
truck/trailer or food cart will be set up;
         (j)   A copy of each related license or permit if applicable issued by
the county and the state required to operate a mobile food unit or food cart;
and
         (k)   A copy of the applicant’s state sales tax ID number.
(Prior Code, § 1170.03) (Ord. 20190619-01, passed 6-19-2019) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 116.04 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this subchapter:
   (A)   Community events approved and licensed or permitted by the City
Council; provided that, participating vendors are covered by the event license
or permit and are otherwise compliant with the state’s Department of Health
standards; and
   (B)   Children conducting a neighborhood lemonade stand or similar type with
parent’s approval.
(Prior Code, § 1170.04) (Ord. 20190619-01, passed 6-19-2019)
§ 116.05 LICENSE CONDITIONS.
   A mobile food unit or food cart may only operate if compliant with the
following.
   (A)   Locations.
      (1)   A mobile food unit or food cart may only operate in the locations
set forth in this subchapter.
      (2)   A mobile food unit or food cart may only operate in commercial and
industrial zoning districts and must be placed on either concrete or bituminous
unless otherwise approved by the city.
      (3)   A mobile food unit or food cart may only operate in a city park or
on city property with the prior written approval of the city; additional
permits may be required for the operations.
   (B)   Performance standards. A mobile food unit or food cart licensee is
subject to the following performance standards.
      (1)   Applicable license fee shall be paid.
      (2)   Only food and non-alcoholic beverages shall be sold.
      (3)   A mobile food unit or food cart shall be operated in strict
compliance with the laws, rules and regulations of the United States, the
state, the county and the city.
      (4)   Wastewater or gray water may not be drained into city storm water
drains.
      (5)   (a)   A mobile food unit or food cart shall provide and maintain at
least one clearly designated waste container for customer use per each food
cart or mobile food unit. The operator of a mobile food unit or food cart is
responsible for daily removal of trash, litter, recycling and refuse. Public
trash cans shall not be used to dispose of waste generated by the operation.
         (b)   The permittee shall provide a garbage receptacle with a tight-
fitting lid. The receptacle shall be easily accessible for customer use and
located within five feet of the unit. The permittee shall be responsible for
collecting any visible trash or other debris from mobile food unit or food cart
operations within a 100-foot circumference of the unit which patrons have not
properly disposed of.
      (6)   A mobile food unit must provide a power supply that is screened
from public view and that complies with pertinent city noise regulations.
Electrical cords and hook ups to public utilities are not permitted.
      (7)   A mobile food unit or food cart may operate between 7:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m. and must not create any unnecessary noise, disturbances or disrupt
public traffic or safety in any way. An exemption to hours may be authorized by
City Council on a per event basis.
      (8)   Mobile food units or food carts shall be allowed to set up one hour
prior to conducting food vending and shall exit from the site within one hour
of the close of conducting business. The licensee shall ensure that the site is
free of refuse and debris prior to exiting the site.
      (9)   A mobile food unit or food cart may have a maximum footprint of 300
square feet unless otherwise approved by the city.
      (10)   One “A” frame sign not exceeding 12 square feet per side is
permitted during operation, not to impede on vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
      (11)   Operators must clean around their mobile food unit or food cart at
the end of each day and the mobile food unit or food cart must be kept in good
repair and have a neat appearance.
      (12)   A mobile food unit or food cart operator must be licensed by the
state’s Department of Health and proof of the state’s Department of Health
licensing must be provided and posted on the mobile food unit or food cart.
      (13)   An out of service mobile food unit or food cart stored within the
city must comply with all applicable zoning ordinance requirements.
      (14)   A mobile food unit or food cart may not operate within 100 feet
from the public entrance to any restaurant and/or any portion of a restaurant’s
outdoor dining area during that restaurant’s hours of operation unless the
licensee obtains written permission from the restaurant owner/manager.
      (15)   Mobile food units or food carts cannot locate within 300 feet from
the perimeter of any pre-approved festival, sporting event or civic event
unless a license is issued to be a part of the festival or event.
      (16)   Mobile food units or food carts shall not be left on city property
after the daily hours of operation, except as otherwise provided by city code
pertaining to vehicle parking.
      (17)   A mobile food unit or food cart may not operate in city-owned
parking lots, except those parking lots adjacent to or inside a city park with
the approval of a special event permit.
      (18)   Freestanding food tents, not associated with a mobile food unit or
food cart, are not allowed on city-owned property unless they have obtained a
special event permit; or, unless they are operating through an organization
that has already obtained the permit.
   (C)   Non-transferable license. A mobile food unit or food cart license is
non-transferable. Proof of license shall be displayed at all times in the
mobile food unit or food cart.
   (D)   Practices prohibited. It is unlawful for any person engaged in the
business of a mobile food unit or food cart operation to do any of the
following:
      (1)   Call attention to that licensee’s business by crying out, blowing a
horn, ringing a bell, loud music or by any loud or unusual noise or by use of
any amplifying device;
      (2)   Fail to display proof of license and produce valid identification
when requested;
      (3)   Leave a mobile food unit or food cart unattended or at an
authorized location outside allowed hours of operation;
      (4)   Operate the mobile food unit or food cart in or on public sidewalks
or trails;
      (5)   Obstruct the ingress or egress from commercial buildings during the
building hours of operation;
      (6)   Claim endorsements by the city; or
      (7)   Conduct business in any manner as to create a threat to the health,
safety and welfare of a specific individual or the general public.
(Prior Code, § 1170.05) (Ord. 20190619-01, passed 6-19-2019) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 116.06 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   A license issued pursuant to this subchapter may be suspended by the city if
the licensee has violated the terms of this subchapter, or is otherwise
conducting business in a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace,
fraudulent conduct or any other conduct that is prohibited by local, state or
federal laws or regulations. Falsification of information required for a
license is also grounds for denial, suspension or revocation of a license. The
license shall be automatically revoked if the licensee does not file an appeal
pursuant to this subchapter. When taking action on any license issued under
this subchapter, the city shall provide the licensee with verbal or written
notice of the violation. The notice shall inform the licensee of its right to
be heard before the City Council. The notice shall also inform the licensee
that the license shall be automatically revoked if no appeal is filed within 21
days of the date of the notice by the city. Verbal notice shall be confirmed
within five days by a mailed written notice to the licensee. The City Council
shall not conduct a hearing on a suspension or revocation unless a request is
made by the next City Council meeting. No City Council resolution or other
notice calling for a hearing shall be required.
(Prior Code, § 1170.06) (Ord. 20190619-01, passed 6-19-2019)
CHAPTER 117: MOVING BUILDINGS
Section
   
117.01   Definitions
   
117.02   License required
   
117.03   Insurance and bond
   
117.04   Building moving permit
   
117.05   Deposit for expense
   
117.06   Building Official; duties
   
117.07   House mover’s duties
   
117.08   Conditions and requirements; fees
§ 117.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING. Any structure subject to the provisions of the state’s Building
Code and Ch. 151 of this code of ordinances. The term also includes farm
buildings and dwellings.
   REMOVAL LOCATION. A location in the city to which a building may properly be
moved and on which the building may properly be located after the moving under
the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 405.01)
§ 117.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful to move, remove, raise or hold up any building within the
limits of the city without a license or permit to do so issued by the city.
License fees are set by §
36.02 of this code of ordinances. Upon the filing of an application for a house
mover’s license, the application will be referred to the building office, who
must make an investigation of the qualifications of the applicant to carry on
the work of moving, raising and holding up buildings and report findings
thereon to the Council. Upon a report being filed with the Council and the
execution of the required bond and its acceptance by the Council, the license
may be granted or refused, in the discretion of the Council. A license may not
be granted to any person under 21 years of age.
(Prior Code, § 405.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 117.03 INSURANCE AND BOND.
   A house mover’s license may not be issued unless the applicant first files
with the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer a policy or policies of insurance
insuring the applicant against liability imposed by law in the limits of
$2,000,000 per occurrence, bodily injury and property damage combined single
limit. The policy must provide that it may not be not renewed, terminated or
cancelled by the insurer except upon notice to the city in accordance with the
notice periods set forth in M.S. § 60A.351, as it may be amended from time to
time. In case of cancellation of such insurance the license will be
automatically suspended until the insurance has been replaced. A license may
not be granted until the party applying therefor has given a bond in the sum of
$10,000 with good and sufficient sureties to be approved by the City Attorney
and the City Council, and conditioned that the party will save, indemnify and
keep harmless, the city against all liabilities, judgments, costs and expenses,
that in any way accrue against the city in consequence of the granting of the
license, including the cost of the city for the services of public utility
maintenance personnel necessitated by the moving of any building, and will
comply with the provisions of this section and with the conditions of any
permits which may be issued to them.
(Prior Code, § 405.05)
§ 117.04 BUILDING MOVING PERMIT.
   (A)   Prohibition. It is unlawful for a licensed house mover to move a
building over, along or across any highway, street or alley in the city without
first obtaining a building moving permit from the Building Department.
   (B)   Application. A person seeking issuance of a permit must file an
application with the Department on forms provided by the Department. The
application must set forth the following information:
      (1)   A description of the building proposed to be moved, giving street
number, construction materials, dimensions, number of rooms and condition of
exterior and interior, and photographs showing ground and street elevations;
      (2)   A legal description of the premises from which the building is to
be moved;
      (3)   A legal description of the premises to which it is proposed the
building be moved, if located in the city;
      (4)   The portion of the premises to be occupied by the building when
moved if located in the city;
      (5)   The highways, streets and alleys over, along or across which the
building is proposed to be moved; and
      (6)   The proposed moving date and hours; and any additional information
which the Department finds necessary to make a determination of whether a
permit should be issued.
   (C)   Filing date of application. The application for a building moving
permit must be made at least 30 days prior to the proposed moving date in order
to allow the Departmental personnel to make the inspection required.
   (D)   Certificate of non-incumbrance. The owner of the building to be moved
must file with the application sufficient evidence that the building and lot
from which it is to be removed are free of any mortgages, liens or other
encumbrances and that all taxes and any other charges against the real and
personal property are paid in full.
   (E)   Certificate of ownership or entitlement. The applicant must file with
the application a written statement or bill of sale or other sufficient
evidence that the applicant is entitled to move the building.
   (F)   Permit fee. The application must be accompanied by the permit fees
required by §
36.02 of this code of ordinances, together with a sufficient sum, as estimated
by the Building Official, to cover all other charges required under the terms
of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 405.07) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 117.05 DEPOSIT FOR EXPENSE.
   (A)   Amount.
      (1)   Upon receipt of an application for a building moving permit, the
Department will compute an estimate of the expenses that will be incurred in
removing and replacing any electric wires, street lamps or pole lines belonging
to the city or any other property of the city, the removal and replacement of
which will be required by reason of the moving of the building through the
city, together with the cost of materials necessary to be used in making the
removals or replacements.
      (2)   Prior to issuance of the permit, the Building Official will require
of the applicant a deposit of a sum of money equal to the amount of the
estimated expenses.
   (B)   Accounting. After the building has been removed, the Department must
furnish the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer with a written statement of all
expenses incurred in removing and replacing all property belonging to the city
and of all material used in the making of the removal and replacement together
with a statement of all damage caused to or inflicted upon property belonging
to the city. If any wires, poles, lamps or other property are not located in
conformity with this code, the permittee is not liable for the cost of removing
them. The Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer may authorize the Department to return
to the applicant all deposits after the deduction of a sum sufficient to pay
for all of the costs and expenses and for all damage done to property of the
city by reason of the removal of the building. Permit fees deposited with the
application will not be returned.
   (C)   Expenses above deposit. The permittee is liable for any expense,
damage or costs in excess of deposited amounts or securities. The City Attorney
must prosecute an action against the permittee in a court of competent
jurisdiction for the recovery of the damages, costs or expenses.
   (D)   Unsafe premises. The city will do the work necessary to leave the
original premises in a safe and sanitary condition if the permittee does not
comply with the requirements of this chapter. The cost thereof will be charged
against the house mover’s deposit.
(Prior Code, § 405.09)
§ 117.06 BUILDING OFFICIAL; DUTIES.
   (A)   General. The Building Official has the powers and duties enumerated in
this section in connection with building moving.
   (B)   Inspection. The Official must inspect the building, wherever located,
and the applicant’s equipment to determine whether the standards for issuance
of a permit are met. Costs incurred by the city regarding travel expense will
be reimbursed by the applicant.
   (C)   Standards. The Official must refuse to issue a permit if it is found
that:
      (1)   Any application requirement or any fee or deposit requirement has
not been complied with;
      (2)   The building is too large to move without endangering persons or
property in the city;
      (3)   The building is in such a state of deterioration or disrepair or is
otherwise so structurally unsafe that it could not be moved without endangering
persons and property in the city;
      (4)   The building is structurally unsafe or unfit for the purpose for
which moved, if the removal location is in the city;
      (5)   The applicant’s equipment is unsafe and that persons and property
would be endangered by its use;
      (6)   Zoning regulations or other portions of this code would be violated
by the building in its removal location;
      (7)   For any reason persons or property in the city would be endangered
by the moving of the building;
      (8)   The building to be moved is not worth at least 50% of the cost of a
similar new building; and
      (9)   The building in its removal location would fail to comply in any
respect with any provision of this code or that proper assurances of future
compliance have not been given.
   (D)   Permit fees and deposits. The Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer must
deposit all fees and deposits with the city in the same manner as all other
receipts to the city are deposited. If the Official refuses to issue the
permit, all deposits, bonds and insurance policies will be returned to the
applicant. Permit fees filed with the application will not be returned.
   (E)   Designate streets for removal. The Department must obtain from the
Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer a list of designated streets, railroad crossings
and bridges over which the building may be moved. The list must be approved by
the Chief of Police and reproduced on the permit. In making their
determinations, the Director and the Chief must assure maximum safety to
persons and property in the city and minimize congestion and traffic hazards on
public streets.
(Prior Code, § 405.11)
§ 117.07 HOUSE MOVER’S DUTIES.
   (A)   General. Permittees under this chapter must conform to the provisions
of this section.
   (B)   Designated streets. The permittee must move a building only over
streets designated for the use in the written permit.
   (C)   Changes. The permittee must notify the Building Official in writing of
a desired change in moving date and hours as proposed in the application.
   (D)   Damage. The permittee must notify the Building Official of any and all
damage done to property belonging to the city within 24 hours after the damage
or injury has occurred.
   (E)   Warning signals. The permittee must display red lights on every side
of the building during the nighttime and red flags during the daytime while
building is being moved or standing on a street, in such manner as to warn the
public of the obstruction, and must where necessary erect and maintain
barricades across the streets in a manner to protect the public from damage or
injury by reason of the removal of the building.
   (F)   Time limit. The permittee must remove the building from the city
streets after four days of presence thereon, unless an extension is granted by
the Department.
   (G)   Other provisions. The permittee must comply with the Building Code,
the zoning regulations and all other applicable portions of this code.
   (H)   Police protection. The permittee must pay the expense of a traffic
officer, ordered by the Sheriff, to accompany the movement of the building to
protect the public from injury at the rate specified in §
36.02 of this code of ordinances.
   (I)   Restoration of premises. The permittee must remove all rubbish and
materials completely or to a minimum five foot depth of the foundation
materials, cap sewer and water lines, which must be inspected and witnessed by
the Building Official, and fill all excavations to existing grade at the
original building site, when located in the city, so that the premises are left
in a safe and sanitary condition.
(Prior Code, § 405.13)
§ 117.08 CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS; FEES.
   (A)   Other requirements. In addition to other provisions of this chapter,
the provisions of this section apply to the moving of buildings within the
city.
   (B)   Land covenants. Where the removal location of any building is known by
the Building Official to be subject to any restrictive covenants of record, the
Official must not issue a permit under the provisions of this chapter until
satisfied that all of the terms and conditions of the covenants have been
complied with.
   (C)   Neighborhood conformity. A permit may not be issued unless the
Building Official is satisfied that the building moved will in its removal
location conform to the general character and to the type of architecture of
the neighborhood.
   (D)   Non-interference. This chapter does not affect, abrogate or annul any
easement, covenant or other agreement between parties. If this chapter imposes
a greater restriction than is imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation
or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this chapter
control.
   (E)   Additional fees. The applicant must pay, in addition to all other
required fees, an additional fee for mileage traveled by each Official of the
Building Department in making any inspection under the provisions of this
chapter or any other ordinance of the city computed from the City Hall to the
site, location or premises where an inspection is to be made, together with an
hourly fee for each Official for the time spent in connection with the
inspection. The charges are computed at the rates specified in §
36.02 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 405.15)
CHAPTER 118: RENTAL HOUSING
Section
   
118.01   Purpose
   
118.02   Definitions
   
118.03   License required to rent
   
118.04   License application requirements
   
118.05   Fees
   
118.06   Manner of licensing, renewal
   
118.07   Certification
   
118.08   Method of correction
   
118.09   Transfer of property
   
118.10   License denial, suspension or revocation
   
118.11   Appeals; Rental Appeals Board
   
118.12   Authority and enforcement
   
118.13   Tenant identification
 
   
118.99   Penalty
§ 118.01 PURPOSE.
   The city recognizes a need for an organized inspection program of
residential rental units within the city in order to establish minimum
standards for rental units to meet city and state safety, health, fire and
zoning codes within the city and to provide a more efficient system for
compelling both absentee and local landlords to correct violations and properly
maintain rental property within the city. The city recognizes that the most
efficient system to provide for rental inspections is the creation of a program
requiring the licensing of all residential rental units within the city so that
orderly inspections can be undertaken.
(Prior Code, § 440.01) (Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-2-2015)
§ 118.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   RENT. A stated return or payment for the temporary possession of a dwelling,
dwelling unit or rooming unit. The return or payment may be money, service,
property or other valuable consideration.
   RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY.
      (1)   Any building, structure, room, enclosure or mobile home including
the real property upon which it is located and which surrounds it, which is
rented or offered for rent by any person to any other person or persons for use
for residential purposes by the other person or persons.
      (2)   RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY does not mean the following located
within the city, all of which shall be specifically exempt from the inspection
and licensing requirements set forth by this chapter:
         (a)   Relative homestead, including qualifying relatives;
         (b)   Parent, step-parent, child, step-child, grandparent, grandchild,
brother, sister, uncle, aunt, nephew or niece of the owner, by blood or
marriage;
         (c)   Contract for deeds that have been executed and recorded with the
County Recorder;
         (d)   On-campus dormitories;
         (e)   Licensed in-home residential care facilities;
         (f)   Hospital units, nursing home units, assisted living units; or
         (g)   Hotels or motels with daily rental units.
(Prior Code, § 440.03) (Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-2-2015; Ord. 20200219-03, passed
2-19-2020)
§ 118.03 LICENSE REQUIRED TO RENT.
   It is unlawful for any person to hereafter occupy, allow to be occupied or
let to another person for occupancy any residential rental property within the
city for which a license application has not been properly made and filed with
the city and for which there is not an effective license.
(Prior Code, § 440.05) (Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-2-2015) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.04 LICENSE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   License applications and license renewal applications shall be made upon
forms furnished by the city for such purpose and shall specifically require the
following minimum information:
   (A)   Name, address and phone number of the property owner. In cases where
the property is subject to a contract for deed, the contract for deed vendee
shall be considered the owner for the purposes of this chapter;
   (B)   The name, phone number and address of any person authorized to make or
order repairs or services for the property, if in violation of any applicable
law or regulation if the person is different than the owner;
   (C)   The street address of the residential rental property;
   (D)   The number and types of units within the residential rental property
(dwelling units or sleeping rooms);
   (E)   The maximum number of occupants for each dwelling unit or sleeping
room;
   (F)   Off-street parking arrangements; and
   (G)   Any other information required by the city.
(Prior Code, § 440.07) (Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-2-2015)
§ 118.05 FEES.
   There shall be an annual license application fee as set forth in the city’s
fee schedule, set out in §
36.02 of this code of ordinances. If a license is suspended, a reinstatement
fee will be charged. The reinstatement fee is set forth in the city’s fee
schedule, set out in §
36.02 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 440.09) (Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-2-2015)
§ 118.06 MANNER OF LICENSING, RENEWAL.
   (A)   Applications as of the effective date of this chapter. The owner or
his or her designated agent shall make initial application for a license for a
residential rental property existing on the effective date of this chapter by
personally filing a license application with the city. A temporary license will
be issued by the city until such time as an inspection can first be made.
   (B)   License expiration.
      (1)   Each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for one
year from January 1 to December 31.
      (2)   The city will mail license renewal applications in December before
the new license year. Failure to receive a renewal application from the city
shall not excuse the owner from meeting the license requirements. Renewal
applications must be filed with the city no later than the expiration date of
the license.
   (C)   Change in occupancy. If there is a change in the type of occupancy
from the type stated in the license application, a new license application must
be filed with the city within 30 days of the date of the change. An inspection
by the city may be required.
(Prior Code, § 440.11) (Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-2-2015; Ord. 20200219-03, passed
2-19-2020)
§ 118.07 CERTIFICATION.
   (A)   Initial inspection. Upon receipt of a license application, the city
shall conduct an inspection of the residential rental property. The purpose of
the inspection is to ensure that all rental unit(s) meet code requirements
under the state’s Building Code and Fire Code and all city code requirements.
   (B)   Inspection schedule. Each residential rental property may be inspected
by the city at a rate of approximately once every three years, with a minimum
frequency of inspections of once every six years. New construction must be
initially inspected by the city prior to being issued a certificate of
occupancy and then be inspected three years from the date of the certificate of
occupancy; provided that, no modifications were made in the interim.
   (C)   Inspection report. The city’s officer or agent charged with the duty
of conducting the inspection shall issue an inspection report upon completion
of an inspection required by this chapter.
   (D)   Compliance. No residential rental property license will be issued by
the city if the residential rental property does not fully comply with State
Building and Fire Code requirements and all city code requirements.
   (E)   Exceptions to inspection schedule. Any residential rental properties
that have been inspected by the State Fire Marshal’s office, by a State
Building Code Division Inspector or a certified inspector from the Office of
Housing and Urban Development within the year prior to the license application
are exempt from the inspection requirement of this chapter if a copy of the
inspection report or compliance certificate is provided to the city at the time
of application and the property is in compliance with the inspecting agency’s
requirements.
(Prior Code, § 440.13) (Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-2-2015)
§ 118.08 METHOD OF CORRECTION.
   (A)   Whenever the city’s inspector determines that any residential rental
property fails to meet the requirements set forth in this chapter, the State
Building Code or Fire Code or any city code provision, he or she shall issue a
notice to the owner setting forth the violations and ordering the owner to
correct the violations. The notice must be provided to the owner either
personally or by U.S. certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice must
also be posted on the door of the licensed property that is found to be in
violation.
   (B)   The notice shall be in writing and include the following information:
      (1)   The property’s address;
      (2)   A description of the location and nature of the violation;
      (3)   A description of the work that needs to be performed in order to
correct the violation; and
      (4)   The date upon which the violation must be corrected.
(Prior Code, § 440.15) (Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-2-2015)
§ 118.09 TRANSFER OF PROPERTY.
   (A)   If residential rental property is transferred, the new owner (whether
as fee owner or contract for deed vendee) must immediately upon transfer
furnish to the city, his or her name, address and phone number and the name,
address and phone number of any designated agent. No license fee shall be
required of the new owner during the year in which the property is purchased;
provided that, the previous owner has paid the annual license fees, has
complied with all requirements of this chapter and has corrected any
violations.
   (B)   All contracts for deed executed on or after 1-1-1984 shall be recorded
by the vendee within four months in the office of the County Recorder in which
the land is located. A contract for deed does not include: a purchase
agreement; an earnest money contract; an exercised option or a lease, including
a lease with an option to purchase; or a mortgage as defined by M.S. § 287.01,
as it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 440.17) (Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-2-2015; Ord. 20200219-03, passed
2-19-2020)
§ 118.10 LICENSE DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   (1)   A residential rental property license may be denied, revoked or
suspended by the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer for any of the following
reasons:
         (a)   False or misleading information given or provided in connection
with the license application or renewal application;
         (b)   Failure to pay any fee herein provided for;
         (c)   Failure to allow the city inspector to inspect the residential
rental property to determine whether the property is in compliance with the
Building and Fire Codes and city code requirements;
         (d)   Any conduct on the licensed premises whether it be by the owner
or the tenant that constitutes a criminal offense, including, but not limited
to, disorderly conduct, illegal drug activity, nuisances, noisy parties/
gatherings, prostitution or unlawful use or possession of a firearm; or
         (e)   The residential rental property is not in compliance with the
State Building or Fire Code or city code requirements.
      (2)   The licensee or applicant shall be given notice of the action being
taken in writing and of his or her right to appeal the action to the Rental
Appeals Board.
   (B)   A suspended license may be reinstated by the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer if the circumstances leading to the suspension have been remedied and
a reinstatement fee has been paid. If the license was revoked, a new license
may be issued by the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer to the revoked owner
only if the circumstances leading to the revocation have been remedied, a new
license application has been made and an additional license fee has been paid.
(Prior Code, § 440.19) (Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-2-2015; Ord. 20200219-03, passed
2-19-2020)
§ 118.11 APPEALS; RENTAL APPEALS BOARD.
   (A)   The City Council will establish and appoint a five-member Rental
Appeals Board to hear appeals of residential rental property license denials,
suspensions, revocations and other grievances brought by licensees. If
possible, the membership of the Board shall consist of at least one tenant and
one landlord.
(Prior Code, § 440.21)
   (B)   (1)   Any licensee or applicant aggrieved by any action taken by the
city with regard to a residential rental property license under this chapter,
including, but not limited to, a license denial, suspension or revocation may
request a review by or may make an appeal to the Rental Appeals Board as to the
action of the city. An appeal must be made within ten days from the city’s
action and shall be in writing, addressed to the Rental Appeals Board.
      (2)   The Board shall schedule a hearing for the appeal and notify the
licensee in writing of the hearing date and time. At the hearing, the property
owner shall have the right to appear, speak, provide information and be
represented by an attorney.
      (3)   The Rental Appeals Board shall issue a written decision on the
matter within 30 days of the hearing and provide the licensee or applicant with
a copy of the decision. The licensee or applicant may appeal the Rental Appeals
Board’s decision to the City Council.
      (4)   The appeal must be filed with the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer within ten days of the date of the Board decision.
(Prior Code, § 440.23)
(Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-2-2015; Ord. 20200219-03, passed 2-19-2020)
§ 118.12 AUTHORITY AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city from taking action
under any of its building, nuisance, fire, housing, zoning or other health
safety codes to seek abatement, injunctive relief or criminal prosecution for
the violations. The city may seek injunctive relief against a property owner or
designated agent who fails to comply with the terms and conditions of this
chapter to obtain an order forbidding rental of the property or occupancy until
violations of this chapter have been remedied by the property owner or
designated agent.
(Prior Code, § 440.25)
   (B)   In the event that the property owner or the tenant refuses to allow
the city to enter the property in order to conduct an inspection authorized by
this chapter or to ensure that the property is in compliance with the
requirements of this chapter, the city may seek an administrative search
warrant in order to enter the property.
(Prior Code, § 440.27)
(Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-2-2015)
§ 118.13 TENANT IDENTIFICATION.
   When requested by the city or law enforcement, licensees must provide the
names of tenants occupying the licensed property.
(Prior Code, § 440.29) (Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-2-2015)
§ 118.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed
for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this chapter, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more
than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
      (3)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time,
in either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
      (4) The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
      (5)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if any
person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this code,
the City Council or any city official designated by it may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
   (B)   If an owner of residential rental property does not comply with the
provisions of this chapter, specifically including, but not limited to, renting
unit(s) without obtaining a license, the owner shall have committed a
misdemeanor with the applicable penalties as set by then-existing state law.
Each day that a premises is actually rented to a tenant in violation of this
chapter shall constitute a separate and additional misdemeanor offense.
(Prior Code, § 440.31) (Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-2-2015)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
      
131.   CURFEW FOR MINORS
      
132.   DRUGS, ALCOHOL AND OTHER SUBSTANCES
      
133.   WEAPONS AND HUNTING
      
134.   PREDATORY OFFENDER RESIDENCY
      
135.   NOISE CONTROL
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
General Provisions
   
130.01   Prohibited conduct
   
130.02   Criminal Code provisions adopted by reference
   
130.03   Violations
Specific Misdemeanors
   
130.15   Disorderly conduct
   
130.16   Resisting police officer
   
130.17   False statements
   
130.18   Loitering
   
130.19   False fire alarms
   
130.20   Fire hydrant obstruction
   
130.21   Liquor and beer
   
130.22   Trespass; noise
 
   
130.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.01 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   It is unlawful to engage in an act or in the behavior prohibited by this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2000.01) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 CRIMINAL CODE PROVISIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The provisions of M.S. Chapter 609, as it may be amended from time to time,
are hereby adopted by reference and are as much a part of this code as if fully
set forth herein:
   (A)   Sections 609.221, 609.222, 609.223, 609.2231 and 609.224, “Assault in
first to fifth degree”;
   (B)   Section 609.51, “Simulating legal process”;
   (C)   Section 609.52, “Theft”;
   (D)   Section 609.505, “Falsely reporting a crime”;
   (E)   Section 609.535, “Issuance of dishonored checks”;
   (F)   Section 609.545, “Misuse of credit card to secure services”;
   (G)   Section 609.576, “Negligent fires; dangerous smoking”;
   (H)   Section 609.605, “Trespass”;
   (I)   Section 609.66, “Dangerous weapons”;
   (J)   Section 609.68, “Unlawful deposit of garbage, litter or like”;
   (K)   Section 609.705, “Unlawful assembly”;
   (L)   Section 609.715, “Presence at unlawful assembly”;
   (M)   Section 609.72, “Disorderly conduct” subd. 1(1) and 1(3);
   (N)   Section 609.75, “Gambling; definitions”; and
   (O)   Section 609.755, “Acts of or relating to gambling”.
(Prior Code, § 2000.03)
§ 130.03 VIOLATIONS.
   A violation of the statutes adopted by reference in §
130.02 of this chapter is a violation of this code.
(Prior Code, § 2000.05)
SPECIFIC MISDEMEANORS
§ 130.15 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   The following acts are disorderly conduct:
   (A)   Lurking, lying in wait or concealment in any building, yard or street
within the city with intent to do mischief, to pilfer or to commit any crime or
misdemeanor therein;
   (B)   Willfully and lewdly exposing one’s person or one’s private parts, or
procuring another to so expose oneself, and any open and gross lewdness or
lascivious behavior, or any act of public indecency;
   (C)   Using profane, vulgar or indecent language in or about any public
building, store, place of public entertainment or place of business, or upon
any of the streets, alleys or sidewalks of the city so as to be audible and
offensive;
   (D)   Appearing upon any public street or other public place in an
intoxicated condition or drinking intoxicating liquor on any street or in a
vehicle upon a public street;
   (E)   Unlawfully striking or in any unlawful manner offering to or doing any
bodily harm to another person or unlawfully making an attempt to apply any
degree of force or violence to the person of another, or in a violent, rude,
angry or insolent manner touch or lay hands upon the person of another; and
   (F)   Willfully making a false report to a police officer in the performance
of his or her official duties.
(Prior Code, § 2005.01) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.16 RESISTING POLICE OFFICER.
   It is unlawful to willfully resist, delay or obstruct a public officer in
discharging or attempting to discharge a duty of the officer’s office.
(Prior Code, § 2005.03) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.17 FALSE STATEMENTS.
   It is unlawful to make a false statement in an application for a permit or
license from the city.
(Prior Code, § 2005.05) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.18 LOITERING.
   (A)   Prohibited. It is unlawful to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain
idle either alone or in consort with others in a public place in a manner as
to:
      (1)   Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any
other public place or any building generally open to public patronage, by
hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted
passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians; and/or
      (2)   Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public
sidewalk or any other public place or any building generally open to public
patronage, any act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free
and uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully conducted by
any one in or upon or facing or fronting on any public street, public sidewalk
or any other public place or building, all of which prevents the free and
uninterrupted ingress, egress and regress therein, thereon and thereto.
   (B)   Police order.
      (1)   If a person causes or commits a condition enumerated in division
(A) above, a police officer or any law enforcement officer may order that
person to stop causing or committing the conditions and to move on or disperse.
      (2)   A person who fails or refuses to obey the orders is guilty of a
violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 2005.07) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.19 FALSE FIRE ALARMS.
   It is unlawful to tamper with or in any way interfere with any element of
any fire alarm system within the city. It is unlawful to give, or cause to be
given, any alarm of fire or other emergency condition when no fire or emergency
condition exists.
(Prior Code, § 2005.09) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.20 FIRE HYDRANT OBSTRUCTION.
   It is unlawful to park a vehicle in a way as to obstruct a fire hydrant. The
stopping or parking of a vehicle within ten feet of a fire hydrant is an
obstruction of the hydrant and a violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 2005.11) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.21 LIQUOR AND BEER.
   (A) Liquor and beer in parks. It is unlawful to bring into, possess, barter,
give away or consume any intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt beverages in any
public park or any vehicle parking area immediately adjoining the park;
provided, however, that, this prohibition does not apply to any special permit
issued by the City Council under the provisions hereof relating to 3.2% malt
liquor.
(Prior Code, § 2005.13)
   (B)   Liquor and beer in public places.
      (1)   Public ways. It is unlawful to consume, barter or give intoxicating
beverages or malt beverages in or upon a public street, avenue, boulevard,
alley or other public way, whether in a vehicle or not, in the city.
      (2)   Parking areas. It is unlawful to consume, barter or give any
intoxicating beverages or 3.2% malt beverages in or upon a parking area open to
the public whether in a vehicle or not.
(Prior Code, § 2005.15) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.22 TRESPASS; NOISE.
   (A)   Remaining on premises. On premises privately owned, but open to the
use of the general public, it is unlawful to remain on the premises after
having been requested to leave by the owner of the premises, an authorized
representative of the owner or any other person or entity entitled to
possession of the premises.
   (B)   Two-year rule. On any property privately owned, but open to the use of
the general public, it is unlawful to return to the property after receipt of a
written notice of trespass from the owner, an authorized representative of the
owner, or any person or entity entitled to possession of the property, or law
enforcement official, which notice prohibits the person from returning to the
property. This prohibition is effective for two years from the date the written
notice was served.
   (C)   Notice. The written notice under division (B) above must be personally
served upon the party prohibited from entering the property. An affidavit of
service must be executed at the time of service. A prosecution may not be
maintained under division (B) above unless the property owner or other
complaining party can produce a copy of the notice of trespass and a signed
affidavit of its service.
(Prior Code, § 2005.17) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation of a provision of this chapter is a misdemeanor and may be
punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 2000.01)
   (B)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed
for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this chapter, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more
than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
      (3)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time,
in either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
      (4) The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
      (5)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if any
person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this code,
the City Council or any city official designated by it may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
CHAPTER 131: CURFEW FOR MINORS
Section
   
131.01   Standard curfew
 
   
131.99   Penalty
§ 131.01 STANDARD CURFEW.
   (A)   Purpose. The curfew for minors established by this section is
maintained for four primary reasons:
      (1)   To protect the pubic from illegal acts of minors committed during
the curfew hours;
      (2)   To protect minors from improper influences that prevail during the
curfew hours, including involvement with gangs;
      (3) To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs during the
curfew hours; and
      (4) To help parents control their minor children.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates of requires a
different meaning,
      EMERGENCY ERRAND. A task that if not completed promptly threatens the
health, safety or comfort of the minor or a member of the minor’s household.
The term shall include, but shall not be limited to, seeking urgent medical
treatment, seeking urgent assistance from law enforcement or Fire Department
personnel and seeking sheer from the elements or urgent assistance from a
utility company due to a natural or human-made calamity.
      OFFICIAL CITY TIME. The time of day as determined by reference to the
master clock use by the Police Department.
      PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT OR REFRESHMENT. Those places bat
include, but are not limited to, movie theaters, pinball arcades, shopping
malls, nightclubs catering to minors, restaurants and pool halls.
      PRIMARY CARE or PRIMARY CUSTODY. The person who is responsible for
providing food, clothing, shelter and other basic necessities to the minor. The
person providing PRIMARY CARE or CUSTODY to the mor shall not be another minor.
      SCHOOL ACTIVITY. An event which has been placed on a school calendar by
public or parochial school authorities as a school sanctioned event.
   (C)   Hours.
      (1)   No minor under the age of 16 years shall be in or upon the public
streets, alleys, pars, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places,
public buildings; nor in or upon places of amusement, entertainment o
refreshment; nor in or upon any vacant lot, between the hours10:00 p.m. and 5:
00 a.m. the following day, official city time.
      (2)   No minor of the ages of 16 or 17 years shall be in or upon the
public street, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public
places, public buildings; nor in or upon places of amusement, entertainment of
refreshment; or in or upon any vacant lot, between the hours of 12:00 p.m.
midnight and 5:00 a.m. the following day, official city time.
   (D)   Effect on control by adult responsible for minor. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to give a minor the right the stay out until the
curfew hours designated in this section if otherwise directed by a parent,
guardian or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the
minor; nor shall the section be construed to diminish or impair the control of
the adult person having the primary care or custody of the minor.
   (E)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply in the
following situations:
      (1)   To a minor accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or other
adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor;
      (2)   To a minor who is upon an emergency errand at the direction of is
of his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the primary care
and custody of the minor;
      (3)   To a minor who is in any of the places described in this section if
in connection with or as required by an employer engaged in a lawful business,
trade, profession or occupation; or to a minor traveling directly to or from
the location of the business, trade, profession or occupation and the minor’s
residence. Minors who fall within th scope of this exception shall carry
written proof of employment and proof of the hours the employer requires the
minor’s presence at work;
      (4)   To a minor who is participating in or traveling directly to or from
an event which has been officially designated as a school activity by public or
parochial school authorities; or who is participating in or traveling directly
to or from an official activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city,
civic organization, school, religious institution or similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor and with the permission of the minor’s parent,
guardian or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the
minor;
      (5)   To a minor who is passing through the city in the course of
interstate travel during the hours of curfew;
      (6)   To a minor who is attending or traveling directly or from an
activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech,
freedom of assembly or freedom of religion;
      (7)   To minors on the sidewalk abutting his or her residence or abutting
the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor does not complain to the
city’s designated law enforcement provider about the minor’s presence; or
      (8)   To a minor whois married or has been married, or is otherwise
legally emancipated.
   (F)   Duties of person legally responsible for minor. No parent, guardian or
other adult having the primary care or custody of any minor shall permit any
violation of the requirements of this section by the minor.
   (G)   Duties of other persons. No person operating of in charge of any place
of amusement, entertainment or refreshment shall permit any minor to enter or
remain in his or her place of business during the hours prohibited by this
section unless the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other
adult person having primary care or custody of the minor, or unless one of the
exceptions to this section.
   (H)   Defense. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that
the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the
city’s designated law enforcement provider that a minor was present on the
premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for
any crime which is a misdemeanor under this chapter, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more
than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
   (C)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time, in
either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
   (D) The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
   (E)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if any
person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this code,
the City Council or any city official designated by it may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
CHAPTER 132: DRUGS, ALCOHOL AND OTHER SUBSTANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
132.01   State drug control law adopted
   
132.02   Certain drug paraphernalia prohibited
Glue and Similar Chemicals
   
132.15   Inhaling, drinking and other prohibited acts
   
132.16   Possession, sale and the like
   
132.17   Sales; exceptions
   
132.18   Application of regulations
Cannabis and Cannabis-derived Products
   132.30   Purpose and intent
   132.31   Definitions
   132.32   Prohibited acts
   132.33   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 132.01 STATE DRUG CONTROL LAW ADOPTED.
   (A)   M.S. § 151.40 and M.S. Chapter 152, as they may be amended from time
to time, relating to prohibited drugs, are hereby adopted by reference and are
as much a part of this code as if fully set forth herein.
   (B)   A violation of the statutes herein adopted is a violation of this
code.
(Prior Code, § 930.01)
§ 132.02 CERTAIN DRUG PARAPHERNALIA PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful to use, possess or have under a person’s control for use any
stem, bowl, lamp, yen hock or other opium-smoking paraphernalia or accessories
used for the smoking or inhalation of opium or marijuana smoking paraphernalia
such as, but not limited to, roach clips and roach pipes.
(Prior Code, § 930.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
GLUE AND SIMILAR CHEMICALS
§ 132.15 INHALING, DRINKING AND OTHER PROHIBITED ACTS.
   It is unlawful to intentionally inhale, breathe, or drink any compound
liquor or chemical containing toluol, hexane, trichlorethylene, acetone,
toluene, ethyl acetate, fluorocarbon, methyl ethyl ketone, trichoroathane,
isopropahol, methyl isobutyl ketone, methyl cellosolve acetate, cyclohexanone,
or any other glue or adhesive substance, hereinafter referred to as “glue”, for
the purpose of inducing symptoms of intoxication, elation, dizziness,
paralysis, irrational behavior, physical or in any manner change, distort or
disturb the audio, visual, or mental processes. For the purpose of this
section, any such condition so induced must be deemed to be an intoxicated
condition; provided, however, that, the provisions of this section must not
apply to any person who inhales, breathes or drinks such material or substance
pursuant to the direction or prescription of any doctor, physician, surgeon,
dentist or podiatrist authorized to so direct or prescribe.
(Prior Code, § 925.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.16 POSSESSION, SALE AND THE LIKE.
   It is unlawful for the purpose of violating or aiding another to violate any
provision of this subchapter, to intentionally possess, buy, sell, transfer
possession or receive possession of glue.
(Prior Code, § 925.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.17 SALES; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Sales.
      (1)   Possession. Except as otherwise provided in this section, a person
17 years of age or under may not possess or buy glue.
      (2)   Transfers. Except as otherwise provided in this section, it is
unlawful to sell or transfer possession of glue to another person 17 years of
age or under.
      (3)   Exception; consent. A person may sell or transfer possession of
glue to a person 17 years of age or under for model building or other lawful
use where the juvenile has in possession and exhibits the written consent of a
parent or guardian.
      (4)    Exception; lawful sale. This division (A) does not apply where the
glue or cement is sold, delivered or given away simultaneously with and as part
of a kit used for the construction of model airplanes, model boats, model
automobiles, model trains or other similar models.
(Prior Code, § 925.05)
   (B)   Information required. A person making a sale or transfer of possession
of glue to a person 17 years of age or under who exhibits the written consent
of a parent or guardian must record the name, address, sex and age of the
person and the name and address of the consenting parent or guardian. Data
required by this section must be kept in a permanent type register available
for inspection by the Police Department for a period of at least six months.
(Prior Code, § 925.07)
   (C)   Self-service. Retail establishments may not sell glue from a self-
service display.
(Prior Code, § 925.09)
   (D)   Youth organizations. This section does not apply to the distribution
of glue or cements by youth organizations such as the YMCA for use by its
regularly organized model classes.
(Prior Code, § 925.11) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.18 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
   This subchapter does not apply to a person who inhales, breathes, drinks or
otherwise in any manner uses intoxicating liquor as defined by law. This
section does not apply to a person who inhales, breathes, drinks or otherwise
in any manner uses any narcotic, dangerous drug or other materials or substance
or combination thereof, which material or substance or combination thereof is
defined by, and the use of which is prohibited or regulated by law.
(Prior Code, § 925.13)
CANNABIS AND CANNABIS-DERIVED PRODUCTS
§ 132.30 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   This subchapter is adopted by the City Council for the purpose of
protecting public health and safety by regulating or prohibiting the use of
cannabis and cannabis-derived products in public places and places of public
accommodation within the city.
   (B)   By enacting 2023 Session Law, Chapter 63, H.F. No. 100 (“State
Legislation”), the Minnesota Legislature passed the adult-use cannabis bill.
Under that bill, the adult use, possession, and personal growing of cannabis
became legal August 1, 2023.
   (C)   State Legislation authorizes adoption of a local ordinance
establishing a petty misdemeanor offense for public use of cannabis. See State
Legislation § 19, M.S. § 152.0263, subd. 5, or successor statute, as it may be
amended from time to time.
      (1)   The city wishes to be proactive in protecting public health and
safety by enacting regulations that will mitigate threats presented to the
public by the public use of cannabis.
      (2)   The city recognizes the risks that unintended access and use of
cannabis products present to the health, welfare, and safety of youth in the
city.
(Ord. 20231018-01, passed 10-18-2023)
§ 132.31 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms
shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. The following words, terms,
and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to
them except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS FLOWER. Cannabis flower that is approved for sale by the
Office of Cannabis Management or is substantially similar to a product approved
by that office. ADULT-USE CANNABIS FLOWER does not include medical cannabis
flower, hemp plant parts, or hemp-derived consumer products.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS PRODUCT. A cannabis product that is approved for sale by
the Office of Cannabis Management or is substantially similar to a product
approved by that office. ADULT-USE CANNABIS PRODUCT includes edible cannabis
products, but does not include medical cannabinoid products or lower-potency
hemp edibles.
   CANNABIS FLOWER. The harvested flower, bud, leaves, and stems of a cannabis
plant. CANNABIS FLOWER includes adult-use cannabis flower and medical cannabis
flower. CANNABIS FLOWER does not include cannabis seed, hemp plant parts, or
hemp-derived consumer products.
   CANNABIS PRODUCT. Any of the following:
      (1)   Cannabis concentrate;
      (2)   A product infused with cannabinoids, including, but not limited to,
tetrahydrocannabinol extracted or derived from cannabis plants or cannabis
flower; or
      (3)   Any other product that contains cannabis concentrate.
   HEMP-DERIVED CONSUMER PRODUCT. A product intended for human or animal
consumption that does not contain cannabis flower or cannabis concentrate, and:
      (1)   Contains or consists of hemp plant parts; or
      (2)   Contains hemp concentrate or artificially-derived cannabinoids in
combination with other ingredients.
HEMP-DERIVED CONSUMER PRODUCTS does not include artificially-derived
cannabinoids, lower-potency hemp edibles, hemp-derived topical products, hemp-
fiber products, or hemp grain.
   LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLE. Any product that:
      (1)   Is intended to be eaten or consumed as a beverage by humans;
      (2)   Contains hemp concentrate or an artificially-derived cannabinoid,
in combination with food ingredients;
      (3)   Is not a drug;
      (4)   Consists of servings that contain no more than five milligrams of
delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol, 25 milligrams of cannabidiol, 25 milligrams of
cannabigerol, or any combination of those cannabinoids that does not exceed the
identified amounts;
      (5)   Does not contain more than a combined total of 0.5 milligrams of
all other cannabinoids per serving;
      (6)   Does not contain an artificially-derived cannabinoid other than
delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol;
      (7)   Does not contain a cannabinoid derived from cannabis plants or
cannabis flower; and
      (8)   Is a type of product approved for sale by the Office of Cannabis
Management or is substantially similar to a product approved by the Office of
Cannabis Management, including, but not limited to, products that resemble
nonalcoholic beverages, candy, and baked goods.
   PUBLIC PLACE. A public park or trail, public street or sidewalk, any
enclosed, indoor area used by the general public, including, but not limited
to, theaters, restaurants, bars, food establishments, places licensed to sell
intoxicating liquor, wine, or malt beverages, retail businesses, gyms, common
areas in buildings, public shopping areas, auditoriums, arenas, or other places
of public accommodation.
   PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION. A business, refreshment, entertainment,
recreation, or transportation facility of any kind, whose goods, services,
facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations are extended, offered,
sold, or otherwise made available to the public.
   Exceptions to public place or place of public accommodation. A PUBLIC PLACE
or PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION does not include the following:
      (1)   A private residence, including the individual’s curtilage or yard;
      (2)   A private property, not generally accessible by the public, unless
the individual is explicitly prohibited from consuming cannabis flower,
cannabis products, lower-potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer
products on the property by the owner of the property; or
      (3)   On the premises of an establishment or event licensed to permit on-
site consumption.
   SMOKING. Inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated
cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other lighted or heated product containing
cannabis flower, cannabis products, artificially-derived cannabinoids, or hemp-
derived consumer products. SMOKING includes carrying or using an activated
electronic delivery device for human consumption through inhalation of aerosol
or vapor from the product.
(Ord. 20231018-01, passed 10-18-2023)
§ 132.32 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   No person shall use cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency hemp
edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products in a public place or a place of
public accommodation unless the premises is an establishment or an event
licensed to permit onsite consumption of adult-use cannabis flower and adult-
use cannabis products. See State Legislation § 9, M.S. § 342.09, subd. 1(2), or
successor statute, as it may be amended from time to time. See also State
Legislation, M.S. § 342.09, subd. 1(7)(iii), or successor statute, as it may be
amended from time to time, and State Legislation § 19, M.S. § 152.0263, subd.
5, or successor statute, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 20231018-01, passed 10-18-2023)
§ 132.33 PENALTY.
   Criminal penalty. A violation of this subchapter shall be a petty
misdemeanor having a fine payable up to $300. Nothing in this subchapter
prohibits the city from seeking prosecution for an alleged violation.
(Ord. 20231018-01, passed 10-18-2023)
CHAPTER 133: WEAPONS AND HUNTING
Section
Firearms and Dangerous Weapons
   
133.01   Permit required; exceptions
   
133.02   Killing birds and animals
   
133.03   Target and trap shooting
   
133.04   Permits to destroy animals
   
133.05   Civil liability
   
133.06   Dangerous weapons; exemption
Bow and Arrow Hunting of Deer
   
133.20   Bow hunting season
   
133.21   Definitions
   
133.22   Land requirements
   
133.23   Permission
   
133.24   Restrictions
   
133.25   Exceptions
 
   
133.99   Penalty
FIREARMS AND DANGEROUS WEAPONS
§ 133.01 PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Permit. It is unlawful to shoot, discharge or explode any firearm,
cartridge or shell containing an explosive or air rifle within the corporate
limits of the city without first obtaining a written permit from the city.
   (B)   Exceptions. Division (A) above does not apply to:
      (1)   Persons duly authorized to act as law enforcement officers,
employees of the U.S. Bureau of Prisons, or members of military forces of the
United States or the state in the discharge of their duties;
      (2)   Persons engaged in target shooting, with inanimate objects as
targets, within a building or structure safely enclosed where the sound of the
shooting or discharge will not be a nuisance to persons occupying adjacent
property;
      (3)   Persons engaged in target or trap shooting on target or trap
shooting ranges licensed as such by the Council as provided in §
133.03 of this chapter;
      (4)   Persons acting in self-defense when the use of firearms for that
purpose would be lawful under the laws of the state; and/or
      (5)   For the destruction of diseased, injured or dangerous birds,
animals or reptiles by persons specifically authorized to do so by the city.
(Prior Code, § 945.01) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.02 KILLING BIRDS AND ANIMALS.
   It is unlawful, with or without a permit, to use a shotgun, rifle or other
firearm for hunting, shooting or otherwise capturing or killing any animal or
bird, except as authorized by §
133.01 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 945.03) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.03 TARGET AND TRAP SHOOTING.
   The Council may license the use of firearms and air rifles for target
shooting and trap shooting at any suitable place within the city upon
application of the owner or occupant of the premises to be licensed and payment
of a license fee established by §
36.02 of this code of ordinances. All licenses expire on December 31 of the
year in which granted. A license may not be granted until the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer and the Council are satisfied that target
shooting or trap shooting at the place to be licensed will not be a hazard to
persons, animals or property on or adjacent to the licensed premises. A license
may not be granted with respect to a place not a safe distance from a public
street, nor to any place where the sound of the shooting will be a nuisance to
the residents in the vicinity. In granting a license, the Council may prescribe
the hours during which shooting will be permitted and the caliber of rifles or
other firearms which may be used. A license may be terminated by the Council at
any time after reasonable notice to the licensee and hearing, if the Council
finds that any provision of the license has been violated or that use of the
target or trap shooting range has become hazardous to any person, property,
animals or is a nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 945.05)
§ 133.04 PERMITS TO DESTROY ANIMALS.
   The City Council may grant a permit to any person on application for the use
of appropriate firearms or air rifles for destruction of a diseased, dangerous
or injured animal. The permit is valid for 24 hours.
(Prior Code, § 945.07)
§ 133.05 CIVIL LIABILITY.
   This subchapter does not authorize the use of a firearm or air rifle in a
manner that will endanger any human being or property. A permit or license
granted hereunder does not relieve the person acting thereunder from civil
liability for any damage resulting from the use of the firearm or air rifle.
(Prior Code, § 945.09)
§ 133.06 DANGEROUS WEAPONS; EXEMPTION.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, the term DANGEROUS WEAPON has the
meaning given it by M.S. § 609.02, subd. 6, as it may be amended from time to
time.
   (B)   M.S. § 609.66, as it may be amended from time to time, is adopted by
reference.
   (C)   A bow and arrow, crossbow or a similar device when used as part of a
deer reduction program under §§
133.20 through
133.25 of this chapter is exempt from the provisions of this section.
   (D)   (1)   This section does not apply to property comprising the federal
correctional institution in the city.
      (2)   The owner and immediate family members of the owner of compact and
contiguous parcel of land of ten acres or more may engage in archery target
practice on that parcel using no more than two targets. The archery must be
conducted in a manner that arrows will not cross the property lines of the
parcel.
(Prior Code, § 945.11) (Ord. 02-05, passed 12-18-2002; Ord. 20181107-03, passed
11-7-2018)
BOW AND ARROW HUNTING OF DEER
§ 133.20 BOW HUNTING SEASON.
   Persons may hunt deer by means of bow and arrow in the city during regular
state bow and arrow hunting season if they hold a valid state bow and arrow
hunting license and comply with this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 946.01)
§ 133.21 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOW AND ARROW. A bow and arrow drawn, held or released either mechanically
or manually including crossbows if authorized by state law.
   HUNT or HUNTING. The chasing, pursuing, stalking, tracking, harvesting or
taking of deer while in the possession of a bow and arrow.
   HUNTER. Any individual engaged in the activity of hunting.
(Prior Code, § 946.03)
§ 133.22 LAND REQUIREMENTS.
   Hunting is only allowed in the city on private property with the permission
of the property owner or on city-owned property with the permission of the
city. No hunting shall take place on any property consisting of less than ten
contiguous, commonly-owned acres.
(Prior Code, § 946.05) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.23 PERMISSION.
   (A)   Each person desiring to hunt within the city shall first obtain
written permission from the owner or owners of the property where the hunt is
to take place granting approval and permission to hunt and discharge a bow and
arrow.
   (B)   This permission is required to be carried on the hunter’s person at
all times when hunting and shall include:
      (1)   Full name, date of birth and address of the hunter;
      (2)   The name, address and phone number of the owner(s) of property to
be hunted;
      (3)   Address and description of property to be hunted (if different than
above); and
      (4)   Any restrictions applicable to the hunter or property.
(Prior Code, § 946.07)
§ 133.24 RESTRICTIONS.
   The following restrictions shall apply to all hunting conducted within the
city.
   (A)   No bow and arrow shall be discharged on or within the right-of-way of
an improved public highway (including, but not limited to, federal, state,
county, city and township roadways).
   (B)   No bow and arrow shall be discharged within 250 feet of any dwelling
or other building intended for human habitation or storing of animals without
the property owner’s consent.
   (C)   No bow and arrow shall be discharged within 100 feet of any
residential or commercial structure.
   (D)   No bow and arrow shall be discharged within 250 feet of any property
owned by a public school, charter school or private school.
   (E)   No hunter shall attempt to take a deer that is beyond the effective
range of the particular bow and arrow being discharged by the particular
hunter.
   (F)   Each hunter shall repair or pay to repair any damage to the property
of another arising from the hunter’s conduct while hunting.
   (G)   No deer carcass or entrails shall be allowed to remain in open view to
the public; carcass or entrails on private property shall be removed and
disposed of by the hunter if so requested by the property owner.
   (H)   All hunting conducted pursuant to this subchapter must otherwise
comply with state law and the rules of appropriate state agencies.
   (I)   The city’s bow hunting season shall run concurrent with the state’s
bow hunting season.
(Prior Code, § 946.09) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.25 EXCEPTIONS.
   The following exceptions apply.
   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not prohibit the use of any
bow and arrow in the lawful defense of the person, property, family or in
enforcement of the laws of the city, state or United States of America.
   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not prohibit the use of any
bow and arrow for archery practice pursuant to §
133.06(E) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 946.11)
§ 133.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed
for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this chapter, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more
than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
      (3)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time,
in either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
      (4) The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
      (5)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if any
person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this code,
the City Council or any city official designated by it may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
   (B)   Any person found in violation of any provision of §§
133.20 through
133.25 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 946.13)
CHAPTER 134: PREDATORY OFFENDER RESIDENCY
Section
   
134.01   Findings
   
134.02   Definitions
   
134.03   Residence prohibition
   
134.04   Rental property prohibition
 
   
134.99   Penalty
§ 134.01 FINDINGS.
   (A)   Repeat sexual offenders, sexual offenders who use physical violence
and sexual offenders who prey on children are sexual predators who present an
extreme threat to the public safety. Sexual offenders are extremely likely to
use physical violence and to repeat their offenses. Most sexual offenders
commit many offenses, have many more victims than are ever reported and are
prosecuted for only a fraction of their crimes. This makes the cost of sexual
offender victimization to society at large, while incalculable, clearly
exorbitant.
   (B)   It is the intent of this chapter to serve the city’s compelling
interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of its
citizens by creating a civil, non-punitive regulatory scheme, establishing
areas around locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated
numbers, wherein certain sexual offenders and sexual predators are prohibited
from establishing temporary or permanent residence.
(Prior Code, § 965.01)
§ 134.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHILDREN. Persons age 16 and younger.
   DAY CARE CENTER. A facility licensed by the state in which care, supervision
and training for children is provided for part of a 24-hour period.
   DESIGNATED OFFENDER. Any person who has been convicted of a designated
sexual offense, regardless of whether adjudication has been withheld, in which
the victim of the offense was less than 16 years of age, or has been
categorized as a Level III sex offender under M.S. § 244.052, as it may be
amended from time to time, or successor statute.
   DESIGNATED SEXUAL OFFENSE. A conviction, adjudication of delinquency,
commitment under M.S. Chapter 253B, as it may be amended from time to time, or
admission of guilt under oath without adjudication involving any of the
following offenses: M.S. §§ 609.342, 609.343, 609.344, 609.345, 609.352,
609.365, 617.23, 617.246, 617.247 and 617.293, as they may be amended from time
to time, successor statutes or a similar offense from another state.
   PARK or PLAYGROUND. Any land, including improvements, operated by the city
for the use by the general public as a recreational area.
   PERMANENT RESIDENCE. A place where the person abides, lodges or resides for
14 or more consecutive days.
   SCHOOL. Any public, private or parochial educational institution that offers
educational instruction to individuals under the age of 18.
   TEMPORARY RESIDENCE. A place where the person abides, lodges or resides for
a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year, and
which is not the person’s permanent address or a place where the person
routinely abides, lodges or resides for a period of four or more consecutive
days or on consecutive days in any month, and which is not the person’s
permanent residence.
(Prior Code, § 965.03) (Ord. 2016-01, passed 2-17-2016)
§ 134.03 RESIDENCE PROHIBITION.
   (A)   Prohibited location of residence. It is unlawful for any designated
offender to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within 2,000
feet of any school, licensed day care center, place of worship that provides
regular educational programs, park or playground.
   (B)   Measurement of distance.
      (1)   For purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the
requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer
property line of the permanent residence or temporary residence to nearest
outer property line of a school, day care center, park, playground, place of
worship or other place where children regularly congregate.
      (2)   The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall maintain an official
map showing prohibited locations, as defined by this section. The City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall update the map at least annually to reflect
any changes in the location of prohibited zones.
   (C)   Exceptions. 
      (1)   A designated offender residing within a prohibited area as
described in division (A) above does not commit a violation of this section if
any of the following apply:
         (a)   The person established the permanent residence or temporary
residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to M.S. §§
243.166, 243.167 or successor statute, as they may be amended from time to
time, prior to 2-17-2016;
         (b)   The school, place of worship, park or day care center within
2,000 feet of the person’s permanent residence was designated or opened after
the person established the permanent residence or temporary residence and
reported and registered the residence pursuant to M.S. §§ 243.166 or 243.167,
as they may be amended from time to time;
         (c)   The residence is a property owned or operated by the state’s
Department of Corrections or the Federal Bureau of Prisons; or
         (d)   The person’s conviction for the designated offense was reversed
on appeal.
      (2)   Nothing in this provision shall require any person to sell or
otherwise dispose of any real property acquired or owned prior to the
conviction restricting residency under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 965.05) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.04 RENTAL PROPERTY PROHIBITION.
   (A)   It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure or part thereof,
trailer or other dwelling, with the knowledge that it will be used as a
permanent residence or temporary residence by any person prohibited from
establishing permanent residence or temporary residence pursuant to this
section, if the place, structure or part thereof, trailer or other dwelling, is
located within a prohibited location zone described in §
134.03(A) of this chapter.
   (B)   If a property owner discovers or is informed that a tenant is a
designated offender after signing a lease or otherwise agreeing to let the
offender reside on the property, the owner or property manager should take
measures to terminate the lease or to evict the offender.
   (C)   A property owner’s failure to comply with provisions of this section
shall constitute a violation of this chapter, and shall subject the property
owner to the enforcement provisions and procedures as provided in this chapter
and the city code.
(Prior Code, § 965.07) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for
any crime which is a misdemeanor under this chapter, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more
than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
   (C)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time, in
either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
   (D) The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
   (E)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if any
person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this code,
the City Council or any city official designated by it may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
CHAPTER 135: NOISE CONTROL
Section
   
135.01   Definitions
   
135.02   Motor vehicle noise
   
135.03   Hourly restriction on certain operations
   
135.04   Receiving land use standards
   
135.05   Air circulation devices
   
135.06   Emergency work; exception
   
135.07   Noise control officer; powers and duties
   
135.08   Variances
   
135.09   Violations; notice
 
   
135.99   Penalty
§ 135.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Any other
word or phrase used in this section and defined in regulations of the state’s
pollution control agency air quality and noise pollution control, Minn. Rules
Chapter 7030 have the meaning given in those regulations.
   AIR CIRCULATION DEVICE. A mechanism designed and used for the controlled
flow of air used in ventilation, cooling or conditioning, including, but not
limited to, central and window air conditioning units.
   L10. The sound level, expressed in decibels (dBA) which is exceeded 10% of
the time for a one- hour period, as measured by a sound level meter having
characteristics as specified in the latest standards, S 1.4, of the American
National Standards Institute and using test procedures approved by the noise
control officer.
   L50. The sound level similarly expressed and measured which is exceeded 50%
of the time for a one-hour period.
(Prior Code, § 645.01)
§ 135.02 MOTOR VEHICLE NOISE.
   (A)   Noises prohibited.
      (1)   General prohibition. It is unlawful to make or cause to be made any
noise that unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort,
repose, health, peace, safety or welfare of others or precludes their enjoyment
of property or adversely affects the value of this property. This general
prohibition is not limited by the specific restrictions of the following
divisions (A)(2) through (A)(10).
      (2)   Motor vehicles. It is unlawful to operate a motor vehicle in the
city in violation of the motor vehicle noise limits of the state’s pollution
control agency or in violation of the provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   Horns, signaling devices and the like. It is unlawful to sound any
signaling device on any vehicle, except as a warning of danger.
      (4)   Exhaust, except motor vehicles. It is unlawful to discharge or
permit the discharge of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion
engine, motor boat, motor vehicle or snowmobile, except through a muffler or
other device that effectively prevents loud or explosive noises therefrom and
complies with applicable state laws and regulations.
      (5)   Exhaust, motor vehicles. Every motor vehicle must at all times be
equipped with a muffler in good working order which blends the exhaust noise
into the overall vehicle noise and is in constant operation to prevent
excessive or unusual noise, and no person may use a muffler cutout, bypass or
similar device upon a motor vehicle on a street or highway. The exhaust system
must not emit or produce a sharp popping or crackling sound.
      (6)   Defective vehicles or excessive loads. It is unlawful to operate
any vehicle in a state of disrepair or overloaded so as to create loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
      (7)   Loading, unloading, unpacking. It is unlawful to create loud and
excessive noise in loading, unloading or unpacking any vehicle.
      (8)   Radios, stereo, CD and the like. It is unlawful to operate any
radio receiving set, musical instrument, stereo or other device for the
production or reproduction of sound in a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet
and comfort of neighbors or others nearby. Operation of any set, instrument,
phonograph, machine or other device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. in a manner as to be plainly audible at a property line or at 50 feet from
a vehicle, structure or building in which it is located is prima facie evidence
of a violation of this section.
      (9)   Loud speakers, amplifiers for advertising and the like. It is
unlawful to use or operate or permit the use or operation of any loud speaker,
sound amplifier or other device for the production or reproduction of sound
when the sound is cast upon a street or other public place for the purpose of
commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any
commercial establishment or vehicle.
      (10)   Schools, places of worship, hospitals and the like. It is unlawful
to create any excessive noise on a street, alley or public grounds adjacent to
any school, institution of learning, place of worship or hospital when the
noise unreasonably interferes with the working of the institution or disturbs
or unduly annoys its occupants or residents.
(Prior Code, § 645.03)
   (B)   Motor vehicle sound level requirements.
      (1)   A motor vehicle operated or driven on any highway within the city
must comply with the noise limits of the state.
      (2)   Minn. Rules parts 7030.1000 to 7030.1600, regarding mufflers, are
adopted and incorporated by reference.
      (3)   A motor vehicle with a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating
of 9,000 pounds or less operated or driven within the city, on any highway,
public property or private property within a city, must also comply with the
following standards when a stationary testing procedure is used:
 
Automobiles, vans, light trucks 95 dBA
(GVWR- 10,000 pounds or less)
Motorcycles                     99 dBA
 
(Prior Code, § 645.09) (Ord. 20231115-03, passed 11-15-2023) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.03 HOURLY RESTRICTION ON CERTAIN OPERATIONS.
   (A)   Recreational vehicles. It is unlawful to, between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m., drive or operate any minibike, snowmobile or other
recreational vehicle not licensed for travel on public highways.
   (B)   Outdoor power equipment. It is unlawful to operate a power lawn mower,
power hedge clippers, chainsaw or other outdoor property maintenance equipment
except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any weekday or between
the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Saturday, Sunday or holiday. This
division (B) does not apply to snow removal activities or to municipal or
commercial outdoor property maintenance activities; except that, commercial
activities must not unreasonably disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of nearby
residents. In the case of emergencies resulting from unforeseen causes such as
snow or wind storms, this section does not apply to reasonable and necessary
remedial actions.
   (C)   Refuse hauling. Garbage and refuse may not be collected or removed
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on a weekday or between the hours
of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday.
   (D)   Construction activities. It is unlawful to engage in or permit
construction activities involving the use of any kind of electric, diesel or
gas powered machine or other power equipment except between the hours of
sunrise and sunset on any weekday, Saturday, Sunday or holiday operations are
limited to between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m.
(Prior Code, § 645.05) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.04 RECEIVING LAND USE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Maximum noise levels by receiving land use.
      (1)   It is unlawful to operate or cause to be operated any source of
noise in a manner as to create a noise level exceeding the limit set in the
table below for the receiving land use category specified when measured at or
within the property line of the receiving land use.
 
Sound levels by receiving land use
                Day                    Night
                (7:00 a.m.-10:00 p.m.) (10:00 p.m.-7:00 a.m.)
Zoning District L50 L10                L50 L10
Commercial      65  70                 65  70
Industrial      75  80                 75  80
Residential     60  65                 50  55
 
      (2)   In the event that the property on which an industrial or commercial
noise source is located abuts residential property, the noise source in
question must not exceed an L10 noise level of 60 dBA in the daytime (7:00 a.m.
to 10:00 p.m.) and an L50 noise level of 50 dBA in the nighttime (10:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.) as measured on the property line abutting the source.
   (B)   Exemptions. The levels prescribed in division (A) above do not apply
to streets owned, operated and maintained by the city.
(Prior Code, § 645.07) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.05 AIR CIRCULATION DEVICES.
   It is unlawful to install or place any air circulation device, except a
window air conditioning unit in any location until the noise control officer
determines that the device in that location will comply with the noise level
standards prescribed in §
135.04 of this chapter and issues a permit for the installation. The noise
produced by any window unit and by any existing air circulation device must be
attenuated by means deemed appropriate by the noise control officer, including,
but not limited to, relocation of the device, if the noise results in or
contributes to a violation of §
135.04 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 645.11) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.06 EMERGENCY WORK; EXCEPTION.
   Noise created exclusively in the performance of emergency work to preserve
the public health, safety or welfare or in the performance of emergency work
necessary to restore a public service or eliminate a public hazard is exempt
from the provisions of this chapter for a period not to exceed 24 hours after
the work is commenced. Persons responsible for the work must inform the noise
control officer of the need to initiate the work, if the work is commenced
during non-business hours of the city, then at the beginning of business hours
of the first business day thereafter. A person responsible for the emergency
work must take all reasonable actions to minimize the amount of noise.
(Prior Code, § 645.13)
§ 135.07 NOISE CONTROL OFFICER; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   Administering officer. The noise control program established by this
chapter is administered by the noise control officer, who is appointed by the
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer.
   (B)   Testing procedures. The noise control officer must adopt guidelines
establishing the test procedures and instrumentation to be used in enforcing
the provisions of this chapter. A copy of the guidelines must be kept on file
in the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer’s office and must be available to the
public for reference during office hours.
   (C)   Studies and the like. The noise control officer must conduct the
research, monitoring and other studies related to sound as are necessary or
useful in enforcing this section and reducing noise in the city. The officer
may make investigations and inspections in accordance with law as required in
applying ordinance requirements.
   (D)   Noise impact statements. The noise control officer may require any
person applying to the city for a change in zoning classification or a permit
or license for any structure, operation, process, installation or alteration,
or project that may be considered a potential noise source to submit a noise
impact statement on a form prescribed by the officer. The officer must evaluate
each statement and make appropriate recommendations to the Council or other
agency or officer authorized to take the action or approve the license or
permit.
   (E)   Other powers and duties. The noise control officer may exercise other
powers and perform other duties as are reasonable and necessary to enforce this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 645.15)
§ 135.08 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Authority. The City Council may grant variances from the requirements
of §
135.04 of this chapter.
   (B)   Application. A person seeking a variance must file an application
therefor with the noise control officer on a form prescribed by the officer.
The application must state the dates during which the variance is proposed, the
location of the noise source and times of operation, the nature of the noise
source, reasons why the variance is sought, steps taken to minimize the noise
level and other information as is required by the noise control officer. If the
application is for a variance for more than three days, the noise control
officer must give mailed notice of the requested variance to all property
owners within at least 500 feet of the noise source. Any person claiming to be
adversely affected by the variance applied for may, within ten days of mailing
of the notice, file a statement with the noise control officer in support of
the claim.
   (C)   Action on application. The Council may grant a variance only if it
finds that full compliance with the sound level requirements of this section
would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on other persons,
or on the general public. In determining whether to grant or deny the
application, the Council is to balance the hardship to the applicant against
the adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of the persons affected,
the adverse impact on property affected, and any other adverse effects of
granting the variance. The variance may be granted subject to conditions,
including a time limit.
(Prior Code, § 645.17)
§ 135.09 VIOLATIONS; NOTICE.
   When the noise control officer determines that a noise exceeds the maximum
sound level permitted under §
135.04 of this chapter, the officer must give written notice of the violation
to the owner or occupant of the premises where the noise originates and order
the person to correct or remove each specified violation within a reasonable
time as is prescribed in the notice. The failure to remove or correct any
violation within the time so prescribed is a violation of this chapter. Before
issuing citations for violations of this section, the noise control officer
must provide the violator with notice and an opportunity to comply, unless the
officer determines that the violation is not of a continuing or ongoing nature
such that compliance can be readily confirmed at the end of a reasonable
period.
(Prior Code, § 645.19) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed
for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this chapter, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more
than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
      (3)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time,
in either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
      (4) The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
      (5)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if any
person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this code,
the City Council or any city official designated by it may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
   (B)   This chapter may be enforced by injunction, action for abatement or
other appropriate civil remedy.
(Prior Code, § 645.19)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   BUILDING CODE
      
152.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
      
153.   PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS
      
154.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
      
155.   RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
      
156.   TREES
      
157.   LAND DISTURBANCES
      
158.   STORM WATER; DRAINAGE AND MANAGEMENT
      
159.   TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
      
160.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
161.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
162.   SIGNS
      
163.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Planning Commission
   
150.02   Building security
Commercial and Industrial Building Maintenance
   
150.15   Purpose
   
150.16   Definition
   
150.17   Maintenance
   
150.18   Administration and enforcement; inspections, access
   
150.19   Appeals
 
   
150.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Commission. The Planning Commission has the powers and duties given it
by M.S. §§ 462.351 to 462.365, as they may be amended from time to time, and
this code. The Planning Commission is the planning agency of the city.
(Prior Code, § 500.01)
   (B)   Amendments. The Planning Commission, upon its own motion, may and, at
the direction of the Council, must prepare proposed changes in the Zoning Code,
the Comprehensive Municipal Plan, the subdivision regulations and other
official controls of the city. The procedures for the adoption of these changes
is that specified for the amendment of the Zoning Code in Chapter 163 of this
code of ordinances and law.
(Prior Code, § 500.03)
   (C)   Vacation of public ways. A petition for the vacation of a street or
public way must be referred to the Planning Commission for review and comment
prior to being considered by the City Council. Failure of the Planning
Commission to submit its comments to the Council within 45 days of the
Commission’s receipt of the petition is deemed approval of the petition by the
Commission.
(Prior Code, § 500.05)
(Ord. 99-03, passed 4-21-1999)
Cross-reference:
   Planning Commission, see §
31.27
§ 150.02 BUILDING SECURITY.
   (A)   Definition. For purposes of this section, a DEAD BOLT LOCK means a
locking bolt that, when in the locked position, can only be moved positively by
turning a knob, key, sliding bolt or mechanism activated by working a
combination. The term does not include a lock bolt moved by a skeleton-type
key.
(Prior Code, § 915.01)
   (B)   Dead bolt lock required. Multiple dwellings, hotels, motels and
apartment hotels must provide dead bolt locks on all entrance doors of each
dwelling unit, at least one that must be capable of being locked from the
exterior.
(Prior Code, § 915.03)
   (C)   Responsibility for security. The owner, operator or agent of buildings
covered by this section is responsible for compliance with this section.
(Prior Code, § 915.05)
   (D)   Security enforcement. The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer
administers and enforces this section.
(Prior Code, § 915.07)
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL BUILDING MAINTENANCE
§ 150.15 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to protect the public health, safety and
general welfare of the people and property owners of the city by, among other
things:
   (A)   Protecting the stability and character of commercial and industrial
buildings;
   (B)   Providing minimum standards for the maintenance of existing commercial
and industrial buildings, including abandoned commercial and industrial
buildings;
   (C)   To prevent blight and economic deterioration in the city;
   (D)   To preserve the economic value of land and buildings in the city; and
   (E)   To enhance and preserve the real estate base in the city.
(Prior Code, § 435.01) (Ord. 2008-10, passed 8-6-2008; Ord. 11-08, passed 7-20-
2011; Ord. 2014-09, passed 5-7-2014)
§ 150.16 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED BUILDING.
      (1)   A vacant building that was being used for commercial or industrial
purposes, the ownership responsibilities of which have been surrendered or
relinquished, whether intentionally or by failure to occupy and maintain the
property; or
      (2)   A building that was being used for commercial or industrial
purposes for which the owner cannot be identified or located by delivery of
certified mail at the last known or registered address, which persistently or
repeatedly becomes unprotected or unsecured or, which is or has been occupied
by unauthorized persons.
(Prior Code, § 435.03) (Ord. 2008-10, passed 8-6-2008; Ord. 11-08, passed 7-20-
2011; Ord. 2014-09, passed 5-7-2014)
§ 150.17 MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Applicability. Commercial and industrial buildings are subject to the
following requirements.
   (B)   General. All commercial and industrial buildings, whether occupied or
unoccupied shall be in compliance with the city’s property maintenance
regulations as set forth in Chapter 152 of this code of ordinances.
   (C)   Windows and doors. Any broken or cracked windows on a commercial or
industrial building shall be immediately repaired or replaced. Windows shall
not be boarded up. Abandoned buildings are not subject to these requirements,
but all window and door openings must be secured from unauthorized entry.
Window and door openings on abandoned commercial or industrial buildings may be
boarded up.
   (D)   Signs. When a business or service is discontinued in a commercial or
industrial building, all signs relating to such business or service shall be
removed within 20 days from the date of discontinuance. Any sign face that is
removed must be replaced with a neutral color blank face plate. Abandoned
buildings are not subject to these requirements.
   (E)   Additional requirements for abandoned commercial and industrial
buildings. The following additional requirements apply to abandoned commercial
and industrial buildings.
      (1)   “No trespassing” signs must be posted on the building.
      (2)   Liability insurance must be maintained on the building and if
requested, the city must be furnished with a copy of the certificate of
insurance.
      (3)   The city must be provided with the name, address and telephone
number of a responsible person who can be contacted in case of an emergency.
The name and contact number of the responsible person must also be marked on
the front of the building.
(Prior Code, § 435.05) (Ord. 2008-10, passed 8-6-2008; Ord. 11-08, passed 7-20-
2011; Ord. 2014-09, passed 5-7-2014; Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-21-2014) Penalty,
see §
150.99
§ 150.18 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT; INSPECTIONS, ACCESS.
   (A)   Inspection of buildings and premises. The city’s Building Official
shall enforce the provisions of this subchapter and is hereby authorized to
make inspections of commercial and industrial buildings on a scheduled basis or
when reason exists to believe that violation of this subchapter has been or is
being committed.
   (B)   Inspector access. If any owner, occupant or other person in charge of
a commercial or industrial building fails or refuses to permit the city’s
Building Official to access and enter the structure or premises for an
inspection pursuant to this subchapter, the city’s Building Official may seek a
court order authorizing the inspection.
   (C)   Notice of violation. Whenever the city’s Building Official determines
that any commercial or industrial building fails to meet the requirements set
forth in this subchapter or
Chapter 152 of this code of ordinances, the Building Official must issue a
compliance order in the manner set forth in §§
152.02 or
152.03 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 435.07) (Ord. 2008-10, passed 8-6-2008; Ord. 11-08, passed 7-20-
2011; Ord. 2014-09, passed 5-7-2014; Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-21-2014)
§ 150.19 APPEALS.
   An owner may contest a compliance order by filing a request for a hearing
before the City Council. The hearing request shall be made in accordance with §
152.04 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 435.09) (Ord. 2008-10, passed 8-6-2008; Ord. 11-08, passed 7-20-
2011; Ord. 2014-09, passed 5-7-2014; Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-21-2014)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed
for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this chapter, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more
than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
      (3)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time,
in either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
      (4) The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
      (5)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if any
person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this code,
the City Council or any city official designated by it may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
   (B)   Failure to meet the requirements of a notice is a violation of §§
150.15 through
150.19 of this chapter and a misdemeanor, and is subject to all penalties, as
provided by state statute. Each day a violation continues in existence shall be
deemed a separate violation. If the building or property is hazardous, the City
Council may take action to repair or remove the hazardous conditions pursuant
to the procedure set forth in M.S. §§ 463.15 to 463.261, as they may be amended
from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 435.11) (Ord. 2008-10, passed 8-6-2008; Ord. 11-08, passed 7-20-
2011; Ord. 2014-09, passed 5-7-2014)
CHAPTER 151: BUILDING CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Codes adopted by reference
   
151.02   Application, administration and enforcement
   
151.03   Permits and fees
   
151.04   Optional chapters
   
151.05   Organization and enforcement
   
151.06   Licensed activities
   
151.07   Permit fees
   
151.08   Exceptions; owner-occupied single-family dwellings
Numbering Houses and Buildings
   
151.20   Numbers required
   
151.21   Enforcement
 
   
151.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Minnesota State Building Code, as adopted by the Commissioner of Labor
and Industry pursuant to M.S. Chapter 326B, including all of the amendments,
rules and regulations established, adopted and published from time to time by
the state’s Commissioner of Labor and Industry, through the Building Codes and
Standards Unit, is hereby adopted by reference with the exception of the
optional chapters, unless specifically adopted in this subchapter. The
Minnesota State Building Code is hereby incorporated in this subchapter as if
fully set out herein.
(Prior Code, § 400.02) (Ord. 03-01, passed 5-7-2003; Ord. 2009-03, passed 5-20-
2009)
§ 151.02 APPLICATION, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The application, administration and enforcement of the code shall be
in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code. The code may be enforced
within the extraterritorial limits permitted by M.S. § 326B.121, subd. 2(d), as
it may be amended from time to time, when so established by ordinance and with
the permission of the City Council.
   (B)   The code enforcement agency of the city is called the “Building
Department”.
   (C)   This code is enforced by the Minnesota-Certified Building Official
designated by the city to administer the code in accordance with M.S. §
326B.133, subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 400.02) (Ord. 03-01, passed 5-7-2003)
§ 151.03 PERMITS AND FEES.
   (A)   The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as
authorized in Minn. Rules Chapter 1300.
   (B)   (1)   Permit fees will be assessed for work governed by this code in
accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the city.
      (2)   In addition, a surcharge fee will be collected on all permits
issued for work governed by this code in accordance with M.S. § 326B.148, as it
may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 400.02) (Ord. 03-07, passed - -2003)
§ 151.04 OPTIONAL CHAPTERS.
   The Minnesota State Building Code, Minn. Rules Chapter 1300, allows: the
following optional provisions identified in the most current edition of the
State Building Code are hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the Building
Code for the city: Appendix Chapter J - (Grading) - of the 2021 International
Building Code, as it may be amended and updated from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 400.02) (Ord. 03-01, passed 5-7-2003)
§ 151.05 ORGANIZATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The organization of the Building Department and enforcement of the
code is as established by the International Building Code, as it may be amended
from time to time. The code is enforced within the incorporated limits of the
city, and may be enforced by ordinance in the extraterritorial limits permitted
by M.S. § 326B.121, subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   The Building Department is the enforcement agency for the city. The
administrative authority is pursuant to a joint powers agreement. A copy of the
joint powers agreement is in §
36.02 of this code of ordinances.
   (C)   The Building Official issues tags for Building Code violations, but
must clear the issuance with the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer.
   (D)   The issuance of permits and collection of fees is as authorized in
M.S. § 326B.121, subd. l, as it may be amended from time to time, and as
provided for in the International Code, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (E)   Permit fees are set forth in §
36.02 of this code of ordinances. In addition to the permit fees, the applicant
must pay a surcharge to be remitted to the state’s Department of Administration
as prescribed by M.S. § 326B.148, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 400.03) (Ord. 96-1, passed 3-6-1996; Ord. 99-02, passed 3-17-
1999)
§ 151.06 LICENSED ACTIVITIES.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to perform a
work subject to the provisions of the Building Code unless that person is
currently licensed to do so under applicable provisions of this code or state
law. The work includes, but is not limited to, electrical installations,
plumbing, gas appliance installation, high-pressure steam fitting installation
and elevator construction.
(Prior Code, § 400.05) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.07 PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   General rule. It is unlawful for any person to perform work subject to
the Building Code for which a permit is required without having obtained the
permit and paid the fees required by §
36.02 of this code of ordinances. The Building Official must establish a system
for the issuance of required permits in accordance with the Building Code and §
36.02 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Time limits. If the construction or alteration for which a building
permit was issued is not commenced within 180 days after the date of the
issuance of the permit, the permit expires. Construction in the residential
zoning districts must be completed as to the exterior appearance within 12
months of the date of issuance of a permit.
(Prior Code, § 400.07) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.08 EXCEPTIONS; OWNER-OCCUPIED SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS.
   (A)   Buildings. Permits may be issued to make repairs, additions,
replacements and alterations to the plumbing, heating or electrical systems of
single-family dwelling structures used exclusively for living purposes and
accessory buildings thereto. All work in connection therewith may be performed
only by a person who is a bona fide owner of the dwelling and a resident
therein, or a member of the owner-occupant’s immediate family.
   (B)   “Family” defined. For purposes of this section, the term IMMEDIATE
FAMILY means a parent, children by birth or adoption or their spouse living in
the dwelling.
   (C)   Other code provisions. Other provisions of the Building Code
regulating the work permitted by this section must be complied with.
   (D)   Description. When an application is made for a permit for work
permitted by this section, the applicant must file with the Building Official
an affidavit stating that the applicant or the member of the applicant’s
immediate family who is to do the work is qualified to perform it.
(Prior Code, § 400.11)
NUMBERING HOUSES AND BUILDINGS
§ 151.20 NUMBERS REQUIRED.
   The owner and each and every occupant of a house or commercial building in
the city must place on the front of each such house or commercial building,
suitable house or building numbers, large enough to be read from the street
upon which the house or commercial building is located. The buildings must be
numbered in accordance with the instructions of the Building Official.
(Prior Code, § 400.13)
§ 151.21 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Building Official must enforce this subchapter. The Official must give
the owner or occupant of any house or commercial building that does not conform
with this subchapter 15 days’ written notice within which to comply with the
terms of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 400.13)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed
for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this chapter, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more
than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
      (3)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time,
in either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
      (4)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
      (5)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if any
person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this code,
the City Council or any city official designated by it may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
   (B)   A violation of the code set out in §
151.01 of this chapter is a misdemeanor, per M.S. § 326B.082, subd. 16, as it
may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 400.02)
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or
maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done
contrary to or in violation of any provision of the Building Code embodied in
§§
151.05 through
151.08 of this chapter. Each day during which a violation of the Building Code
is committed, continued or permitted, constitutes a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 400.09)
(Ord. 03-07, passed - -2003)
CHAPTER 152: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Section
   
152.01   International Property Maintenance Code adopted
   
152.02   Compliance required; administration
   
152.03   Emergency cases
   
152.04   Appeals
 
   
152.99   Penalty
§ 152.01 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   The International Property Maintenance Code (“IPMC”), published by the
International Code Council, Inc., is adopted by reference, subject to the
changes set forth in subdivision 2, below.
   (B)   For the purposes of this chapter, the IPMC is amended as follows:
Section 101.1. Insert the name “City of Sandstone.”
Section 102.3. In the first sentence, delete the terms: “International Building
Code, International Energy Conservation Code, International Fire Code,
International Fuel Gas Code, International Mechanical Code, International
Residential Code, International Plumbing Code, and NFPA 70 and replace with
“Minnesota State Building Code, as defined in Minnesota Rule Part 1300.0020.”
And, in the second sentence, delete the term “International Zoning Code and
insert “Sandstone City Code.”
Section 102.7. Revise the paragraph as follows: “The codes and standards
referred in this code shall be those that are listed in the Minnesota State
Building Code and considered part of the requirements of this code to the
prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between
provisions of this code and the Minnesota State Building Code, the Minnesota
State Building Code shall apply.”
Section 103. Delete sections 103.1, 103.2, 103.3, and 103.5 in their entirety.
Section 107. Delete in its entirety.
Section 108.3. Delete the references to “Section 107.3 and “Section 107.2" and
insert “Chapter 152 of the Sandstone City Code.”
Section 109. Delete in its entirety.
Section 110.1. In the first sentence delete the term “shall” and replace with
the term “may.”
Section 110.2. Delete the term “Section 107 and insert the term “Chapter 152 of
the Sandstone City Code.”
Section 112.4. Delete the phrase “liable to a fine of not less than [AMOUNT]
dollars or more than [AMOUNT] dollars” and insert the phrase “guilty of a
misdemeanor.”
Section 201.3. Delete the terms “International Building Code, International
Existing Building Code, International Fire Code, International Fuel Gas Code,
International Mechanical Code, International Plumbing Code, International
Residential Code, International Zoning Code or NFPA 70 and insert “Minnesota
State Building Code, as defined in Minnesota Rule 1300.0020, Minnesota Plumbing
Code, as defined in Minnesota Rules Chapter 4715, Minnesota State Fire Code, as
defined in Minnesota Rules Chapter 7511, and the Sandstone City Code.”
Section 202. Amend as follows “Code Official. The official who is charged with
the administration and enforcement of this code, or any duly authorized
representative. For the purposes of this Code, the Code Official shall be the
Building Official of the City of Sandstone.”
Section 304.2. Amend by inserting “At least 50 percent of to the beginning of
the first sentence. Amend by inserting the following language at the end of the
paragraph “In cases where the City Council has approved the issuance of an
order to correct the deteriorated exterior of a building and a determination
has been made by the Building Official that a building permit is needed for the
building, 85% percent of the exterior structure will be required to be brought
into compliance with this paragraph and shall be weather resistant and water
tight.” (Amended Ord. No. 17-02)
Section 302.4. Delete in its entirety.
Section 302.8. Delete in its entirety.
Section 304.1.1. Delete the phrase “International Building Code or the
International Existing Building Code” and insert “Minnesota State Building
Code, as defined in Minnesota Rule 1300.0020.”
Section 304.7. Amend by inserting after the last sentence “[t]his requirement
shall not apply to existing single family homes unless an application for a
building permit is made that relates to any of these items.”
Section 304.13. Amend by inserting after the last sentence “[t]his requirement
shall not apply to existing single family homes unless an application for a
building permit is made that relates to any of these items.”
Section 304.14. Amend by inserting the following dates “May 1" and October 1"
Amend by inserting after the last sentence “[t]his requirement shall not apply
to existing single family homes unless an application for a building permit is
made that relates to any of these items.”
Section 305.1.1. Delete the phrase “International Building Code or the
International Existing Building Code and insert “Minnesota State Building Code,
as defined in Minnesota Rule 1300.0020.”
Section 306.1.1. Delete the term “International Building Code” and insert
“Minnesota State Building Code, as defined in Minnesota Rule Part 1300.0020.
Section 308. Delete in its entirety.
Section 401.3. Delete the term “International Building Code” and insert the
term “Minnesota State Building Code, as defined in Minnesota Rule Part
1300.0020.”
Section 402.1. Amend by inserting after the last sentence “[t]his requirement
shall not apply to existing single family homes unless an application for a
building permit is made that relates to any of these items.”
Section 404.4.3. Amend the last sentence to read as follows: “[e]very bedroom
in a dwelling unit shall have access to a least one water closet and lavatory
located in the same dwelling.”
Section 502.5. Delete the term “International Plumbing Code” and insert the
term “Minnesota Plumbing Code, as set forth in Minnesota Rules Chapter 4715.”
Section 505.1. Delete the term “International Plumbing Code” and insert the
term “Minnesota Plumbing Code, as set forth in Minnesota Rules Chapter 4715.”
Section 506.3. Amend the first sentence to read as follows: “[grease
interceptors and automatic grease removal devices shall be maintained in
accordance with this code, the Sandstone City Code, and the manufacturer’s
installation instructions.”
Section 602.2. Delete the phrase “Appendix D of the International Plumbing
Code” and insert the phrase “Minnesota Plumbing Code, as set forth in Minnesota
Rules Chapter 4715.” Delete the exception.
Section 602.3. Amend the first sentence to read as follows: “[h]eat supply.
Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases, or lets one or more
dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to
furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply functioning heating
equipment for the Minnesota heating season of October 1 to April 30.” Delete
both of the exceptions.
Section 602.4. Amend the first sentence by inserting the following dates in the
brackets: October 1 and April 30.
Section 603.2. Amend the first sentence by inserting the following at the end
of the sentence “unless the equipment or appliance is labeled as ‘unvented’ .”
Section 604.2. Amend by deleting the term “NFPA 70 in the first sentence and
insert “State Electrical Code, as set forth in Minnesota Rule 1315.0200.”
Change the term “dwelling units” to “non-owner occupied dwelling units” and add
a sentence to the end of the paragraph that states as follows: “[t]his
requirement does not apply to owner-occupied dwellings unless there is a hazard
to life or safety.”
Section 604.3.1.1. Amend by deleting the term “International Building Code” and
inserting “Minnesota State Building Code, as defined in Minnesota Rules Part
1300.0020.”
Section 604.3.2.1. Amend by deleting the term “International Building Code” and
inserting “Minnesota State Building Code, as defined in Minnesota Rules Part
1300.0020.”
Section 605.2. Amend by adding the following sentence to the end of the
paragraph “all receptacles within eight feet of water must have a ground fault
circuit interrupter.”
Section 606.1. Amend by deleting the term “ASME A17.1 in the first and third
sentences and insert “Minnesota State Building Code, as defined in Minnesota
Rule 1300.0020.” Delete everything in the last sentence starting with “Appendix
N.”
Sections 701–704. Delete all of these sections in their entirety.
Chapter 8. Delete Chapter 8 in its entirety.
Appendix. Delete the Appendix in its entirety.
   (C)   Where there is any conflict between the provisions of the IPMC and any
other applicable code or ordinance enforced by or in the city, the more
restrictive provisions shall apply.
   (D)   Nothing in the IPMC hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any
suit or proceeding pending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability
incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any
other code or ordinance enforced by or in the city, nor shall any just or legal
right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected.
(Prior Code, § 425.01) (Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-21-2014; Ord. 17-02, passed 5-3-
2017)
§ 152.02 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Building Official to administer. The City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer shall designate the Building Official to administer and to enforce
the provisions of this chapter. The Building Official is authorized to inspect
the premises on a scheduled basis or when reason exists to believe that a
violation of this chapter has been committed.
   (B)   Compliance order.
      (1)   Whenever the Building Official determines that a premise fails to
meet any provision of the IPMC, the Building Official may issue a compliance
order setting forth the violations and ordering the owner or the owner’s agent
or the occupant to correct the violations.
      (2)   The compliance order shall:
         (a)   Be in writing;
         (b)   Describe the location and nature of the violations of the IPMC
and refer to the specific provisions violated;
         (c)   Specify a time in which violations must be corrected;
         (d)   Include a statement that the owner, the owner’s agent or the
occupant may request a hearing with the City Council to review the Building
Official’s actions and the possible assessment of costs. The request for
hearing shall be in writing and submitted to the City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer within ten working days of the date of the order; and
         (e)   Be served in the following manner: service shall be sufficient
on the occupant if personally served, posted in a conspicuous place on or about
the premises, or mailed to the occupant by first class mail to the occupant’s
last known address. Service shall be sufficient on the owner or the owner’s
agent by mailing the notice by first class mail to the address on record with
the county or city tax or assessment office identifying the party responsible
for paying the taxes for the premises.
(Prior Code, § 425.03) (Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-21-2014) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.03 EMERGENCY CASES.
   When the Building Official determines that a violation of this chapter
constitutes an imminent peril to life, health, safety or property and there
does not exist sufficient time to follow the procedures set forth, the Building
Official may take appropriate action to correct the violation by the procedure
set forth below.
   (A)   Order by City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer. The Building Official
shall obtain from the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer or the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer’s designated representative, a written
administrative order directing the Building Official to correct the emergency
situation. A good faith effort shall be made to inform the owner, the owner’s
agent or the occupant that the action is being taken.
   (B)   Notice of the correction. After the corrective action has been taken
and the costs of the action have been determined, the Building Official shall
serve the owner, the owner’s agent or the occupant with a notice of the action,
which shall contain the following information:
      (1)   A description of the emergency circumstances;
      (2)   The corrective action taken by the city;
      (3)   The cost incurred in correcting the emergency;
      (4)   The city’s intent to assess some or all of the costs against the
corrected property; and
      (5)   A statement that the owner, the owner’s agent or the occupant may
request a hearing with the City Council to review the Building Official’s
actions and the possible assessment of costs. The request for hearing shall be
in writing and submitted to the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer within ten
working days of the date of the notice.
(Prior Code, § 425.05) (Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-21-2014)
§ 152.04 APPEALS.
   (A)   Request. The owner, owner’s agent or occupant may appeal an order
issued pursuant to §§
152.02 or
152.03 of this chapter by filing a request for a hearing with the City
Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer within ten working days of the date of the
order. In the event that a request is timely filed, the City Council shall
within three weeks fix a date for a public hearing.
   (B)   Hearing. The appellant, the appellant’s representative, the Building
Official and any other person whose interests are affected by the order shall
be given an opportunity to be heard.
   (C)   Written opinion. The City Council shall render a written opinion no
later than the third regularly scheduled City Council meeting following the
appeal hearing. The City Council may adopt a resolution levying an assessment
for all or a portion of the costs incurred in correcting the emergency. A copy
of the decision and the resolution shall be served upon the appellant in the
manner set forth above.
(Prior Code, § 425.07) (Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-21-2014)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed
for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this chapter, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more
than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
      (3)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time,
in either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
      (4) The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
      (5)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if any
person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this code,
the City Council or any city official designated by it may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
   (B)   A person who violates the provisions of this chapter may be charged
with a misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense. The Building Official may post the premises by appropriate
signs or notices prohibiting occupancy, and may act to cause the premises to be
vacated or remain vacant until the code violations are corrected.
(Prior Code, § 425.09) (Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-21-2014)
CHAPTER 153: PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS
Section
Public Swimming Pools
   
153.01   State Health Department rules adopted
   
153.02   License required
   
153.03   License application
   
153.04   License expiration and renewal
   
153.05   License fees
Private Swimming Pools
   
153.20   Definition
   
153.21   Fencing required around outdoor swimming pools
   
153.22   Exception
PUBLIC SWIMMING POOLS
§ 153.01 STATE HEALTH DEPARTMENT RULES ADOPTED.
   Minn. Rules parts 4717.0150 through 4717.3975, relating to public swimming
pools, are adopted by the city by reference. Reference in those rules to the
Commissioner of Health is to the city health authority.
(Prior Code, § 625.01)
§ 153.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful to operate or permit swimming in a public swimming pool,
regardless of whether a fee is charged for such use, unless the city has issued
a license therefor that is in full force and effect. The license must be on
display in the vicinity of the swimming pool or conveniently accessible upon
demand.
(Prior Code, § 625.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.03 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   Application for a license hereunder is submitted to the Deputy Clerk in such
form and manner as the city may prescribe.
(Prior Code, § 625.05)
§ 153.04 LICENSE EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL.
   Licenses issued under this subchapter expire on April 30 each year. License
renewal applications must be filed with the Deputy Clerk prior to April 1 of
each year.
(Prior Code, § 625.07)
§ 153.05 LICENSE FEES.
   The license fees for public swimming pools are set by §
36.02 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 625.09)
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS
§ 153.20 DEFINITION.
   For purposes of this subchapter, a SWIMMING POOL is any structure, basin,
chamber or tank containing an artificial body of water for swimming, diving or
recreational bathing and having a depth of more than 24 inches at any point and
a surface area of 150 square feet or more.
(Prior Code, § 950.01)
§ 153.21 FENCING REQUIRED AROUND OUTDOOR SWIMMING POOLS.
   (A)   Outdoor swimming pools existing and hereafter constructed must be
completely enclosed by a security fence or wall at least four feet high and
located at least four feet from the edge of the swimming pool on at least one-
half of the perimeter.
   (B)   Fence openings or points of entry into the pool area must be equipped
with gates. Gates must be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices
placed at the top of the gate or in a manner otherwise inaccessible to
children. Openings between the fence bottom and the ground or other surface may
not exceed four inches.
(Prior Code, § 950.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.22 EXCEPTION.
   This subchapter does not apply to above-ground outdoor swimming pools having
at least four-foot height, vertical or outward-inclined sidewalls; provided
that, sole access is by means of removable ladder, ramp or stairs that must be
removed when the pool is not in use.
(Prior Code, § 950.05)
CHAPTER 154: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
Section
General Provisions
   
154.001   Width of streets and sidewalks
   
154.002   Planting in streets or sidewalk easements
   
154.003   Street excavations; permits, bonds and the like
   
154.004   Sidewalk, curb and gutter construction
   
154.005   Street nuisances
   
154.006   Damaging public property
   
154.007   Damaging signs
   
154.008   Damaging trees and shrubbery
   
154.009   New buildings
   
154.010   Hardship assessment deferral
Park Dedication
   
154.020   Dedication required
   
154.021   Amount required
   
154.022   Cash payment in lieu of dedication
   
154.023   Amount of cash payment
   
154.024   Park and Open Space Fund
   
154.025   Partial dedication
   
154.026   Credit for private land
Sidewalk Repair
   
154.040   Duty of owner
   
154.041   Inspections; notice
   
154.042   Repair by city
   
154.043   Personal liability
   
154.044   Assessment
Snow Removal from Sidewalks
   
154.055   Clearing sidewalks
   
154.056   Owner, occupant responsibility
   
154.057   Placement of snow
   
154.058   Costs of removal; lien
   
154.059   Assessment
Courtesy Benches
   
154.070   Definition
   
154.071   Location
   
154.072   Specifications
   
154.073   License; procedure
   
154.074   Removal
   
154.075   Advertising
Street Names and Numbers
   
154.090   Purpose
   
154.091   Assignment of street names
   
154.092   Future assignment of street names
   
154.093   Assignment of property numbers
   
154.094   Display of numbers
   
154.095   Numbers for future buildings
   
154.096   Administration
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 WIDTH OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Fifty-foot streets. Streets having a width of more than 50 feet must
have a roadway measured from curb to curb of 30 feet, and sidewalks must be
five feet wide and laid one-half foot from the property line. The remaining
portion of the street is boulevard.
   (B)   Streets less than 50 feet. Streets having a width of 50 feet or less
must have a roadway measured from curb to curb of 30 feet and sidewalks must be
five feet wide and laid next to the property line. The remaining portion of the
street is boulevard.
(Prior Code, § 800.01)
§ 154.002 PLANTING IN STREETS OR SIDEWALK EASEMENTS.
   (A)   General rule. Except as provided in division (B) below, trees, bushes
or any plant life other than grass may not be planted or replanted within any
of the public easements for right-of-way for streets, sidewalks and boulevards
within the city. If trees, bushes or any plant life other than grass is planted
or replanted in violation of this subchapter, upon written notice to the
adjoining land owner, lessee or occupier of the land by any police officer or
city employee, the adjoining land owner, lessee or occupier of land must within
30 days of the notice, remove or cause to be removed from the right-of-way the
tree, bush or other plant life which is in violation of this subchapter. If not
removed within the 30-day period, the tree, bush or other plant life which is
in violation of this subchapter may be removed by or at the direction of the
city, and the expense of the removal may be charged against the adjoining land
owner, lessee or occupier of land.
   (B)   Exceptions. In furtherance of the city’s urban wildlife landscape
design and Tree City U.S.A. programs, the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer is
directed to prepare a list of trees and other vegetation that may be planted in
public ways with the approval of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 800.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.003 STREET EXCAVATIONS; PERMITS, BONDS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   (1)   Permit. It is unlawful for any person to make an excavation
within any street or alley in the city for the purpose of installing water,
sewer, steam or gas pipes, or electric or telephone conduits or for any other
purpose, without first obtaining a permit for the excavation from the Building
Official. A permit is not required for any such excavation that is made under a
contract awarded by the city or made by persons hired by the city.
      (2)   Application. Application for permits is made in writing on forms
provided for that purpose by the city. The form must set forth the pertinent
regulations applicable to the permit, as prepared from time to time by the City
Engineer, and as modified by the City Engineer with respect to the particular
work covered by the permit. The City Engineer must prepare such regulations
with respect to excavations within any street or alley and modify them with
respect to particular work, as may be necessary or advisable to protect the
public from injury, to prevent damage to public or private property and to
minimize interference with the public use of the streets.
      (3)   Issuance. Permits for excavations are in writing. The permit must
be kept on the site of the work while it is in progress in the custody of the
individual in charge and must be exhibited upon request made by any city
official or police officer.
      (4)   Fees. Before a permit is issued, the applicant requesting the
permit must pay the fee set by §
36.02 of this code of ordinances for each location covered by the permit. Each
transverse excavation and each 300 feet or portion thereof of longitudinal
excavation is a location.
(Prior Code, § 800.05)
   (B)   (1)   Barricades. Excavations must be protected by a suitable
barricade, guard or fence about the place of the excavation, sufficient to
prevent persons or animals from being injured by falling into the same. The
permittee must place and maintain, during the hours of the day, flags and
between the hours of sunset and sunrise a suitable number of red lanterns or
flares on all sides thereof to warn the general public of the existence of the
excavation.
      (2)   Surety bond. A surety bond in the amount of $1,000 is required from
each person requesting a permit, except a duly licensed and bonded plumber, or
a public utility corporation holding a franchise from the city. The bond must
be conditioned that the holder will perform the work in accordance with the
applicable regulations, will indemnify and save harmless the city from all
damage caused in the execution of such work or costs in connection with the
repair of the streets or alleys excavated, and that the holder will pay any and
all damages that will be suffered by the city by reason of the failure of the
person securing the permit to observe the terms of this subchapter or by reason
of negligence in the execution of the work.
      (3)   Contractor’s insurance. A certified copy of the contractor’s
insurance policy, which must name the city as an additional insured under the
coverage provided by the policy, must be filed with the Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer. This insurance policy must be not less than $300,000 for bodily
injury to or death of one person, $600,000 on account of any one accident and
$50,000 for property damage.
      (4)   Traffic inconvenience. Work must progress in an expeditious manner
until completion in order to avoid unnecessary inconvenience to traffic. In the
event that the work is not performed in accordance with the applicable
regulations or ceases or is abandoned without due cause, the city may, after
six hours’ notice in writing to the holder of the permit of intent to do so,
correct the work or fill the excavation and repair the street. The entire cost
to the city of the work must be a liability of and must be paid by the person
to whom the permit was issued.
      (5)   Utility permits. The provisions of this division (B) are in
addition to all utility connection permits that may be required by the code or
by the rules and regulations of the City Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 800.07)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.004 SIDEWALK, CURB AND GUTTER CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Public Works Director. The Public Works Director is responsible for
the control and supervision of the construction and repair of all public
sidewalks, curb or curb and gutter and supervises or constructs the public
sidewalk and curb and gutter whenever the same is ordered by the Council.
   (B)   Permit. It is unlawful to lay or construct a sidewalk, driveway, curb
or curb and gutter upon any boulevard, street, parkway or public ground without
obtaining a permit from the City Engineer. The applicant must pay the fees set
by §
36.02 of this code of ordinances.
   (C)   Bond. The permit application must be accompanied by a good and
sufficient bond with at least two sureties, or a surety company, to guarantee
the construction of such sidewalk, driveway, curb or curb and gutter in
accordance with the specifications on file in the office of the City Engineer,
and to indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may arise by the
obstruction of the street or from any other cause. The bond must contain an
agreement and condition that all artificial stone sidewalks, curbs and curbs
and gutters laid by the principal in the bond must be maintained by such
principal for the period of two years after the completion of the laying of the
same in a good and sufficient condition and free from all defects, settlements
and cracks caused by action of the elements, the use of imperfect material or
workmanship, or by the proper use of such sidewalks, curbs and curbs and
gutters for the purpose intended.
(Prior Code, § 800.09) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.005 STREET NUISANCES.
   (A)   Prohibition. The acts prohibited by this section are declared to be
public nuisances and may be abated by the city as such.
   (B)   Dirt and filth. It is unlawful to throw, spill, place or deposit or
leave, or cause to be thrown, spilled, placed, deposited or left, or permit any
person, agent or employee to throw, spill, place, deposit or leave in or upon
any street, highway, alley, sidewalk, park or other public place in the city,
any dirt, sweepings, filth, shells, garbage, vegetables, dead carcasses,
sewage, slops, excrement, compost, stable manure, ashes, soot, tin cans, rags,
waste paper, leaves, brush, weeds, grass, hay, wood shavings, barrels, crates,
boxes, litter or loose combustible materials; materials subject to being
carried by the wind or unwholesome, noisome or putrescible material of any
kind.
   (C)   Offensive liquids. It is unlawful to allow slops, or malodorous,
noxious liquids to run, drip or fall into or upon any street, highway, alley,
sidewalk, park, stream or other public place.
   (D)   Accumulation of ice and snow. It is unlawful to deposit accumulation
of ice and snow in or upon any street or other public place or way.
   (E)   Glass, china or other substances. It is unlawful to place or cause to
be placed or cause or allow to remain in or upon the surface of any street,
highway, sidewalk, alley or other public place any glass, china, nails, tacks
or other sharp or penetrating substance.
   (F)   Fruit skins. It is unlawful to throw or deposit on any sidewalk or in
any street or public place any part or portion of any fruit or vegetable or
other substance, which when stepped upon by a person is liable to cause or does
cause that person to slip or fall.
   (G)   Littering. It is unlawful to scatter, drop or spill or permit to be
scattered, dropped or spilled any dirt, sand, gravel, clay, loam, stone or
building rubbish, or hay, straw, sawdust, shavings or other light materials of
any sort or manufacturing, trade or household wastes, refuse, rubbish of any
sort or ashes or manure, garbage or other organic refuse or other offensive
matter therefrom, or permit the same to be blown off therefrom by the wind in
or upon any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place.
   (H)   Obstruction of sewers and drains. It is unlawful to throw or deposit
or cause to be thrown or deposited into any drain, catch basin, sewer or gutter
any substance which may cause obstruction or injury thereto or nuisance therein
or to divert or stop the flow of any drain or sewer.
   (I)   Violation. It is unlawful to perform any of the acts prohibited by
this section.
(Prior Code, § 800.11) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.006 DAMAGING PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   It is unlawful to make any excavation, or to build or construct any
fence, sidewalk or building or structure of any nature in any street, road,
avenue, lane, alley or public grounds of or in the city for any purpose, or
remove any earth or soil therefrom unless authorized to do so by a written
permit from the Council.
   (B)   A person, when so authorized, may not make any such excavation or
construction, except in accordance with the conditions, provisions, limitations
and specifications contained in the permit and until that person has erected a
guard or fence about the place of the excavation or building, sufficient to
prevent persons or animals from being injured by falling into the excavation or
by articles falling from the construction.
   (C)   Every person making the excavation or construction, when it is
accomplished, or at any time when ordered by the Council, must without delay,
fill or remove the same, so that the public grounds or thoroughfares will be in
at least as good condition as before the excavation or construction was made.
(Prior Code, § 800.13) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.007 DAMAGING SIGNS.
   It is unlawful to mar, injure, deface, destroy or place or cause to be
placed any advertising device or representation of any kind or nature upon any
fence, tree, guide posts or boards, sign boards, awnings, lamp posts, lamp or
lanterns, street signs, telephone poles or electric poles upon or along any
street, road, avenue, lane, alley, square or other public place in the city.
(Prior Code, § 800.15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.008 DAMAGING TREES AND SHRUBBERY.
   It is unlawful to cut down, injure or destroy any fruit, shade or other tree
or shrubbery growing or being in any public street, avenue, road, lane, alley,
common square or other public ground in the city without the permission of the
Council.
(Prior Code, § 800.17) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.009 NEW BUILDINGS.
   (A)   General rule. A high-density residential, commercial and industrial
building constructed, whether with or without a garage, must conform to and
comply with the provisions of this subchapter. All residential property that
abuts a street lined with concrete curb and sidewalk is also included in this
rule.
   (B)   Requirements. All such buildings must provide an impervious surface
driveway from the curb line to the property line of the lot upon which the
building is to be placed. Concrete must be air- entraining portland cement
concrete. The concrete driveway must rise at the rate of one-fourth inch per
foot from the top of the curb line to the property line of the lot. The
driveway may not be less than 12 feet in width and be not less than three
inches thick.
   (C)   Escrow required.
      (1)   A cash escrow must be deposited with the city to guarantee the
construction of the concrete driveway. A certificate of occupancy may not be
issued for any building until all of the requirements of the Building Code,
zoning or other ordinances of the city have been complied with, including the
construction of the concrete driveway as prescribed above; except that, after
October 15 of each calendar year a certificate of occupancy may be issued
stipulating the driveway is to be constructed prior to July 1 of the following
year.
      (2)   In the event that the driveway is not constructed by July 1 of the
following year, then the permittee will be considered in default, and if the
permittee is in default, the escrow will be forfeited and the city, its
employees or its authorized agent must enter upon the lot and complete the
concrete driveways as prescribed in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 800.19) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.010 HARDSHIP ASSESSMENT DEFERRAL.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. In accordance with M.S. §§ 435.191 through
435.195, as may be amended from time to time, this section is adopted by the
City Council for the purpose of deferring the payment of special assessments
for any homestead property located in the city that is:
      (1)   Owned by a person 65 years of age or older or retired by virtue of
a permanent and total disability for whom it would be a hardship to make the
payments; or
      (2)   Owned by a person who is a member of the Minnesota National Guard
or other military reserves who is ordered into active military service, as
defined in M.S. § 190.05, subd. 5b or 5c, as may be amended from time to time,
as stated in the person's military orders, for whom it would be a hardship to
make the payments.
   (B)   Standards for deferment.
      (1)   The City Administrator is hereby authorized to record the deferment
of special assessments where the following conditions are met.
         (a)   The applicant must be 65 years of age or older, or retired by
virtue of permanent and total disability, or a member of the Minnesota National
Guard or other military reserves who is ordered into active military service.
         (b)   The applicant must be the owner of the property.
         (c)   The applicant must occupy the property as his or her principal
place of residence.
         (d)   The average annual payment for assessments levied against the
subject property exceed one percent of the adjusted gross income of the
applicant, as evidenced by the applicant’s most recent Federal income tax
return (excluding the above-mentioned military situation). The average annual
payment of an assessment shall be the total cost of the assessment divided by
the number of years over which it is spread.
      (2)   The deferment shall be granted for as long a period of time as the
hardship exists and the conditions aforementioned have been met. However, it
shall be the duty of the applicant to notify the City Administrator of any
change in status that would affect eligibility for deferment.
      (3)   Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the determination of
hardship on the basis of exceptional and unusual circumstances not covered by
the standards and guidelines, where the determination is made in a
nondiscriminatory manner and does not give the applicant an unreasonable
preference or advantage over other applicants.
   (C)   Procedure to obtain deferred assessment. The homeowner shall make
application for deferred payment of special assessments on forms prescribed by
the city in which the homestead is located. Where the deferred assessment is
granted, the city shall record a notice thereof with the County Recorder who
shall set forth the amount of the assessment. The city may determine by
ordinance or resolution the amount of interest, if any, on the deferred
assessment, and this rate shall be recorded by the Auditor, along with and in
the same manner as the amount of the assessment.
   (D)   Termination of right to deferred payment.
      (1)   The option to defer the payment of special assessments shall
terminate and all amounts accumulated, plus applicable interest, shall become
due upon the occurrence of any of the following events:
         (a)   The death of the owner, provided that the spouse is otherwise
not eligible for the benefits hereunder;
         (b)   The sale, transfer or subdivision of the property or any part
thereof;
         (c)   If the property should for any reason lose its homestead status;
         (d)   The servicemember is no longer on active military service; or
         (e)   If for any reason the taxing authority deferring the payments
shall determine that there would be no hardship to require immediate or partial
payment.
      (2)   The entire amount of deferred special assessments shall be due
within 60 days after loss of eligibility by the applicant. If the deferred
special assessment is not paid within the 60 days, the City Administrator shall
add thereto interest at a per-annum interest rate of two percent above the bond
interest rate, and the total amount of principal and interest shall be
certified to the County Auditor for collection with taxes the following year.
Should the applicant demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Council that full
repayment of the deferred special assessment would cause the applicant
particular undue financial hardship, the city will certify the entire amount of
the deferred special assessments to the County Auditor to be paid according to
the terms and conditions of the original special assessments.
(Ord. 20240612-01, passed 6-12-2024)
PARK DEDICATION
§ 154.020 DEDICATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   As a condition of approval of any plat, replat, subdivision or lot
division allowing development of land for residential, commercial, industrial
or other uses or combination thereof, a reasonable portion of the land to be
divided must be dedicated to the public or preserved for public use as parks,
playgrounds, trails or open space.
   (B)   This requirement applies to plats, replats, subdivisions or lot
divisions that:
      (1)   Create at least one additional lot or provide for at least one
additional dwelling unit;
      (2)   Combine lots for the purpose of development involving changed or
mixed land uses or the intensification of uses; or
      (3)   Consist of a planned unit development as defined and regulated by
the Zoning Code.
   (C)   The dedication requirements are not satisfied if the city reasonably
determines that the land proposed for dedication is unsuitable for public
recreational use. The dedication required by this subchapter is in addition to
dedication required for streets, roads, utilities, storm water ponding areas,
or similar utilities and improvements.
(Prior Code, § 510.01)
§ 154.021 AMOUNT REQUIRED.
   (A)   The amount of land required for dedication is based upon the gross
land area to be subdivided and equals the land the city reasonably finds it
will need to acquire for park or other recreational purposes as a result of
approval of the land division.
   (B)   Generally, 10% of the gross land area to be subdivided must be
dedicated for residential subdivisions and 5% for commercial and industrial
subdivisions.
(Prior Code, § 510.03)
§ 154.022 CASH PAYMENT IN LIEU OF DEDICATION.
   (A)   The city may require a cash payment in lieu of land dedication.
   (B)   In determining to require payment or dedication, the Council will
consider such factors as whether the land is needed in the proposed location,
whether the proposed dedication is suitable for the intended use, and whether a
cash payment would be more beneficial to development of the entire park system.
(Prior Code, § 510.05)
§ 154.023 AMOUNT OF CASH PAYMENT.
   (A)   The cash payment in lieu of dedication is determined by the fair
market value of the undivided land as determined by the City Assessor at the
time of final plat approval, including the value added by existing utilities,
streets and other public improvements serving the property, but excluding the
value added by all other existing improvements to the land.
   (B)   The cash payment is determined by applying the appropriate percentage
stated in §
154.021 of this chapter to the fair market value as determined by the Assessor.
The maximum cash payment is $400 for each dwelling unit in residential
subdivisions and $400 per acre in commercial and industrial subdivisions, or
other such amounts as shall be set by the City Council from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 510.07)
§ 154.024 PARK AND OPEN SPACE FUND.
   Cash payments in lieu of dedication are payable at the time of final
subdivision approval. The payment must be placed in a special fund established
by the city to be used solely for the purposes of acquisition or development of
parks, playgrounds, trails or open space.
(Prior Code, § 510.09)
§ 154.025 PARTIAL DEDICATION.
   The city may accept a dedication of land in an amount less than that
specified in §
154.021 of this chapter and require a cash payment equivalent to the balance of
the dedication requirement. The partial cash payment is determined by
subtracting the percentage of land actually dedicated from the percentage of
land required to be dedicated under §
154.021 of this chapter, and applying the resulting percentage to the fair
market value of the proposed subdivision.
(Prior Code, § 510.11)
§ 154.026 CREDIT FOR PRIVATE LAND.
   (A)   A credit of up to 25% of the dedication requirements may be awarded
for park and open space that is to be privately owned and maintained by the
future residents of the subdivision.
   (B)   A credit will not be awarded unless the following conditions are met.
      (1)   Private open space may not be occupied by non-recreational
buildings and must be available for the use of all the residents of the
proposed subdivision.
      (2)   Required building setbacks will not be included in computation of
private open spaces.
      (3)   Use of the private open space must be restricted for park,
playground, trail or open space purposes by recorded covenants that:
         (a)   Run with the land in favor of future owners of property within
the subdivision; and
         (b)   Cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the City
Council.
      (4)   The private open space will be of a size, shape, location,
topography and useability for park or recreational purposes, or contain unique
features which are important to be preserved.
      (5)   The private open space must reduce the demand for public
recreational facilities or public open space occasioned by development of the
subdivision.
(Prior Code, § 510.13)
SIDEWALK REPAIR
§ 154.040 DUTY OF OWNER.
   (A)   The owner of property within the city abutting a public sidewalk must
keep the sidewalk in good repair.
   (B)   Repairs must be made in accordance with the standard specifications
approved by the Council and on file in the office of the City Administrator/
Clerk-Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 825.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.041 INSPECTIONS; NOTICE.
   The Public Works Director must make such inspections as are necessary to
determine that public sidewalks within the city are kept in good repair. If the
Public Works Director finds that a sidewalk abutting on private property is
unsafe and in need of repairs, the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer will cause a
notice to be served, by registered or certified mail or by personal service,
upon the record owner of the property, or the occupant, if the owner does not
reside within the city or cannot be found therein, ordering the owner to have
the sidewalk repaired within 20 days, and stating that if the owner fails to do
so, the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer will do so on behalf of the city,
that the expense thereof must be paid by the owner and that, if unpaid, it will
be made a special assessment against the property affected.
(Prior Code, § 825.01)
§ 154.042 REPAIR BY CITY.
   If the sidewalk is not repaired within 20 days after receipt of the notice,
the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer must cause the sidewalk to be repaired
in accordance with law. The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer must keep a
record of the total cost of the repair attributable to each lot or parcel of
property and report the information to the Deputy Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 825.01)
§ 154.043 PERSONAL LIABILITY.
   (A)   The owner of property on which or adjacent to which a sidewalk repair
has been performed under this subchapter is personally liable for the cost of
the repair.
   (B)   As soon as the repair has been completed and the cost determined, the
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer must prepare a bill and mail it to the owner
and thereupon the amount will be due and payable at the office of the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 825.03)
§ 154.044 ASSESSMENT.
   On or before September 15 of each year, the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer
must list the total unpaid charges for sidewalk repair against each separate
lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this subchapter. The Council
may then levy the unpaid charges against the property as a special assessment
under M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, and other
pertinent statutes, for certification to the County Auditor, and collection
along with current taxes the following year or in annual installments, not
exceeding ten, as the Council determines.
(Prior Code, § 825.05)
SNOW REMOVAL FROM SIDEWALKS
§ 154.055 CLEARING SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Sidewalks; snow and ice removal. Sidewalks to be cleared. Snow and ice
must be removed from the sidewalks of the city and must be kept clear of snow
and ice by the abutting property owner or occupant thereof. Where ice has
formed that cannot be removed, then salt, sand, ashes or other suitable
material must be spread upon the ice in sufficient quantity to make the
sidewalks usable by pedestrians.
(Prior Code, § 810.01)
   (B)   Clear within 12 hours of snowfall. Sidewalks must be cleared as soon
as possible after each snowfall but no later than 12 hours after the cessation
of the snowfall. Subsequent intermittent snow flurries may not be used to
enlarge the 12-hour period.
(Prior Code, § 810.03)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.056 OWNER, OCCUPANT RESPONSIBILITY.
   The owner and occupant of any building or ground within the corporate limits
of the city fronting upon or adjacent to the public street must cause the
sidewalks along or in front of the premises to be kept clear and free of snow
to the full width thereof. The owner of vacant land wherein there is located a
public sidewalk is responsible for the removal of snow therefrom. Nothing in
this section requires the removal of snow upon the public boulevard where no
sidewalk exists.
(Prior Code, § 810.05)
§ 154.057 PLACEMENT OF SNOW.
   No person shall remove snow from private property or a public sidewalk and
deposit the same on any public street or property. All property owners shall
make arrangements for the storage of accumulated snow either on their own
premises or on the premises of another; provided that, written permission is
obtained from the other property owner. Properties zoned “Historic Downtown
District” may deposit snow from their properties into a public street for
removal by the city; provided that, a written agreement is entered into between
the property owner and the city which specifies when the snow must be placed in
the street for removal and requires the property owner to pay the city for the
removal.
(Prior Code, § 810.06) (Ord. 2008-01, passed 9-17-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.058 COSTS OF REMOVAL; LIEN.
   (A)   The refusal of an owner or occupant to remove snow or ice from the
sidewalk or the failure of the owner or occupant to comply with this section is
sufficient cause for the City Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer to direct the
removal of snow or ice therefrom by city or hired labor or equipment charging
the actual cost against the abutting land.
   (B)   The Public Works Director will compute the actual cost to each parcel
or lot involved and submit the report to the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer
who must bill each property owner involved for the expense incurred.
(Prior Code, § 810.07)
§ 154.059 ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   On or before September 15 in each year, the Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer must list the total unpaid charge for snow removal from sidewalks
against each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this
subchapter.
   (B)   The Council may then levy the unpaid charges against the property as a
special assessment under M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to
time, for certification to the County Auditor and collection along with current
taxes the following year or in annual installments, not exceeding ten, as the
Council determines.
(Prior Code, § 810.09)
COURTESY BENCHES
§ 154.070 DEFINITION.
   A COURTESY BENCH is a waiting bench for the convenience of the public at a
location within the corporate limits.
(Prior Code, § 805.01)
§ 154.071 LOCATION.
   Courtesy benches may be located on public property when adjacent to
residential zoning and may be placed on private property in commercial and
industrial zoning districts when permission is obtained from the owner of the
land, and a license is granted by the city in accordance with this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 805.03)
§ 154.072 SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Each bench location must be approved by the City Administrator/City-
Treasurer. Benches must be installed parallel with the curb.
   (B)   A bench may not be more than 42 inches high or more than 30 inches
wide or seven feet long.
   (C)   A bench must have displayed thereon, in a conspicuous place, the
license number assigned to it.
   (D)   The licensee must maintain the bench at the location designated in the
license and keep the bench in good repair, painted and in a usable condition.
   (E)   Ice and snow must be removed from the benches and the vicinity thereof
to ensure accessibility and safe use by the public.
(Prior Code, § 805.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.073 LICENSE; PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Application. Application for a courtesy bench license is made to the
Deputy Clerk. The application must be accompanied by the annual license fee set
by §
36.02 of this code of ordinances, the insurance policy required by this
section, and the written approval of the City Administrator/City- Treasurer as
to location.
   (B)   Separate licenses; term. Each individual bench location requires a
separate license. The term of the license is one year.
   (C)   Insurance. The application must be accompanied by an insurance policy
that indemnifies and saves harmless the city, its officers, agents and
employees from any and all loss, costs, damages or liability which may result
from the location of the bench regardless of whether the bench is moved or
removed to a different location in the city without prior approval by the City
Council. The limits of the insurance must be $25,000 for any bodily injury to
or death to any one person in any one accident, $50,000 for any bodily injury
to or death to two or more persons in any one accident and $10,000 for any
damage to or destruction of property of others in any one accident, or other
such amounts as shall be set by the City Council from time to time. The failure
to keep this insurance in force automatically terminates the license for all
benches licensed with the city that the insurance covers.
(Prior Code, § 805.07)
§ 154.074 REMOVAL.
   (A)   After the expiration of the license or revocation thereof, the
licensee has ten days to remove the bench. If the bench is not removed within
the ten-day period, the city may remove the bench and place it in storage.
After the city has removed the bench, the former licensee of record will be
notified by mail directed to the address on file with the city. The owner will
be given 60 days after notification to claim the bench by paying removal and
storage charges.
   (B)   In the event that the bench is not claimed within 60 days, the former
licensee’s rights in the bench will be forfeited to the city, but the
forfeiture will not excuse the former licensee from the payment of the cost of
removal and storage charges for the bench.
(Prior Code, § 805.09)
§ 154.075 ADVERTISING.
   (A)   Location. Advertising matter may not be displayed upon a bench, except
upon the front and rear surfaces of the back rest.
   (B)   Contents; illumination. “Stop”, “look”, “drive-in” and “danger” or any
other phrase or symbol which might interfere with, mislead or distract traffic
may not be displayed on a bench. Reflective materials or electric illumination
of the signs on any bench or benches is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 805.11) Penalty, see §
10.99
STREET NAMES AND NUMBERS
§ 154.090 PURPOSE.
   (A)   To facilitate the easier location of residences and businesses in the
city, by the public, by utility companies and emergency vehicles, and for the
protection and safety of the citizens of the city, the streets and properties
and principal buildings are to be uniformly named and numbered, as shown on
that certain map identified as the city’s Street Name Map and index of all
property numbers on file in the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer’s office.
   (B)   The map and numbering index is adopted and made part of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 400.15) (Ord. 182, passed 11-15-1995)
§ 154.091 ASSIGNMENT OF STREET NAMES.
   (A)   East-west through roadways are known as “streets” and north-south
through roadways are known as “avenues”. Other through roadways are designated
“roads” as indicated on street name map.
   (B)   Non-through roadways are known as “places”.
   (C)   North-south avenues east of Main and north of Division Street will
have the designation “north” on street names. North-south avenues east of Main
and south of Division Street will have “south” designated as part of part of
street names.
   (D)   The following named streets are hereby designated as indicated:
      (1)   Bluff Avenue be designated as River Bluff Avenue;
      (2)   Minnesota Street be designated as Taylor Street;
      (3)   Fourth Street S. be designated as Hoover Street;
      (4)   Fifth Street S. be designated as Eisenhower Street;
      (5)   Sixth Street S. be designated as Collidge Street;
      (6)   Roadway being developed within Skunk Creek Properties be designated
as Quarry Place;
      (7)   East-west road in northeast and southeast quarter of section 10 be
designated as Old Wagon Road;
      (8)   Spring Street be designated as Ash Avenue;
      (9)   Olive Street be designated as Birch Avenue;
      (10)   W. Third Street/Golf Court Road be designated as Grouse Street;
      (11)   W. Sixth Street be designated as Jay Street;
      (12)   W. Seventh Street/Cedar Street be designated as Lark Street;
      (13)   Walnut Street be designated as Mallard Place;
      (14)   Maple Street be designated as Oriole Street;
      (15)   Ida Street be designated as Robin Street;
      (16)   Main Street N. from Sixth Street to Eighth Street be designated as
Angle Avenue;
      (17)   Main Street/Main Avenue from Taylor Street (previously Minnesota)
to 6th Street be designated as Main; and
      (18)   Government Road be designated as Old Military Road.
(Prior Code, § 400.15) (Ord. 182, passed 11-15-1995)
§ 154.092 FUTURE ASSIGNMENT OF STREET NAMES.
   Roadways to be named in the future must follow the existing street naming
system as shown on the street name map. Street names to be designated in the
future will follow the alphabetical and numbering sequence developed in the
street name map and use the street name themes in accordance with existing
street names in the city.
(Prior Code, § 400.15) (Ord. 182, passed 11-15-1995)
§ 154.093 ASSIGNMENT OF PROPERTY NUMBERS.
   Properties or principal buildings within the city will hereafter be
identified by reference to the uniform numbering system. Numbers will be
assigned using one whole number for each 25-foot frontage interval. Uniform
block of 100 numbers per block exist where possible. Buildings on the north and
east side of roadways bear even numbers. Buildings on the south and west side
of roadways bear an odd number.
(Prior Code, § 400.15) (Ord. 182, passed 11-15-1995)
§ 154.094 DISPLAY OF NUMBERS.
   (A)   Each principal building must bear the number assigned to the frontage
on which the front entrance is located.
   (B)   If a principal building is occupied by more than one business or
family dwelling unit, each separate front entrance of the building must bear a
separate property number.
   (C)   Mobile home parks within the city must carry a constant numbering
system for each lot, and the number must be placed by a sign or plaque located
upon each mobile home in the same location and height so that it may be readily
seen.
   (D)   The owner, lessor or occupant of every house, industrial or commercial
or other building must have proper house or building numbers by affixing the
numbers made of a durable material.
   (E)   Property numbers should be no less than four inches in height, in easy
to read block style letters. Numbers will be in a contrasting color to the base
to ensure visibility.
   (F)   (1)   Property numbers should be placed so as to be easily seen from
the street. The numbers must be conspicuously placed immediately above, or at
the side of the proper door of each building so that the number can be seen
plainly from the street line.
      (2)   Whenever any building is situated where the house number is not
easily visible from the street, numbers will be placed near the walk, driveway
or common entrance to such building and upon a gate post, fence, tree, post or
other appropriate place for visibility from roadway.
   (G)   A property owner of improved property has 60 days after the
implementation of new street names and numbers to purchase and display in a
conspicuous place on the properly the number assigned. In the case of numbers
assigned after implementation of street names and property numbers, owners will
have 30 days to affix property numbers to the structure. The owner must remove
any different number which might be mistaken for, or confused with, the
official number assigned to the structure.
   (H)   The cost of numbers is to be paid for by the property owner.
(Prior Code, § 400.15) (Ord. 182, passed 11-15-1995) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.095 NUMBERS FOR FUTURE BUILDINGS.
   Residences and business buildings erected after 11-29-1995 will be assigned
a number in accordance with the property numbering map and must purchase and
display such number as provided for in §
154.094 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 400.15) (Ord. 182, passed 11-15-1995)
§ 154.096 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Building Official is responsible for maintaining the street naming and
numbering system. In the performance of this responsibility, the Building
Official must be guided by the provisions of this section. The Building
Official must keep a record of all numbers assigned under this section. The
Building Official must issue to any property owner, a specific numerical
address to each principal building or separate front entrance to the building,
without charge, in accordance with the official numbering system.
(Prior Code, § 400.15) (Ord. 182, passed 11-15-1995)
CHAPTER 155: RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
155.01   Findings, purpose and intent
   
155.02   Election to manage public rights-of-way
   
155.03   Definitions
   
155.04   Director; Utility Coordination Committee
   
155.05   Appeals
   
155.06   Reservation of regulatory and police powers
   
155.07   Severability
Registration and Permit Requirements
   
155.20   Registration and right-of-way occupancy
   
155.21   Registration information
   
155.22   Reporting obligations
   
155.23   Permit requirements
   
155.24   Permit application
   
155.25   Permit issuance; conditions
   
155.26   Action on small wireless facility permit applications
   
155.27   Permit fees
   
155.28   Right-of-way patching and restoration
   
155.29   Joint and individual applications
   
155.30   Supplementary applications
   
155.31   Denial or revocation of permit
   
155.32   Installation and inspections
   
155.33   Work done without a permit
   
155.34   Supplementary notification
   
155.35   Revocation of permits
Conditions, Obligations and Regulations
   
155.50   Compliance with other laws
   
155.51   Prohibited work
   
155.52   Interference with right-of-way
   
155.53   Traffic control
   
155.54   Mapping data
   
155.55   Undergrounding
   
155.56   Location and relocation of facilities
   
155.57   Pre-excavation facilities location
   
155.58   Interference by other facilities
   
155.59   Right-of-way vacation; reservation of right
   
155.60   Indemnification and liability
   
155.61   Abandoned facilities
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.01 FINDINGS, PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   To provide for the health, safety and welfare of its citizens, and to
ensure the integrity of its streets and the appropriate use of the rights-of-
way, the city strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state of good repair and
free from unnecessary encumbrances.
   (B)   Accordingly, the city has enacted this chapter relating to right-of-
way permits and administration. This chapter imposes reasonable regulation on
the placement and maintenance of facilities and equipment currently within the
city’s rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some future time. It is
intended to complement the regulatory roles of state and federal agencies.
Under this chapter, persons excavating and obstructing the rights-of-way will
bear financial responsibility for their work through the recovery of out-of-
pocket and projected costs from persons using the public rights-of-way.
   (C)   This chapter is to be interpreted consistently with Laws 1997, Chapter
123, substantially codified in M.S. §§ 237.16, 237.162, 237.163, 237.79, 237.81
and 238.086 (the “Act”), as they may be amended from time to time, and 2017
Session Laws, Chapter 94, amending the Act and the other laws governing
applicable rights of the city and users of the right-of-way. This chapter is
also to be interpreted consistent with Minn. Rules parts 7819.0050 through
7819.9950, where possible. To the extent that any provision of this chapter
cannot be interpreted consistently with the Minnesota Rules, the interpretation
most consistent with the Act and other applicable statutory and case law is
intended.
(Prior Code, § 835.01) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017)
§ 155.02 ELECTION TO MANAGE THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under state and federal
statutory, administrative and common law, the city elects pursuant to M.S. §
237.163, subd. 2(b), as it may be amended from time to time, to manage rights-
of-way within its jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 835.03) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017)
§ 155.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
References to “subdivisions” are, unless otherwise specified, references to
subdivisions in this chapter.
   ABANDONED FACILITY. A facility no longer in service or physically
disconnected from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other
facility, that is in use or still carries service. A facility is not ABANDONED
unless declared so by the right-of-way user.
   APPLICANT. Any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a right-
of-way.
   CITY. The City of Sandstone, Minnesota. For purposes of this chapter, CITY
also means the city’s elected officials, officers, employees and agents.
   COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate or
replace a small wireless facility on, under, within or adjacent to an existing
wireless support structure or utility pole that is owned privately, or by the
city or other governmental entity.
   COMMISSION. The Minnesota Public Utilities Commission.
   CONSTRUCTION PERFORMANCE BOND. Any of the following forms of security
provided at the permittee’s option:
      (1)   Individual project bond, including a “license and permit” bond;
      (2)   Cash deposit;
      (3)   Security of a form listed or approved under M.S. § 15.73, subd. 2;
      (4)   Letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the city;
      (5)   Self-insurance, in a form acceptable to the city; and
      (6)   A blanket bond for projects within the city, or other form of
construction bond, for a time specified and in a form acceptable to the city.
   DEGRADATION. A decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused by
excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to
reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation
or disturbance did not occur.
   DEGRADATION COST. Subject to Minn. Rules part 7819.1100, the cost to achieve
a level of restoration as determined the city at by the time the permit is
issued, not to exceed the maximum restoration shown in plates 1 to 13, set
forth in Minn. Rules parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950.
   DEGRADATION FEE. The estimated fee established at the time of permitting by
the city to recover costs associated with the decrease in the useful life of
the right-of-way caused by the excavation, and which equals the degradation
cost.
   DIRECTOR. The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer of the city.
   DELAY PENALTY. The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays in
right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching or restoration as established by
permit.
   EMERGENCY. A condition that:
      (1)   Poses a danger to life or health, or of a significant loss of
property; or
      (2)   Requires immediate repair or replacement of facilities in order to
restore service to a customer.
   EQUIPMENT. Any tangible asset used to install, repair or maintain facilities
in any right-of-way.
   EXCAVATE. To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or
penetrate any part of a right-of-way.
   FACILITY or FACILITIES. Tangible asset in the public right-of-way required
to provide utility service. The term does not include facilities to the extent
the location and relocation of such facilities are preempted by M.S. § 161.45,
as it may be amended from time to time, governing utility facility placement in
state trunk highways.
   HIGH DENSITY CORRIDOR. A designated portion of the public right-of-way
within which telecommunications right-of-way users having multiple and
competing facilities may be required to build and install facilities in a
common conduit system or other common structure.
   HOLE. An excavation in the right-of-way, with the excavation having a length
less than the width of the pavement or adjacent pavement.
   LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE. A local person or persons, or designee of such person
or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make decisions
for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this chapter.
   MANAGEMENT COSTS. The actual costs the city incurs in managing its rights-
of-way, including such costs, if incurred, as those associated with registering
applicants; issuing, processing and verifying right-of-way or small wireless
facility permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration projects;
maintaining, supporting, protecting or moving user facilities during right-of-
way work; determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration; restoring work
inadequately performed, mapping of “as built” location of facilities located in
the right-of-way; and revoking right-of-way or small wireless facility permits
and performing all other tasks required by this chapter, including other costs
the city may incur in managing matters described in this chapter. MANAGEMENT
COSTS do not include payment by a telecommunications right-of-way user for the
use of right-of-way, unreasonable fees of a third-party contractor used by the
city including fees tied to or based on customer counts, access lines or
revenues generated by the right-of-way or for the city, the fees and cost of
litigation relating to the interpretation of Session Laws 1997, Chapter 123;
M.S. §§ 237.162 or 237.163, as they may be amended from time to time, or any
ordinance enacted under those sections, or the city fees and costs related to
appeals taken pursuant to §
155.05 of this chapter.
   OBSTRUCT. To place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to hinder
free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.
   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT. The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be
obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of that right-of-way,
for the duration specified therein, including a blanket permit for a period of
time and for types of work specified by the Director, if deemed appropriate in
Director’s discretion.
   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE. Money paid to the city by a permittee to cover the
costs as provided in §
155.23 of this chapter.
   PATCH or PATCHING.
      (1)   A method of pavement replacement that is temporary in nature; and
      (2)   A PATCH consists of:
         (a)   The compaction of the subbase and aggregate base; and
         (b)   The replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement for a minimum
of two feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all directions.
   PAVEMENT. Any type of improved surface that is within the public right-of-
way and that is paved or otherwise constructed with paver blocks, bituminous,
concrete, aggregate or gravel.
   PERMIT. Has the meaning given “right-of-way permit” in M.S. § 237.162, as it
may be amended from time to time.
   PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a right-of-
way has been granted by the city under this chapter.
   PERSON. Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Wherever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or “whoever” as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHT-OF-WAY. Has the meaning given it in M.S. §
237.162, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time.
   REGISTRANT. Any person who:
      (1)   Has or seeks to have its equipment or facilities located in any
right-of-way; or
      (2)   In any way occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the right-
of-way or place its facilities or equipment in the right-of-way.
   RESTORE or RESTORATION. The process by which an excavated right-of-way and
surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is returned to the same
condition and life expectancy that existed before excavation.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT. Either an obstruction or utility permit, depending on
the circumstances.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY USER.
      (1)   A telecommunications right-of-way user, as defined by M.S. §
237.162, subd. 4, as it may be amended from time to time; or
      (2)   A person owning or controlling a facility in the right-of-way that
is used or intended to be used for providing utility service, and who has a
right under law, franchise or ordinance to use the public right-of-way.
   SERVICE or UTILITY SERVICE.
      (1)   Services provided by a public utility as defined in M.S. § 216B.02,
subd. 4 and 6, as they may be amended from time to time;
      (2)   Services of a telecommunications right-of-way user, including
transporting of voice or data information;
      (3)   Services of a cable communications system as defined in M.S. §
238.02, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (4)   Natural gas or electric energy or telecommunications services
provided by a local government unit;
      (5)   Services provided by a cooperative electric association organized
under M.S. Chapter 308A, as it may be amended from time to time; and
      (6)   Water, sewer, steam, cooling or heating services.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications:
      (1)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six
cubic feet in volume or could fit within such an enclosure; and
      (2)   All other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless
facility; provided, the equipment is, in aggregate, no more than 28 cubic feet
in volume, not including electric meters, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation boxes, battery backup power systems, ground
equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable, conduit, vertical
cable runs for the connection of power and other services and any equipment
concealed from public view within or behind an existing structure or
concealment.
   SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION. An application made to excavate or obstruct more
of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit that had already
been issued.
   TEMPORARY SURFACE. The compaction of subbase and aggregate base and
replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement only to the edges of the
excavation.
   TRENCH. An excavation in the right-of-way, with the excavation having a
length equal to or greater than the width of the pavement or adjacent pavement.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHT-OF-WAY USER. A person owning or controlling a
facility in the right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a facility in the
right-of-way, that is used or is intended to be used for providing wireless
service, or transporting telecommunication or other voice or data information.
For purposes of this chapter, a cable communication system defined and
regulated under M.S. Chapter 238, as it may be amended from time to time, and
telecommunication activities related to providing natural gas or electric
energy services, a public utility as defined in M.S. § 216B.02, as it may be
amended from time to time, a municipality, a municipal gas or power agency
organized under M.S. Chapters 453 and 453A, as they may be amended from time to
time, or a cooperative electric association organized under M.S. Chapter 308A,
as it may be amended from time to time, are not telecommunications right-of-way
users, except to the extent such entity is offering wireless service.
   UTILITY PERMIT. The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be obtained
before a person may excavate in a right-of-way. A UTILITY PERMIT allows the
holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit.
   UTILITY PERMIT FEE. Money paid to the city by an applicant to cover the
costs as provided in §
155.24 of this chapter.
   UTILITY POLE. A pole that is used in whole or in part to facilitate
telecommunications or electric service.
   WIRELESS FACILITY. Equipment at a fixed location that enables the provision
of wireless services between user equipment and a wireless service network,
including equipment associated with wireless service, a radio transceiver,
antenna, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and a
small wireless facility, but not including wireless support structures,
wirelines backhaul facilities or cables between utility poles or wireless
support structures, or not otherwise immediately adjacent to and directly
associated with a specific antenna.
   WIRELESS SERVICE. Any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless
spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or by means
of a mobile device, that is provided using wireless facilities. WIRELESS
SERVICE does not include services regulated under Title VI of the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, including cable service.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A new or existing structure in a right-of-way
designed to support or capable of supporting small wireless facilities, as
reasonably determined by the city.
(Prior Code, § 835.05) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017)
§ 155.04 DIRECTOR; UTILITY COORDINATION COMMITTEE.
   (A)   The Director is responsible for the administration of the rights-of-
way, right-of-way permits and ordinances related thereto. The Director may
delegate any or all of the duties hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 835.07)
   (B)   (1)   The city may create an Advisory Utility Coordination Committee.
Participation on the Committee is voluntary.
      (2)   It is composed of any registrants that wish to assist the city in
obtaining information and making recommendations regarding use of the right-of-
way, and improving the process of performing construction work therein.
      (3)   The city may determine the size of such committee and shall appoint
members from a list of registrants that have expressed a desire to assist the
city.
(Prior Code, § 835.09)
(Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01, passed 11-1-2017)
§ 155.05 APPEALS.
   (A)   A right-of-way user that has been denied registration; has been denied
a permit; has had a permit revoked; or believes that the fees imposed are not
in conformity with state law may have the denial, revocation or fee imposition
reviewed, upon written request, by the City Council.
   (B)   (1)   The City Council must act on a timely written request at its
next regularly scheduled meeting; provided, the right-of-way user has submitted
its appeal with sufficient time to include the appeal as a regular agenda item.
      (2)   A decision by the City Council affirming the denial, revocation or
fee imposition will be in writing and supported by written findings
establishing the reasonableness of the decision.
(Prior Code, § 835.61) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017)
§ 155.06 RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS.
   A permittee’s or registrant’s rights are subject to the regulatory and
police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.
(Prior Code, § 835.63) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017)
§ 155.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, division, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or
administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion is to be deemed a
separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding is not to affect
the validity of the remaining portions thereof. If a regulatory body or a court
of competent jurisdiction should determine by a final, non-appealable order
that any permit, right or registration issued under this chapter or any
portions of this chapter is illegal or unenforceable, then any such permit,
right or registration granted or deemed to exist hereunder is to be considered
as a revocable permit with a mutual right in either party to terminate without
cause upon giving 60 days’ written notice to the other. The requirements and
conditions of such a revocable permit is to be the same requirements and
conditions as set forth in the permit, right or registration, respectively,
except for conditions relating to the term of the permit and the right of
termination. Nothing in this chapter precludes the city from requiring a
franchise agreement with the applicant, as allowed by law, in addition to
requirements set forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 835.65) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017)
REGISTRATION AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
§ 155.20 REGISTRATION AND RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Registration. Each registrant, including a person who occupies, uses,
or seeks to occupy or use, the right-of-way or place any equipment or
facilities in or on the right-of-way, including persons with installation and
maintenance responsibilities by lease, sublease or assignment, must register
with the city. Registration will consist of providing application information
and paying a registration fee. Registration must be renewed annually.
   (B)   Registration prior to work. It is unlawful to construct, install,
repair, remove, relocate or perform any other work on, or use any facilities or
any part thereof in any right-of-way without first being registered with the
city.
   (C)   Exceptions. Nothing in this chapter is to be construed to repeal or
amend the provisions of a city ordinance establishing the rights of and
limitations placed on persons to plant or maintain boulevard plantings or
gardens in the area of the right-of-way between their property and the street
curb. Persons carrying out or requesting the following work are not deemed to
use or occupy the right-of-way within the meaning of this chapter, and are not
governed by this chapter. Such work by non right-of-way users is regulated by
other city code sections, unless provided otherwise:
      (1)   Persons planting or maintaining boulevard plantings or gardens;
      (2)   Persons erecting fences, installing driveways, sidewalks, curb and
gutter, or parking lots;
      (3)   Persons engaged in snow removal activities;
      (4)   Persons installing street furnishings; and
      (5)   Persons installing irrigation systems.
   (D)   Gopher One Call. Nothing herein relieves a person from complying with
the provisions of the M.S. Chapter 216D, as it may be amended from time to
time, the Gopher One Call Law.
(Prior Code, § 835.11) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.21 REGISTRATION INFORMATION.
   (A)   Information required. The registrant must provide the following at the
time of registration and promptly notify the city of changes in such
information:
      (1)   Registrant’s name, address, telephone number, facsimile number and
Gopher One Call registration certificate number if any;
      (2)   Name, street address and email address, telephone number and
facsimile number of the registrant representative;
      (3)   (a)   A certificate of insurance from a company licensed to do
business in the state providing coverage in at least the following amounts:
            1.   General liability. Public liability, including premises,
products and complete operations, or other such amounts as shall be set by the
City Council from time to time:
 
Bodily injury liability                    $1,000,000 each person
                                           $3,000,000 each occurrence
Property damage liability                  $3,000,000 each occurrence
Bodily injury and property damage combined $3,000,000 single limit
 
            2.   Comprehensive. Automobile liability insurance, including
owned, non-owned and hired vehicles.
 
Bodily injury liability                         $1,000,000 each person
Property damage liability                       $3,000,000 each occurrence
In lieu of 1) and 2) bodily injury and property $3,000,000 single limit
damage combined
 
         (b)   1.   The certificate must verify that the registrant is insured
against claims for personal injury, including death, as well as claims for
property damage arising out of the:
               a.   Use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the registrant,
its officers, agents, employees and permittees; and
               b.   Placement and use of equipment or facilities in the right-
of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents, employees and permittees,
including, but not limited to, protection against liability arising from
completed operations, damage of underground equipment and collapse of property.
            2.   The certificate must also name the city as an additional
insured as to whom the coverages required herein are in force and applicable
and for whom defense will be provided as to all such coverages. The certificate
must require that the city be notified 30 days prior to cancellation of the
policy.
      (4)   24-hour emergency number;
      (5)   An acknowledgment by the registrant of the indemnification pursuant
to §
155.60 of this chapter;
      (6)   Certificate of authority to do business in the state and in the
city, if applicable; and
      (7)   Such other information as the Director may require.
   (B)   Notice of changes. The registrant must keep the information listed
above current at all times by providing to the city information as to changes
within 15 days following the date on which the registrant has knowledge of any
change.
(Prior Code, § 835.13) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017)
§ 155.22 REPORTING OBLIGATIONS.
   (A)   Operations. If requested by Director, each registrant shall, at the
time of registration and by December 1 of each year, file a construction and
major maintenance plan for underground facilities with the city. The plan must
be submitted using a format designated by the city and contain the information
determined by the city to be necessary to facilitate the coordination and
reduction in the frequency of excavations and obstructions of rights-of-way.
If, by December 1, the registrant has not developed its construction and
maintenance information for the coming year, the registrant must file that
information with the city as soon as it is developed. The plan must include,
but not be limited to, the locations and the estimated beginning and ending
dates of all projects to be commenced during the next calendar year (in this
chapter, a “next-year project”).
   (B)   Additional next-year projects. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city
will not deny an application for a right-of-way permit for failure to include a
project in a plan submitted to the city if the registrant has used commercially
reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for the project.
(Prior Code, § 835.15) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017)
§ 155.23 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this code, no right-
of-way user may obstruct or excavate, or install or place facilities in the
right-of-way without first having obtained the appropriate right-of-way permit
from the city to do so.
   (B)   Types of permits.
      (1)   Utility permit. A utility permit is required by a registrant to
excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit and to hinder
free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing
facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified
therein.
      (2)   Obstruction permit. An obstruction permit is required by a
registrant to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the
right-of-way by placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the
extent and for the duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not
required if a person already possesses a valid utility permit for the same
project.
      (3)   Small wireless facility permit. A small wireless facility permit is
required by a registrant to erect or install a wireless support structure, to
collocate a small wireless facility or to otherwise install a small wireless
facility in the specified portion of the right-of-way, to the extent specified
therein; provided that, the permit shall remain in effect for the length of
time the facility is in use, unless lawfully revoked.
   (B)   Security. For companies not operating under a franchise with the city,
a surety bond, letter of credit or cash deposit in the amount determined by the
Director, but not less than $5,000, or another such amount as shall be set by
the City Council from time to time, is required from each applicant. A surety
bond shall be from a corporate surety authorized to do business in the state.
The security must be conditioned that the holder will perform the work in
accordance with this chapter and applicable regulations, will pay to the city
any costs incurred by the city in performing work pursuant to this chapter; and
will indemnify and save the city and its officers, agents and employees
harmless against any and all claims, judgment or other costs arising from any
excavation and other work covered by the permit or for which the City Council
or any city officer may be liable by reason of any accident or injury to
persons or property through the fault of the permit holder, either in
improperly guarding the excavation or for any other injury resulting from the
negligence of the permit holder. The bond, letter of credit or cash deposit
will be released by the city upon completion of the work and compliance with
all conditions imposed by the permit. For permits allowing excavations within
public streets, the bond, letter of credit or cash deposit will be held for a
period of 24 months to guaranty the adequacy of all restoration work.
   (C)   Permit extensions.
      (1)   A person may not excavate or obstruct the right-of-way beyond the
date or dates specified in the permit unless:
         (a)   The person makes a supplementary application for another right-
of-way permit before the expiration of the initial permit, or requests a verbal
extension; and
         (b)   A new permit or permit extension is granted.
      (2)   Verbal extensions may be granted by the Director for a period no
greater than 48 hours or for emergencies.
   (D)   Diligence in performing work; delay penalty. Work shall progress in an
expeditious manner as permitted by weather conditions until completion in order
to avoid unnecessary inconvenience. If the work is not done in an expeditious
manner, the city may, after 72-hour notice to the permit holder, fill the
excavation or repair the street. The entire cost of the work must be paid by
the permit holder upon demand made by the city. In accordance with Minn. Rules
part 7819.1000, subp. 3, the city will establish and impose a delay penalty for
unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching or
restoration. The delay penalty shall be established from time to time by City
Council resolution. A delay penalty will not be imposed for delays due to force
majeure, including inclement weather, civil strife, acts of God or other
circumstances beyond the control of the applicant.
   (E)   Permit display. Permits must be conspicuously displayed or otherwise
available at all times at the indicated work site and be available for
inspection by the city.
   (F)   Routine obstruction and excavation. Routine excavations and
obstructions are permitted without separate notice and separate compensation
for the projects. Projects that do not involve excavation of paved surface and
that last less than 12 hours in duration may, in the Director’s discretion, be
considered routine obstruction and excavation and include by way of example,
switching, replacing fuses, replacing transformers, placing line guards, animal
protection, leak surveys, anode installations and inspections.
(Prior Code, § 835.17) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017)
§ 155.24 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application for a permit is made to the city.
   (B)   Right-of-way permit applications must contain, and will be considered
complete only upon compliance with the requirements of the following provisions
of this section:
      (1)   Registration with the city pursuant to this chapter;
      (2)   Submission of a completed permit application form as provided by
the city, including all required attachments, and five copies of scaled
drawings showing the location and area of the proposed project and the location
of all known existing and proposed facilities owned or operated by the
applicant;
      (3)   Payment of money due the city for:
         (a)   Permit fees, estimated restoration costs and other management
costs;
         (b)   Prior obstructions or excavations; and
         (c)   Any undisputed loss, damage or expense suffered by the city
because of applicant’s prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way
or any emergency actions taken by the city.
      (4)   Payment of disputed amounts due the city by posting security or
depositing in an escrow account an amount equal to at least 100% of the amount
owing; and
      (5)   Posting an additional or larger construction performance bond for
additional facilities when applicant requests an excavation permit to install
additional facilities and the city deems the existing construction performance
bond inadequate under applicable standards.
(Prior Code, § 835.19) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017)
§ 155.25 PERMIT ISSUANCE; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Permit issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of
this chapter, the city must issue a permit within ten business days of
receiving a completed application.
   (B)   Conditions. The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the
issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the public or when necessary to
protect the right-of-way and its current use.
   (C)   Notice of work. Upon request by the Director, the permittee must
notify in writing in a form approved by the Director all residents specified by
the Director whose property is adjacent to the right-of-way where the proposed
work is to be done indicating start and completion dates. Written notification
is not required for routine obstruction and excavation projects or in the case
of emergencies. If the permittee chooses not to carry out the notice process
required with its own staff, the permittee must promptly inform the Director.
The city may then carry out the notice process using its own staff, and the
permittee must reimburse the city its costs of providing required notice,
within 30 days of billing.
   (D)   Small wireless facility conditions. In addition to division (B) above,
the erection or installation of a wireless support structure, the collocation
of a small wireless facility, or other installation of a small wireless
facility in the right-of-way, shall be subject to the following conditions.
      (1)   A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on the
particular wireless support structure, under those attachment specifications
and at the height indicated in the applicable permit application.
      (2)   No new wireless support structure installed within the right-of-way
shall exceed 50 feet in height without the city’s written authorization;
provided that, the city may impose a lower height limit in the applicable
permit to protect the public health, safety and welfare or to protect the
right-of-way and its current use; and, further provided that, a registrant may
replace an existing wireless support structure exceeding 50 feet in height with
a structure of the same height subject to such conditions or requirements as
may be imposed in the applicable permit.
      (3)   No wireless facility may extend more than ten feet above its
wireless support structure.
      (4)   Where an applicant proposes to install a new wireless support
structure in the right-of-way, the city may impose separation requirements
between such structure and any existing wireless support structure or other
facilities in and around the right-of-way.
      (5)   Where an applicant proposes collocation on a decorative wireless
support structure, sign or other structure not intended to support small
wireless facilities, the city may impose reasonable requirements to accommodate
the particular design, appearance or intended purpose of the structure.
      (6)   Where an applicant proposes to replace a wireless support
structure, the city may impose reasonable restocking, replacement or relocation
requirements on the replacement of the structure.
   (E)   Small wireless facility agreement.
      (1)   A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on a small
wireless support structure owned or controlled by the city, or any other city
asset in the right-of-way, after the applicant has executed a standard small
wireless facility collocation agreement with the city. The standard collocation
agreement may require payment of the following, or in other such amounts as
shall be set by the City Council from time to time:
         (a)   Up to $150 per year for rent to collocate on the city structure;
         (b)   Twenty-five dollars per year for maintenance associated with the
collocation;
         (c)   A monthly fee for electrical service as follows:
            1.   Seventy-three dollars per radio node less than or equal to 100
maximum watts;
            2.   One-hundred eighty-two dollars per radio node over 100 maximum
watts; or
            3.   The actual costs of electricity, if the actual cost exceed the
foregoing.
      (2)   The standard collocation agreement shall be in addition to, and not
in lieu of, the required small wireless facility permit; provided, however,
that, the applicant shall not be additionally required to obtain a license or
franchise in order to collocate. Issuance of a small wireless facility permit
does not supersede, alter or affect any then-existing agreement between the
city and the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 835.21) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017)
§ 155.26 ACTION ON SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Deadline for action. The city shall approve or deny a small wireless
facility permit application within 90 days after filing of the application. The
small wireless facility permit, and any associated building permit application,
shall be deemed approved if the city fails to approve or deny the application
within the review periods established in this chapter.
   (B)   Consolidated applications.
      (1)   An applicant may file a consolidated small wireless facility permit
application addressing the proposed collocation of up to 15 small wireless
facilities, or a greater number if agreed to by a local government unit;
provided that, all small wireless facilities in the application:
         (a)   Are located within a two-mile radius;
         (b)   Consist of substantially similar equipment; and
         (c)   Are to be placed on similar types of wireless support
structures.
      (2)   In rendering a decision on a consolidated permit application, the
city may approve some small wireless facilities and deny others, but may not
use denial of one or more permits as a basis to deny all small wireless
facilities in the application.
   (C)   Tolling of deadline. The 90-day deadline for action on a small
wireless facility permit application may be tolled if:
      (1)   The city receives applications from one or more applicants seeking
approval of permits for more than 30 small wireless facilities within a seven-
day period. In such case, the city may extend the deadline for all such
applications by 30 days by informing the affected applicants in writing of the
extension.
      (2)   The applicant fails to submit all required documents or information
and the city provides written notice of incompleteness to the applicant within
30 days of receipt the application. Upon submission of additional documents or
information, the city shall have ten days to notify the applicant in writing of
any still-missing information.
      (3)   The city and a small wireless facility applicant agree in writing
to toll the review period.
(Prior Code, § 835.22) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017)
§ 155.27 PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Fee schedule and fee allocation.
      (1)   The city’s permit fee schedule is available to the public and
established in advance where reasonably possible.
      (2)   The permit fees are designed to recover the city’s actual costs
incurred in managing the right-of-way and are based on an allocation among all
users of the right-of-way, including the city.
   (B)   Utility permit fee. The city must establish a utility permit fee in an
amount sufficient to recover the following costs:
      (1)   City management costs; and
      (2)   Degradation costs, if applicable.
   (C)   Obstruction permit fee. The city must establish the obstruction permit
fee in an amount sufficient to recover the city management costs.
   (D)   Small wireless facility permit fee. The city shall impose a small
wireless facility permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover:
      (1)   Management costs; and
      (2)   City engineering, make-ready and construction costs associated with
collocation of small wireless facilities.
   (E)   Payment of permit fees. A utility permit or obstruction permit may not
be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit fees.
   (F)   Non-refundable. Permit fees paid for a permit that the city has
revoked for a breach as stated in §
163.326 are not refundable.
   (G)   Application to franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise,
management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to the
franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise.
(Prior Code, § 835.23) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017)
§ 155.28 RIGHT-OF-WAY PATCHING AND RESTORATION.
   (A)   Timing. Work to be done under the excavation permit and the patching
and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein must be completed within
the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days as work could not
be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the permittee or when
work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable.
   (B)   Patch and restoration. The permittee must patch its own work. The city
may choose either to have the permittee restore the surface and subgrading
portions of right-of-way or to restore the surface portion of right-of-way
itself.
   (C)   Permittee restoration. If the permittee restores the right-of-way
itself, it must at the time of application for an excavation permit post a
construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions of Minn. Rules
part 7819.3000.
   (D)   City restoration. If the city restores the surface portion of right-
of-way, the permittee must pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing. If,
following the restoration, the pavement settles or otherwise fails for reasons
not caused by city’s failure to properly restore, the permittee shall pay to
the city, within 30 days of billing, all costs associated with correcting the
defective work.
   (E)   Degradation fee in lieu of restoration. In lieu of right-of-way
restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation fee. However,
the right-of-way user remains responsible for replacing and compacting the
subgrade and aggregate based material in the excavation and the degradation fee
will not include the cost to accomplish these responsibilities.
   (F)   Standards. The permittee must perform patching and restoration
according to the standards and with the materials specified by the city and
comply with Minn. Rules part 7819.1100. In exercising authority over
restoration, the Director is to be guided by the following standards and
considerations:
      (1)   The number, size, depth and duration of the excavations,
disruptions or damage to the right-of-way;
      (2)   The traffic volume carried by the right-of-way; the character of
the neighborhood surrounding the right-of-way;
      (3)   The pre-excavation condition of the right-of-way; the remaining
life-expectancy of the right-of-way affected by the excavation;
      (4)   Whether the relative cost of the method of restoration to the
permit holder is in reasonable balance with the prevention of an accelerated
depreciation of the right-of-way that would otherwise result from the exaction,
disturbance or damage to the right-of-way; and
      (5)   The likelihood that the particular method of restoration would be
effective in slowing the depreciation of the right-of-way that would otherwise
take place.
   (G)   Duty to correct defects. The permittee must correct defects in
patching, or restoration performed by the permittee or its agents. Upon
notification from the city, the permittee shall correct all restoration work to
the extent necessary, using the method required by the city. Unless otherwise
agreed to by the Director, the work must be commenced within two days of
receipt of the notice from the city and be completed within 14 days of
commencement of work, not including days during which work cannot be done
because of circumstances constituting force majeure or days when work is
prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable.
   (H)   Failure to restore.
      (1)   If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way in the manner
and to the condition required by the city, or fails to satisfactorily and
timely complete all restoration required by the city, the city must notify the
permittee in writing of the specific alleged failure or failures and allow the
permittee five days from receipt of written notice to cure the failure or
failures, unless otherwise extended by the Director.
      (2)   In the event the permittee fails to cure, the city may perform the
necessary work and permittee must pay to the city, within 30 days of billing,
the cost of restoring the right-of-way.
      (3)   If permittee fails to pay as required, the city may exercise its
rights under the construction performance bond.
(Prior Code, § 835.25) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017)
§ 155.29 JOINT AND INDIVIDUAL APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Joint trenching. Director may require registrants to jointly apply for
permits to excavate or obstruct the right-of-way at the same place and time.
   (B)   Fees. Registrants who apply for permits for the same obstruction or
excavation, which the city does not perform, may share in the payment of the
obstruction or utility permit fee as established by the city for joint
trenching. Registrants must agree among themselves as to the portion each will
pay and indicate the same on their applications.
   (C)   With city projects. Registrants in a scheduled obstruction or
excavation performed by the city, whether or not it is a joint application by
two or more registrants or a single application, are not required to pay the
utility or obstruction and degradation portions of the permit fee, but a permit
is required.
(Prior Code, § 835.27) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017)
§ 155.30 SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Limitation on area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area
of the right-of-way specified in the permit. A permittee may not do any work
outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. A
permittee who determines that an area greater than that specified in the permit
must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater area:
      (1)   Make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees
required thereby; and
      (2)   Be granted a new permit or permit extension.
   (B)   Limitation on dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates
specified in the permit. A permittee may not begin work before the permit start
date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the end date. Except
in the case of verbal extensions by the Director, if a permittee does not
finish the work by the permit end date, it must apply for a new permit for the
additional time it needs, and receive the new permit or an extension of the old
permit before working after the end date of the previous permit. This
supplementary application must be submitted before the permit end date.
(Prior Code, § 835.29) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017)
§ 155.31 DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Reasons for denial. The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the
requirements and conditions of this chapter or if the city determines that the
denial is necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare or when necessary
to protect the right-of-way and its current use or for the following specific
violations:
      (1)   Failure to register;
      (2)   A proposed excavation within a street or sidewalk surface that has
been constructed or reconstructed within the preceding five years, unless the
Director determines that no other locations are feasible or when necessitated
by emergency;
      (3)   The applicant is subject to revocation of a prior permit issued
pursuant to this chapter;
      (4)   The proposed schedule for the work would conflict or interfere with
an exhibition, celebration, festival or any other similar event;
      (5)   The right-of-way would become unduly congested due to the proposed
facilities and equipment when combined with other uses in the right-of-way;
and/or
      (6)   Businesses or residences in the vicinity will be unreasonably
disrupted.
   (B)   Procedural requirements. The denial or revocation of a permit must be
made in writing and must document the basis for the denial. The city must
notify the applicant or right-of-way user in writing, within three business
days of the decision to deny or revoke a permit. If an application is denied,
the right-of-way user may address the reasons for denial identified by the city
and resubmit its application. If the application is resubmitted within 30 days
of receipt of the notice of denial, no additional application fee shall be
imposed. The city must approve or deny the resubmitted application within 30
days after submission.
(Prior Code, § 835.33) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017)
§ 155.32 INSTALLATION AND INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other
work performed in the right-of-way must be done in conformance with Minn. Rules
parts 7819.1100, 7819.5000 and 7819.5100 and other applicable local
requirements, such as the city standard specifications and details, in so far
as they are not inconsistent with the M.S. §§ 237.162 and 237.163, as they may
be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 835.35)
   (B)   (1)   Site inspection. The permittee must make the work-site available
to the city and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all
reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the work.
      (2)   Authority of Director. At the time of inspection, the Director may
order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the
life, health, safety or well-being of the public. The Director may issue an
order to the permittee to correct any work that does not conform to the terms
of the permit or other applicable standards, conditions or code. If the work
failure is a “substantial breach” within the meaning of M.S. § 237.163, subd. 4
(c), as it may be amended from time to time, the order must state that failure
to correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit after a
specified period determined by the Director. The permittee shall present proof
to the Director that the violation has been corrected within the time period
set forth by the Director in the order. The proof shall be provided no later
than the next business day following the day of completion. If such proof has
not been presented within the required time, the Director may revoke the
permit.
      (3)   Standards during construction or installation. The permit holder
shall comply with the following standards when engaging in the work:
         (a)   Take such precautions as are necessary to avoid creating
unsanitary conditions. Observe and comply with all laws, rules and regulations
of the state;
         (b)   Conduct the operation and perform the work in a manner as to
ensure the least obstruction and interference to traffic;
         (c)   Take adequate precautions to ensure the safety of the general
public and those who require access to abutting property;
         (d)   If required by the Director, notify adjoining property owners
prior to the commencement of work which may disrupt the use of and access to
such adjoining properties;
         (e)   In all cases where construction work interferes with the normal
use of the construction area, provide for closing the construction area to
traffic or to afford it restricted use of the area and comply with Minnesota
Manual of Uniform Traffic-Control Devices traffic safety signing requirements;
         (f)   Exercise precaution at all times for the protection of persons,
including employees and property;
         (g)   Protect and identify excavations and work operations with
barricade flags, and if required, by flaggers in the daytime, and by warning
lights at night;
         (h)   Provide proper trench protection as required by Occupational
Health and Safety Administration when necessary and depending upon the type of
soil, in order to prevent cave-ins endangering life or tending to enlarge the
excavation;
         (i)   Protect the root growth of trees and shrubbery;
         (j)   Installation of pipe (utility conductors) under portland cement
concrete, asphalt concrete or other high-type bituminous pavements must be done
by jacking, auguring or tunneling as directed by the engineer unless otherwise
authorized. High density polyethylene sleeving shall be an acceptable casing or
sleeving material for telecommunications installations; and
         (k)   When removing pavement of portland cement concrete, asphalt
concrete or high-type built-up bituminous surfacing, the pavement must be
removed on each side of the trench or excavation a distance of nine inches
beyond the trench width and length, in order to provide a shoulder and solid
foundation for the surface restoration.
(Prior Code, § 835.37)
(Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01, passed 11-1-2017)
§ 155.33 WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.
   (A)   Emergency situations. A registrant must immediately notify the
Director of any event regarding its facilities that the registrant considers to
be an emergency. The registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are
necessary to respond to the emergency. Within two business days after the
occurrence of the emergency, unless the Director allows a longer time, the
registrant must apply for the necessary permits, pay the fees associated
therewith and fulfill the rest of the requirements necessary to bring itself
into compliance with this chapter for the actions it took in response to the
emergency. If the Director concludes that a registrant is required to perform
work at the facility solely because of an emergency created by another
registrant and the work is performed in the immediate area of the emergency
work, the Director may waive the permit otherwise required by the registrant
called to the emergency created by another party.
   (B)   Contact; safety. If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding a
registrant’s facilities, the city will contact the registrant’s emergency phone
number as registered with the city or listed in the phone directory. The city
will make the area safe, as necessary. If there is no response from the
registrant, the city may take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to
the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the permittee or registrant
whose facilities occasioned the emergency.
   (C)   Non-emergency situations. Except in an emergency, a person who,
without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a
right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit, pay an unauthorized work permit
fee in an amount established from time to time by the City Council, deposit
with the city the fees necessary to correct any damage to the right-of-way and
comply with all of the requirements of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 835.39) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017)
§ 155.34 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.
   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends
sooner than the date given on the permit, the permittee shall notify the city
by supplementary application of the accurate information as soon as this
information is known.
(Prior Code, § 835.41) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017)
§ 155.35 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Substantial breach. The city may revoke any right-of-way permit,
without a fee refund, if there is a substantial breach of the terms and
conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule or regulation, or any material
condition of the permit. A substantial breach by the permittee includes, but is
not limited to, the following:
      (1)   The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
      (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-
of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit
upon the city or its citizens;
      (3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a
right-of-way permit;
      (4)   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner; unless a
permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to
reasons beyond the permittee’s control; or
      (5)   The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not
conform to a condition indicated on an order issued by the Director.
   (B)   Written notice of breach. If the city determines that the permittee
has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute,
ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit the city must make a
written demand upon the permittee to remedy the violation. The demand must
state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit. A
substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city to place additional or
revised conditions on the permit to mitigate and remedy the breach.
   (C)   Response to notice of breach. Within a time established by the
Director following the permittee’s receipt of notification of the breach, the
permittee shall provide the city with a plan to cure the breach, acceptable to
the city. The permittee’s failure to submit a timely and acceptable plan, or
the permittee’s failure to timely implement the approved plan is grounds for
immediate revocation of the permit.
   (D)   Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee
must also reimburse the city for the city’s reasonable costs, including
restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorneys’ fees
incurred in connection with the revocation.
(Prior Code, § 835.43) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017)
CONDITIONS, OBLIGATIONS AND REGULATIONS
§ 155.50 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS.
   Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not relieve the permittee of its duty
to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses, and authority and to pay all
fees required by the city or other applicable rule, law or regulation. A
permittee shall comply with all requirements of local, state and federal laws,
including M.S. §§ 216D.01 through 216D.09 (Gopher One Call Excavation Notice
System), as they may be amended from time to time. A permittee must perform all
work in conformance with all applicable codes and established rules and
regulations, and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way pursuant
to its permit, regardless of who does the work.
(Prior Code, § 835.31) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017)
§ 155.51 PROHIBITED WORK.
   Except in an emergency, or with the approval of the city, no right-of-way
obstruction or excavation may be done when seasonally prohibited or when
conditions are unreasonable for the work.
(Prior Code, § 835.31) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017)
§ 155.52 INTERFERENCE WITH RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   A permittee may not so obstruct a right-of-way that the natural free and
clear passage of water through the gutters or other waterways will be
interfered with, unless otherwise approved by the Director. Private vehicles of
those doing work in the right-of-way may not be parked within or next to a
permit area, unless parked in conformance with city parking regulations. The
loading or unloading of trucks must be done solely within the defined permit
area unless specifically authorized by the permit.
(Prior Code, § 835.31) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017)
§ 155.53 TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   A permittee must implement traffic control measures in the area of the work
and use traffic-control procedures in accordance with the most recent manuals
on uniform traffic control, traffic-control devices and traffic zone layouts
published by the state.
(Prior Code, § 835.31) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017)
§ 155.54 MAPPING DATA.
   Each registrant and permittee shall provide mapping information in a form
required by the city in accordance with Minn. Rules parts 7819.4000 and
7819.4100. Within 90 days following completion of any work pursuant to a
permit, the permittee shall provide the director accurate maps and drawings
certifying the as-built location of all equipment installed, owned and
maintained by the permittee. The maps and drawings shall include the horizontal
location and the approximate vertical location, to the extent known of all
facilities and equipment and shall be provided consistent with the city’s
electronic mapping system. Failure to provide maps and drawings pursuant to
this section is grounds for revoking the permit holder’s registration.
(Prior Code, § 835.45) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017)
§ 155.55 UNDERGROUNDING.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The purpose of this section is to promote the health, safety and
general welfare of the public and is intended to foster:
         (a)   Safe travel over the right-of-way;
         (b)   Non-travel related safety around homes and buildings where
overhead feeds are connected; and
         (c)   Orderly development in the city.
      (2)   Location and relocation, installation and reinstallation of
facilities in the right-of-way or in or on other public ground must be made in
accordance with this section. This section is intended to be enforced
consistently with state and federal law regulating right-of-way users,
specifically including but not limited to M.S. §§ 161.45, 237.162, 237.163,
301B.01, 222.37, 238.084 and 216B.36, as they may be amended from time to time,
and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, 47 U.S.C. § 253.
   (B)   Undergrounding of facilities.
      (1)   If the city finds that one or more of the purposes set forth in
division (A) above would be promoted, the city may require newly installed or
constructed facilities in the public right-of-way or in other public property
held in common for public use to be located and maintained underground pursuant
to the terms and conditions of this chapter and in accordance with applicable
construction standards, subject to the exceptions below.
      (2)   Above-ground installation, construction, modification or
replacement of meters, gauges, transformers, street lighting, pad mount
switches, capacitor banks, re-closers and service connection pedestals are
allowed.
      (3)   The requirements of this division (B) shall apply equally outside
of the corporate limits of the city coincident with city jurisdiction of
platting, subdivision regulation or comprehensive planning as may now or in the
future be allowed by law.
   (C)   Undergrounding of permanent replacement, relocated or reconstructed
facilities. If the city finds that one or more of the purposes set forth in
division (A) above would be promoted, the city may require a permanent
replacement, relocation or reconstruction of a facility of more than 300 feet
to be located, and maintained underground, with due regard for seasonal working
conditions. For purposes of this chapter, RECONSTRUCTION means any substantial
repair of or any improvement to existing facilities. Undergrounding may be
required whether a replacement, relocation or reconstruction is initiated by
the right-of-way user owning or operating the facilities, or by the city in
connection with:
      (1)   The present or future use by the city or other local government
unit of the right-of-way or other public ground for a public project;
      (2)   The public health or safety; or
      (3)   The safety and convenience of travel over the right-of-way.
   (D)   Exceptions to undergrounding. The following exceptions to the strict
application of this section will be allowed upon the conditions stated:
      (1)   Transmission lines. Above-ground installation, construction or
placement of those facilities commonly referred to as “high voltage
transmission lines” shall be allowed unless the council requires undergrounding
of the facilities after providing the right-of-way user notice and an
opportunity to be heard. This provision is not to be construed as waiving the
requirements of any other ordinance or regulation of the city as the same may
apply to any such proposed project.
      (2)   Technical/economic feasibility; promotion of policy. Above-ground
installation, construction or placement of facilities shall be allowed in
residential, commercial and industrial areas where the council, following
consideration and recommendation by the Planning Commission, finds that:
         (a)   Underground placement would place an undue financial burden upon
the landowner, ratepayers or right-of-way user or would deprive the landowner
of the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights;
         (b)   Underground placement is impractical or not technically feasible
due to topographical, subsoil or other existing conditions which adversely
affect underground facilities placement; or
         (c)   The right-of-way user clearly and convincingly demonstrates that
none of the purposes under division (A) above would be advanced by underground
placement of facilities on the project in question, or the city determines on
its own review that undergrounding is not warranted based on the circumstances
of the proposed undergrounding.
      (3)   Temporary service. Above-ground installation, construction or
placement of temporary service lines shall only be allowed:
         (a)   During new construction of any project for a period not to
exceed three months;
         (b)   During an emergency in order to safeguard lives or property
within the city; or
         (c)   For a period of not more than seven months when soil conditions
make excavation impractical.
   (E)   Retirement of overhead facilities. The City Council may determine
whether it is in the public interest that all facilities within the city, or
facilities within certain districts designated by the city, be permanently
placed and maintained underground by a date certain or target date,
independently of undergrounding required pursuant to this code (new facilities)
and §
155.55(C) (replacement facilities). The decision to underground must be
preceded by a public hearing, after published notice and written notice to the
utilities affected (two weeks’ published; 30 days’ written.) At the hearing,
the Council must consider§
155.55(G)(1) through (G)(4) and make findings. Undergrounding may not take
place until City Council has, after hearing and notice, adopted a plan as
provided in division (H) below.
   (F)   Public hearings. A hearing must be open to the public and may be
continued from time to time. At each hearing, any person interested must be
given an opportunity to be heard. The subject of the public hearings will be
the issue of whether facilities in the right-of-way in the city, or located
within a certain district, are to be located underground by a date certain.
Hearings are not necessary for the undergrounding required under this section.
   (G)   Public hearing issues. The issues to be addressed at the public
hearings include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   The costs and benefits to the public of requiring the
undergrounding of all facilities in the right-of-way;
      (2)   The feasibility and cost of undergrounding all facilities by a date
certain as determined by the city and the affected utilities;
      (3)   The tariff requirements, procedure and rate design for recovery or
intended recovery of incremental costs for undergrounding by the utilities from
ratepayers with the city; and
      (4)   Alternative financing options available if the city deems it in the
public interest to require undergrounding by a date certain and deems it
appropriate to participate in the cost otherwise borne by the rate payers.
   (H)   Undergrounding plan. If the Council finds that it is in the public
interest to underground all or substantially all facilities in the public
right-of-way or in non-right-of-way public ground, the Council must establish a
plan for such undergrounding. The plan for undergrounding must include at least
the following elements:
      (1)   Timetable for the undergrounding;
      (2)   Designation of districts for the undergrounding unless the
undergrounding plan is citywide;
      (3)   Exceptions to the undergrounding requirement and procedure for
establishing such exceptions;
      (4)   Procedures for the undergrounding process, including, but not
limited to, coordination with city projects and provisions to ensure compliance
with non-discrimination requirements under the law;
      (5)   A financing plan for funding of the incremental costs, if the city
determines that it will finance some of the undergrounding costs, and a
determination and verification of the claimed additional costs to underground
incurred by the utility; and
      (6)   Penalties or other remedies for failure to comply with the
undergrounding.
   (I)   Developer responsibility. Owners, platters or developers are
responsible for complying with the requirements of this section, and prior to
final approval of any plat or development plan, must submit to the Director
written instruments from the appropriate right-of-way users showing that all
necessary arrangements with those users for installation of the facilities have
been made.
(Prior Code, § 835.47) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017)
§ 155.56 LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   Rule. Placement, location and relocation of facilities must comply
with the Act, with other applicable law, and with Minn. Rules parts 7819.3100,
7819.5000 and 7819.5100, to the extent the rules do not limit authority
otherwise available to cities.
   (B)   Relocation schedule notification procedure. The Director shall notify
the utility owner at least three months in advance of the need to relocate
existing facilities so the owner can determine if relocation or replacement is
required and plan any required work. The Director shall provide a second
notification to the owner one month before the owner needs to begin the
relocation and the date by which the relocation must be completed. To the
extent technically feasible, all utilities shall be relocated within one month
or in a time frame determined by the Director. The Director may allow a
different schedule if it does not interfere with the city’s project. The
utility owner shall diligently work to relocate the facilities within the above
schedule.
   (C)   Delay to city project. If the owner fails to meet the relocation
schedule due to circumstances within the utility’s control, the city may charge
the utility owner for all costs incurred by the city because the relocation is
not completed in the scheduled time frame.
   (D)   Joint Trenching. All facilities must be placed in appropriate portions
of right-of-way so as to cause minimum conflict with other underground
facilities. When technically appropriate and no safety hazards are created, all
utilities must be installed, constructed or placed within the same trench.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, gas and electric lines shall be placed in
conformance with Minn. Rules part 7819.5100, subpart 2, governing safety
standards.
   (E)   Corridors. The city may assign a specific area within the right-of-
way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of
facilities that are or, pursuant to current technology, the city expects will
be located within the right-of-way. All excavation, obstruction or other
permits issued by the city involving the installation or replacement of
facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue. A
typical crossing-section of the location for utilities may be on file at the
Director’s office. This division (E) is not intended to establish “high density
corridors”.
   (F)   Prior location of facilities. A registrant who has facilities in the
right-of-way in a position at variance with the corridors established by the
city may remain at that location until the city requires facilities relocation
to the corridor pursuant to relocation authority granted under Minn. Rules part
7819.3100 or other applicable law.
   (G)   Limitation of space.
      (1)   To protect the public health, safety and welfare or when necessary
to protect the right-of-way and its current use, the city may prohibit or limit
the placement of new or additional facilities within the right-of-way.
      (2)   In making such decisions, the city will strive to the extent
possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the right-of-way,
but will be guided primarily by considerations of the public interest, the
public’s needs for the particular utility service, the condition of the right-
of-way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the protection of
existing facilities in the right-of-way and future city plans for public
improvements and development projects that have been determined to be in the
public interest.
(Prior Code, § 835.49) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017)
§ 155.57 PRE-EXCAVATION FACILITIES LOCATION.
   (A)   In addition to complying with the requirements of M.S. §§ 216D.01
through 216D.09 (“One Call Excavation Notice System”), as they may be amended
from time to time, before the start date of any right-of-way excavation, each
registrant who has facilities or equipment in the area to be excavated is
responsible to mark the horizontal placement of the facilities, to the extent
technically feasible.
   (B)   To the extent its records contain the information, each registrant
must provide information regarding the approximate vertical location of their
facilities to excavators upon request. Nothing in this section is meant to
limit the rights, duties and obligations of the facility owners or excavators
as set forth in M.S. §§ 216D.01 through 216D.09, as they may be amended from
time to time.
(Prior Code, § 835.51) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017)
§ 155.58 INTERFERENCE BY OTHER FACILITIES.
   (A)   When the city does work in the right-of-way in its governmental right-
of-way management function and finds it necessary to maintain, support or move
a registrant’s facilities to carry out the work without damaging registrant’s
facilities, the city must notify the local representative as early as is
reasonably possible.
   (B)   The city costs associated therewith will be billed to that registrant
and must be paid within 30 days from the date of billing.
   (C)   Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any
facilities in the right-of-way which it or its facilities damages.
(Prior Code, § 835.53) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017)
§ 155.59 RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION; RESERVATION OF RIGHT.
   (A)   Reservation of right. If the city vacates a right-of-way that contains
the equipment of a registrant, and if the vacation does not require the
relocation of registrant facilities and equipment, the city will reserve, to
and for itself and all registrants having facilities and equipment in the
vacated right-of-way, the right to install, maintain and operate any facilities
and equipment in the vacated right-of-way and to enter upon such right-of-way
at any time for the purpose of reconstruction, inspecting, maintaining or
repairing the same.
   (B)   Relocation of equipment. If the vacation requires the relocation of
registrant facilities and equipment, and:
      (1)   If the vacation proceedings are initiated by the registrant, the
registrant must pay the relocation costs;
      (2)   If the vacation proceedings are initiated by the city, the
registrant must pay the relocation costs unless otherwise agreed to by the city
and the registrant; or
      (3)   If the vacation proceedings are initiated by a person or persons
other than the registrant or permit holder, such other person or persons must
pay the relocation costs.
(Prior Code, § 835.55) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017)
§ 155.60 INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.
   By registering with the city, or by accepting a permit under this chapter, a
registrant or permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the city in accordance
with the provisions of Minn. Rules part 7819.1250.
(Prior Code, § 835.57) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017)
§ 155.61 ABANDONED FACILITIES.
   (A)   Discontinued operations. A registrant who has decided to discontinue
all or a portion of its operations in the city must provide information
satisfactory to the city that the registrant’s obligations for its facilities
in the right-of-way under this chapter have been lawfully assumed by another
registrant.
   (B)   Removal. Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-
way shall remove them from that right-of-way pursuant to Minn. Rules part
7819.3300, unless the requirement is waived by the Director.
(Prior Code, § 835.59) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 9-15-2004; Ord. 20171101-01,
passed 11-1-2017)
CHAPTER 156: TREES
Section
Tree Removal and Replacement
   
156.01   Purpose
   
156.02   Tree Advisory Board
   
156.03   Applicability
   
156.04   Licensing
   
156.05   Landscaping
   
156.06   Tree maintenance and removal
   
156.07   Tree Fund
   
156.08   New development and redevelopment
   
156.09   Enforcement
Shade Tree Disease Control
   
156.20   Declaration of policy
   
156.21   Definitions
   
156.22   Tree Inspector
   
156.23   Shade Tree Disease Program
   
156.24   Shade tree diseases
   
156.25   Inspection and investigation
   
156.26   Abatement of shade tree disease nuisances
   
156.27   Procedure for removal of infected trees and wood
   
156.28   Transporting elm wood prohibited
   
156.29   Interference prohibited
 
   
156.99   Penalty
TREE REMOVAL AND REPLACEMENT
§ 156.01 PURPOSE.
   It is the intent of this subchapter to protect, preserve and enhance the
natural environment and beauty of the city by regulating the planting,
maintenance and removal of trees in the city. It is the intent of this
subchapter to encourage the preservation of the existing trees in the city. The
city desires to protect the integrity of the environment and finds that trees
do so by improving air quality, scenic beauty, protection against wind and
water erosion and natural insulation for energy conservation. The city also
finds that trees protect privacy and enhance property values.
(Prior Code, § 830.01)
§ 156.02 TREE ADVISORY BOARD.
   (A)   The Park and Recreation Advisory Commission is designated the “Tree
Advisory Board”.
   (B)   The Board is responsible for recommending policies regarding tree
replacement and maintenance as well as recommending and implementing provisions
required by the Tree City U.S.A. Program.
   (C)   The Board is advisory to the Council.
(Prior Code, § 830.03)
§ 156.03 APPLICABILITY.
   This subchapter applies to:
   (A)   Trees located within street rights-of-way, parks and public places of
the city; and
   (B)   Trees located on private property as specified herein.
(Prior Code, § 830.05)
§ 156.04 LICENSING.
   It is unlawful to engage in the business of trimming or removing trees on
the property of another without a license.
(Prior Code, § 830.07) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.05 LANDSCAPING.
   In new subdivision developments or when the redevelopment of commercial or
industrial property occurs, landscaping plans will be reviewed and approved by
city staff with final approval by the City Council. Landscaping must be done in
accordance with the applicable provisions in Chapter 163 of this code of
ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 830.09) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.06 TREE MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL.
   (A)   Restrictions for tree removal. It is unlawful to remove a tree from
public land without approval from the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer.
   (B)   Standards for replacement.
      (1)   It is the intent of this subchapter that significant and heritage,
non-diseased trees removed from public property will be replaced on a “one for
four” basis for significant trees and on a “one for one” basis with same
species for heritage trees.
      (2)   For the purposes of this subchapter, a SIGNIFICANT TREE is defined
as either:
         (a)   A deciduous tree with the diameter of 14 inches where the
diameter is measured at four and one-half feet above ground level; or
         (b)   A coniferous tree with the diameter of 12 inches where the
diameter is measured at four and one-half feet above ground level.
      (3)   For the purposes of this subchapter, a HERITAGE TREE is defined as
any tree with the diameter of 36 inches where the diameter is measured at four
and one-half feet above ground level.
      (4)   Replacement trees, with the exception of trees replacing heritage
trees which must be replaced with the same species, must be replaced with a
native or zone appropriate non-invasive species of the following size:
         (a)   For deciduous trees, a height of not less than six feet; and
         (b)   For coniferous trees, a diameter not less than two inches at the
bottom of the trunk.
      (5)   Trees removed from public land which require replacement must be
replaced in locations and varieties as specified by the City Administrator/
Clerk-Treasurer.
   (C)   Exemption. Diseased and dead trees which are removed by the city are
exempt from the provisions of this subchapter. However, the city will endeavor
to replace diseased trees in accordance with restrictions on locations in §§
154.001 through
154.009 and
Chapter 163 of this code of ordinances.
   (D)   Alternatives to tree replacement. Alternatives to tree replacement. In
cases in which it can be demonstrated that a property cannot accommodate
additional trees and replacement trees are required, the City Council, at its
sole discretion, may allow a property owner to place the replacement trees on
public property instead of on site. As an alternative to placing replacement
trees on the site or on public property, the City Council, at its sole
discretion, may also allow an applicant to contribute $300 per significant tree
and $600 per heritage tree to the city’s Tree Fund, or other such amounts as
shall be set by the City Council from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 830.11) (Ord. 17-06, passed 7-5-2017) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.07 TREE FUND.
   (A)   The City Council shall establish a Tree Fund for the city.
   (B)   The proceeds of the fund shall be used by the city for the following
purposes:
      (1)   The planting of trees on public property;
      (2)   Conducting community education and events related to trees and
environmental issues affecting the city; or
      (3)   Providing funds for the purchase of a tree to city residents to
plant on their properties that are located within the city. In order to obtain
funds for a tree, city residents must make an application to the Tree Board.
Only one tree per property will be permitted. Funds for tree purchases will
only be provided if there are sufficient funds available in the Tree Fund.
(Prior Code, § 830.13) (Ord. 17-06, passed 7-5-2017)
§ 156.08 NEW DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   General rules. It is the intent of this subchapter that a person
owning vacant land or creating new commercial, industrial or multi-family
development or undertaking the redevelopment of commercial, industrial or
multi-family property in the city is to replace significant, non-diseased trees
as specified for public property in §
156.06 of this chapter.
   (B)   Protection. The property owner or developer or both as the case may be
must take necessary precautions to protect existing trees that are not
scheduled to be removed.
   (C)   Performance guaranty. The property owner or developer or both as the
case may be must provide the city with a performance bond as specified in
Chapter 163 of this code of ordinances to guarantee the proper installation and
vigorous growth of all trees and plant materials.
   (D)   Maintenance. Trees planted in accordance with this subchapter must be
maintained m accordance with the approved plan by the property owner.
   (E)   Exemptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to trees
removed from existing lots of record in the Traditional Residential District
that are developed with single-family or two-family dwellings on the effective
date of this subchapter.
   (F)   Special cases. In furtherance of the city’s urban wildlife landscape
and Tree City U.S.A. programs, the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer is
directed to prepare standards for the replacement of trees on vacant land that
the owner intends to develop or redevelop in the reasonably foreseeable future.
Upon recommendation of the Tree Board, the City Council may vary the
requirements of this subchapter by applying the standards to individual cases.
(Prior Code, § 830.15) (Ord. 17-06, passed 7-5-2017) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.09 ENFORCEMENT.
   The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer enforces this subchapter and rules
and regulations concerning the protection, removal, planting and maintenance of
trees upon the right-of-way of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public
place in the city.
(Prior Code, § 830.17) (Ord. 17-06, passed 7-5-2017)
SHADE TREE DISEASE CONTROL
§ 156.20 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   The City Council has determined that the health of the shade trees within
the city limits is threatened by shade tree diseases. It has further determined
that the loss of shade trees growing upon public and private property would
substantially depreciate the value of property within the city and impair the
safety, good order, general welfare and convenience of the public. It is the
intention of the Council to control and prevent the spread of these diseases,
and this subchapter is enacted for that purpose, and to conform to the policies
and procedures embodied in M.S. §§ 89.51 through 89.66, as they may be amended
from time to time, and rules promulgated thereunder.
(Prior Code, § 2020.01)
§ 156.21 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMISSIONER. The Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Agriculture.
   DISEASE CONTROL AREA. The City of Sandstone.
   SHADE TREE. An oak or elm tree situated in the City of Sandstone.
   SHADE TREE CONTROL PROGRAM or PROGRAM. A program developed by the city to
combat shade tree disease in accordance with rules promulgated by the
Commissioner.
   SHADE TREE DISEASE. Dutch elm disease caused by ceratocystis ulmi, or oak
wilt disease caused by ceratocystis fagaceorum.
   TREE INSPECTOR or INSPECTOR. A person having the necessary qualifications to
conduct a shade tree program and who is so certified by the Commissioner.
(Prior Code, § 2020.03)
§ 156.22 TREE INSPECTOR.
   (A)   (1)   Position created. The powers and duties of the city’s Tree
Inspector as set forth in this subchapter are hereby conferred upon the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer. The Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer may designate
a member of the administrative staff to perform the duties of Tree Inspector.
      (2)   Duties of Tree Inspector. It is the duty of the Tree Inspector to
coordinate, under the direction and control of the Council, all activities of
the city relating to the control and prevention of shade tree disease. The
Inspector must recommend to the Council the details of a program for the
control of shade tree disease and perform the duties incident to such a program
adopted by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2020.05) (Prior Code, § 2020.17)
§ 156.23 SHADE TREE DISEASE PROGRAM.
   It is the intention of the City Council to conduct a program of shade tree
control pursuant to the authority granted by M.S. §§ 89.051 through 89.66, as
it may be amended from time to time. This program is directed specifically at
the control and elimination of shade tree diseases and is undertaken at the
recommendation of the Commissioner of Agriculture, and in conformance with
rules promulgated by the Commissioner. The city’s Tree Inspector acts as
coordinator between the Commissioner of Agriculture and the Council in the
conduct of this program.
(Prior Code, § 2020.07)
§ 156.24 SHADE TREE DISEASES.
   (A)   Nuisances declared. The following things are PUBLIC NUISANCES whenever
they may be found within the city:
      (1)   Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected to any
degree with the Dutch elm disease fimgus ceratocystis ulmi (buisman) moreau or
which harbors any of the elm bark beetles scolytus multistriatus (eichh.) or
hyluigopinus rufipes (marsh);
      (2)   Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including legs, branches,
stumps, firewood or other elm material from which the bark has not been removed
and burned or sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle insecticide; and
      (3)   Any living or standing northern red oak, northern pine oak, black
oak or scarlet oak, or part thereof infected to any degree with oak wilt
disease.
   (B)   Abatement. It is unlawful for any person to permit any public
nuisance, as defined in division (A) above to remain on premises owned or
controlled by that person within the city. Such nuisances may be abated in the
manner prescribed by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 2020.09) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.25 INSPECTION AND INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Annual inspection. The Tree Inspector must inspect all premises and
places within the city as often as practicable to determine whether any
condition described in §
156.24 of this chapter exists thereon. The Inspector must investigate all
reported incidents of infestation by Dutch elm fungus, elm bark beetles or oak
wilt.
   (B)   Entry on private premises. The Tree Inspector may enter upon private
premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of carrying out any of the
duties of the Inspector under this subchapter. The inspections must be preceded
by two days’ written notice to the owner of the private property, unless such
notice is waived in writing by the owner.
   (C)   Diagnosis. The Tree Inspector must, upon finding conditions indicating
shade tree disease infestation, immediately send appropriate specimens or
samples to the Commissioner of Agriculture for analysis, or take such other
steps for diagnosis as may be provided by the Commissioner by rule. Except as
provided in §
156.26 of this chapter, no action to remove infected trees or wood must be
taken until positive diagnosis of the disease has been made.
(Prior Code, § 2020.11)
§ 156.26 ABATEMENT OF SHADE TREE DISEASE NUISANCES.
   (A)   In abating the nuisances defined in this subchapter, the Tree
Inspector must cause the infected tree or wood to be sprayed, removed, burned
or otherwise effectively treated so as to destroy and prevent as fully as
possible the spread of disease.
   (B)   The abatement procedures must be carried out in accordance with
current technical and expert opinions and procedures as may be established by
the Commissioner of Agriculture.
(Prior Code, § 2020.13)
§ 156.27 PROCEDURE FOR REMOVAL OF INFECTED TREES AND WOOD.
   (A)   Findings. Whenever the Tree Inspector finds with reasonable certainty
that the infestation defined in §
156.23 of this chapter exists in any tree or wood in any public or private
place in the city, the Inspector must proceed as follows:
      (1)   If the inspector finds that the danger of infestation of other
trees is not imminent because of dormancy, the Inspector must make a written
report of his or her findings to the Council which must proceed by:
         (a)   Abating the nuisance as a public improvement under M.S. Chapter
429, as it may be amended from time to time; or
         (b)   Abating the nuisance as provided in division (B) below.
      (2)   If the Inspector finds that danger of infestation of other trees is
imminent, the Inspector must notify the abutting property owner by certified
mail that the nuisance will be abated within a specified time, not less than
five days from the date of mailing of the notice. The Inspector must
immediately report such action to the Council, and after the expiration of the
time limited by the notice the Inspector may abate the nuisance.
   (B)   Notice; hearing. Upon receipt of the inspector’s report required by
division (A)(1) above, the Council may by resolution order the nuisance abated.
Before action is taken on such resolution, the Council must publish notice of
its intention to meet to consider taking action to abate the nuisance. The
notice must be mailed to affected property owners and published once no less
than one week prior to the meeting. The notice must state the time and place of
the meeting, the streets affected, action proposed and the estimated cost of
the abatement, and the proposed basis of assessment, if any, of costs. At such
hearing or adjournment thereof, the Council must hear property owners with
reference to the scope and desirability of the proposed project. The Council
may thereafter adopt a resolution confirming the original resolution with such
modification as it considers desirable and provide for the doing of the work by
day labor or by contract.
   (C)   Records. The Inspector must keep a record of the costs of abatements
ordered under this section and report monthly to the Deputy Clerk work done for
which assessments are to be made stating and certifying the description of the
land, lots, parcels involved and the amount chargeable to each.
   (D)   Assessment. On or before September 1 of each year, the Clerk must list
the total unpaid charges for each abatement against each separate lot or parcel
to which they are attributable under this subchapter. The Council may then
spread the charges or any portion thereof against the property involved as a
special assessment under M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to
time, and other pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor and
collection the following year along with current taxes.
(Prior Code, § 2020.15)
§ 156.28 TRANSPORTING ELM WOOD PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful to transport within the city any bark-bearing elm wood
without having obtained a permit from the Tree Inspector. The Inspector will
grant such permits only when the purposes of this subchapter will be served
thereby.
(Prior Code, § 2020.19) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.29 INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful to prevent, delay or interfere with the Inspector while
engaged in the performance of the duties imposed by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 2020.21) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed
for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this chapter, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more
than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
      (3)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time,
in either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
      (4) The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
      (5)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if any
person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this code,
the City Council or any city official designated by it may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
   (B)   Violation of §§
156.01 through
156.09 of this chapter is a misdemeanor. Each day that a violation is permitted
to exist constitutes a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 830.19) (Ord. 17-06, passed 7-5-2017)
CHAPTER 157: LAND DISTURBANCES
Section
   
157.01   Definitions
   
157.02   Permit required
   
157.03   Minor land disturbance permit
   
157.04   Major land disturbance permit
   
157.05   Filling in Floodway District
   
157.06   Major or minor land disturbance permit requirements
   
157.07   Restoration plan
   
157.08   Permit duration
   
157.09   City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer review
   
157.10   Major land disturbance permit operations; mining operations
§ 157.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GRADING. The movement of the earth material within a given site.
   LAND EXCAVATION. The removal of sand, dirt, gravel, rock, clay or similar
material or unsuitable foundation material from the land.
   LAND FILLING. The deposit of the earth material or cleanfill so as to raise
existing surface grades.
(Prior Code, § 420.01) (Ord. 172, passed 3-16-1994; Ord. 04-1, passed 3-3-2004;
Ord. 2008-05, passed 5-21-2008)
§ 157.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   General rule. It is unlawful to deposit upon, grade upon or excavate
from the land any material in the amount of more than 25 cubic yards, or to a
depth of one foot or more, without first having secured a land disturbance
permit from the city.
   (B)   Permit exceptions. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to, and
permits under this chapter are not required for the following:
      (1)   Excavations, grading or fills of less than 25 cubic yards of
material;
      (2)   Construction of buildings for which a permit has been applied and
issued, prior to adoption of this chapter; provided, the contemplated
excavation, grading or filling operation was sufficiently described at the time
of building permit application;
      (3)   Excavations, grading or fills by state, county or city authorities
in connection with the construction or maintenance of roads, highways, parks or
utilities or on slope or utility easements provided such activity is conducted
within public rights-of-way or easements;
      (4)   Curb cuts, utility hookups or street openings for which another
permit is required from the city;
      (5)   Agricultural activities;
      (6)   Cemetery graves;
      (7)   Refuse disposal sites controlled by other laws and regulations; and
      (8)   Exploratory excavations under the direction of soil engineers or
engineering geologists.
(Prior Code, § 420.03) (Ord. 172, passed 3-16-1994; Ord. 04-1, passed 3-3-2004;
Ord. 2008-05, passed 5-21-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 157.03 MINOR LAND DISTURBANCE PERMIT.
   (A)   General rule. Excavation, grading or filling of material in excess of
25 cubic yards, but less than 2,000 cubic yards, or to a depth of one foot or
more, but less than three feet requires a minor land disturbance permit from
the city.
   (B)   Minor land disturbance permit application/exhibits. Application for
minor land disturbance permits must be made in writing on forms supplied by the
city and submitted to the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer for processing.
Applications must be filed jointly by the landowner and the earth moving
contractor. The following information and exhibits must be submitted with the
completed application form:
      (1)   Legal description of the property (one copy); and
      (2)   A copy of the plat map or half section map of the property proposed
to be excavated or filled indicating the area where the activity is to occur
together with an estimate of the amount of material to be moved.
(Prior Code, § 420.05) (Ord. 172, passed 3-16-1994; Ord. 04-1, passed 3-3-2004;
Ord. 2008-05, passed 5-21-2008)
§ 157.04 MAJOR LAND DISTURBANCE PERMIT.
   (A)   General rule. Excavation, grading or filling of any material in the
amount of 2,000 cubic yards or more, disturbing an area of one acre or more or
disturbing an area to a depth of three feet or more, requires a major land
disturbance permit from the City Council following a public hearing by and
recommendation from the Planning Commission.
   (B)   Major land disturbance permit application/exhibits. Application for
major land disturbance permits must be made in writing on forms supplied by the
city and submitted to the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer for processing.
Applications must be filed jointly by the landowner and the earth moving
contractor. The following information and exhibits (ten copies) must be
submitted with the completed application form:
      (1)   Legal description of the property;
      (2)   A map showing existing conditions both on the property and 300 feet
beyond the boundaries of the property. This information must include, but not
be limited to, land ownership, structures, utilities, platting and easements,
street and railroad rights-of-way and waterways. This information may be no
more than two months old at the time of application;
      (3)   A plan to show materials to be removed from, moved or deposited
upon the property. The plan must include final topography, steps to be taken to
conserve topsoil and to minimize erosion, areas where topsoil is to be
stockpiled and if applicable, the proposed phasing of operation and restoration
by years;
      (4)   Identification of proposed truck hauling routes and method of
controlling dust on-site and along haul routes;
      (5)   Hours and period of operation;
      (6)   Copies of any agreements contemplated or entered into between the
owner of the property and any other person charged with performance of the
earth work; and
      (7)   An application for a storm water management plan, as described in
§§
158.25 through
158.35 of this code of ordinances.
   (C)   Existing operations. Mining operations existing on the effective date
of this chapter that hold a major land disturbance permit under the previous
ordinance are not required to submit an application for a storm water
management plan. Existing mining operations must continue to comply with the
regulations, conditions and recommendations contained in §
157.06 of this chapter and the engineering analysis required by §
157.10 of this chapter, including the posting of a suitable bond or other
financial security with the city. All new mining operations and any expansion
of existing operations must apply for a major land disturbance permit and must
submit an application for a storm water management plan, as described in §§
158.25 through
158.35 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 420.07) (Ord. 172, passed 3-16-1994; Ord. 04-1, passed 3-3-2004;
Ord. 2008-05, passed 5-21-2008; Ord. 2008-07, passed 7-2-2008)
§ 157.05 FILLING IN FLOODWAY DISTRICT.
   Material proposed to be deposited in the Floodway Zoning District other than
filling small localized depressions for the purpose of landscaping, or the
deposition of topsoil for the purpose of grading or landscaping, requires a
special use permit and shall be subject to the standards for Floodway District
uses.
(Prior Code, § 420.09) (Ord. 172, passed 3-16-1994; Ord. 04-1, passed 3-3-2004;
Ord. 2008-05, passed 5-21-2008)
§ 157.06 MAJOR OR MINOR LAND DISTURBANCE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   Issuance of a major or minor land disturbance permit are subject to the
following minimum requirements, and such other requirements as the City Council
may specify to protect the public interest.
   (A)   All operations.
      (1)   At the end of excavation, grading or filling operations, the
disturbed area must be restored with topsoil or other approved cover material
and reseeded to establish approved vegetation.
      (2)   Finished grades may not adversely affect adjacent properties.
      (3)   Drainage facilities must be provided to effectively divert or
convey storm water run-off. Any previously existing drainage ways that convey
water from an adjacent property must be preserved in order to allow water flow.
      (4)   It is unlawful for any person to dig and leave open, unfenced,
unbarricaded an entrance to, a pit, quarry, hole or excavation.
   (B)   Major land disturbance permit operations.
      (1)   Provisions must be made for effectively controlling dispersal of
material by wind or by hauling to and from the site, and for general
maintenance of the site.
      (2)   Spillage of material on and damage to public streets used as haul
roads must be cleaned up and repaired to the satisfaction of the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer.
      (3)   Hours of operation are limited to daylight hours only (not before
sunrise and not after sunset), Monday through Saturdays. Operations on Sunday
are limited to between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m. The City Council
may modify, on an individual basis, such operational hours. Applicants for
modification must make a specific request, and must provide documentation to
support the request. Modifications will be made only after a public hearing has
been held before the City Council.
      (4)   All operations must be conducted no closer than 25 feet to an
adjacent property, unless under common lease or ownership, and no closer than
100 feet to any right-of-way line.
      (5)   Operations may not be conducted closer than 300 feet to an existing
dwelling, school, hospital or similar residential or public use.
      (6)   A 25-degree slope must be maintained.
(Prior Code, § 420.11) (Ord. 172, passed 3-16-1994; Ord. 04-1, passed 3-3-2004;
Ord. 2008-05, passed 5-21-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 157.07 RESTORATION PLAN.
   (A)   Plan.
      (1)   The operator of a major land disturbance permit operation must
submit a restoration plan for the operation setting out in reasonable detail
the steps to be taken to restore the operation, upon its closure, to a
condition that will be:
         (a)   As nearly consistent as possible with the topographic condition
of the site of the operation prior to the commencement of the operation; or
         (b)   Compatible with the surrounding topography.
      (2)   Acceptance of the plan by the Council is required prior to the
issuance of the permit.
   (B)   Minor land disturbance operations. The application for a minor land
disturbance permit for other operations must be accompanied by a performance
bond or letter of credit in an amount specified by the City Council. The bond
or letter of credit is to be conditioned upon the satisfactory performance by
the operator of the terms of the permit. A restoration plan is not required.
(Prior Code, § 420.12) (Ord. 172, passed 3-16-1994; Ord. 04-1, passed 3-3-2004;
Ord. 2008-05, passed 5-21-2008)
§ 157.08 PERMIT DURATION.
   Permits take effect on May 1 and expire on April 30 of each year. All
applications must be filed with the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer no later
than April 10. Permits must be renewed on an annual basis with a fee payable
yearly according to §
36.02 of this code of ordinances. Renewal may or may not require a public
hearing at the discretion of the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer. Operations
must cease on April 30 of any year unless the permit is renewed.
(Prior Code, § 420.13) (Ord. 172, passed 3-16-1994; Ord. 98-07, passed 9-16-
1998; Ord. 04-1, passed 3-3-2004; Ord. 2008-05, passed 5-21-2008)
§ 157.09 CITY ADMINISTRATOR/CLERK-TREASURER REVIEW.
   An application for a permit required under this chapter must be reviewed by
the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer before the permit is granted. The City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer may review procedures to determine if they are in
accordance with general public welfare and safety through regular on-site
inspections. The Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, upon determining the
permittee’s operation creates a serious and immediate safety hazard, may order
the operation ceased for a period of 72 hours. Upon so ordering, a special
meeting of the Council must be called. The permittee’s attendance at this
meeting will be requested. If the Council determines that an immediate safety
hazard exists, the permit may be withdrawn until the permittee complies with
Council directives to eliminate the hazard.
(Prior Code, § 420.15) (Ord. 172, passed 3-16-1994; Ord. 04-1, passed 3-3-2004;
Ord. 2008-05, passed 5-21-2008)
§ 157.10 MAJOR LAND DISTURBANCE PERMIT OPERATIONS; MINING OPERATIONS.
   (A)   Policy: findings.
      (1)   If it is found and determined that:
         (a)   Certain major land disturbance operations involve mining
activities (herein referred to as “mining operations”) that may pose
substantial threats to the public health, welfare and safety;
         (b)   It is necessary to insure the safe operation of mining
operations in a manner that is consistent with the efficient and economical
conduct of these operations; and
         (c)   Because of the unique nature of each mining operation it is not
feasible to set out precise regulations for such operations dealing with such
matters as slope, angle of repose and set back and each operation must be
viewed individually.
      (2)   Because of these factors, certain mining operations require an
engineering analysis and the development of regulations based on that analysis
and its recommendations. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for such
analyses and to establish procedures for the implementation of the engineering
analysis and recommendations.
   (B)   Procedures; report to Council. When, in the judgment of the City
Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer, a mining operation presents or will present an
imminent threat to the public health, safety and welfare and that remedial
action may be necessary, the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer must report that
fact to the City Council together with a preliminary analysis of that threat
and a recommendation that an engineering analysis of the mining operation be
conducted by an engineering firm with special expertise in the matter.
   (C)   Council action. If the Council determines on the basis of the
engineering analysis that remedial action is or may be necessary, the Council
may authorize the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer to retain a competent
engineering firm to conduct the analysis and to submit the firm’s analysis and
its recommendations to the Council within a reasonable time. The cost of the
engineering analysis is to be borne by the City Council and the operator of the
mining operation in a proportion as the Council deems reasonable. The Council
may, by written order, direct the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer and the
operator to implement the engineering recommendations with whatever
modifications the Council deems necessary within a time specified in the order.
The cost of the implementation of the recommendations is to be borne by the
operator.
   (D)   Effect; continuing operation. Active permitted mining operation on the
effective date of this chapter may continue. When the Council has ordered an
engineering analysis for a specific mining operation, that operation may
continue until completion of the analysis. If the Council finds and specifies
in its order that the public health and safety is or will be endangered by
continued operation of a specific operation, the operation must cease until
completion of the required remedial action if so specified in the order.
   (E)   Cessation; non-compliance. If a mining operation that has been ordered
to implement an order for remedial action does not complete that action within
the time specified in the order or any extension of that order the
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer is authorized and directed to order the operation
to cease operation immediately. Failure to comply with an order under this
chapter operates as a revocation of the permit for the operation and is grounds
for denying an application for a permit.
(Prior Code, § 420.17) (Ord. 172, passed 3-16-1994; Ord. 04-1, passed 3-3-2004;
Ord. 2008-05, passed 5-21-2008)
CHAPTER 158: STORM WATER DRAINAGE AND MANAGEMENT
Section
Storm Water Drainage Utility
   
158.01   Establishment
   
158.02   Findings and determinations
   
158.03   Storm Drainage Utility Fund
   
158.04   Definitions
   
158.05   User fee factors
   
158.06   Other land uses
   
158.07   Adjustment of charges
   
158.08   Storm sewer connection fee
   
158.09   Exemptions
   
158.10   Payment of fee
   
158.11   Appeal
   
158.12   Establishment of tax lien
Storm Water Management
   
158.25   Findings
   
158.26   Purpose
   
158.27   Scope and effect
   
158.28   Storm Water Management Plan application requirements
   
158.29   Fees; financial security
   
158.30   Storm Water Management Plan application review procedure
   
158.31   General plan standards
   
158.32   Plan criteria for temporary erosion control measures and facilities
   
158.33   Criteria for permanent storm water facilities
   
158.34   Construction requirements
   
158.35   Non-compliance and enforcement procedures
 
   
158.99   Penalty
STORM WATER DRAINAGE UTILITY
§ 158.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   Pursuant to M.S. § 444.075, as it may be amended from time to time, the city
establishes a Storm Water Drainage Utility and authorizes the imposition of
just and reasonable charges for the use of, connection to and availability of
storm drainage facilities. The Storm Water Drainage Utility operation is a part
of the Public Works Department.
(Prior Code, § 720.01) (Ord. 2004-07, passed 10-6-2004; Ord. 2008-12, passed 8-
6-2008)
§ 158.02 FINDINGS AND DETERMINATIONS.
   In the exercise of its government authority and in order to promote the
public health, safety, convenience and general welfare, the city has
constructed, operated and maintained a storm water drainage system. This
subchapter is adopted in the further exercise of such authority and for the
same purposes. The system, as constructed heretofore, has been financed and
paid for through the imposition of special assessments and ad valorem taxes. It
is necessary and desirable to provide an additional method of recovering some
or all of the future costs of improving, establishing, enlarging, replacing,
repairing, maintaining and operating the system through the imposition of
charges as provided in this subchapter. In imposing charges, it is necessary to
establish a methodology that undertakes to make charges just and equitable.
Taking into account the status of completion of the system, past methods of
recovering system costs, the topography of the city and other relevant factors,
it is determined to be just and equitable to assign responsibility for some or
all of the future costs of improving, establishing, enlarging, replacing,
repairing, maintaining and operating the system on the basis of the expected
storm water run-off from the various parcels of land within the city during a
standard rainfall event.
(Prior Code, § 720.03) (Ord. 2004-07, passed 10-6-2004)
§ 158.03 STORM DRAINAGE UTILITY FUND.
   (A)   There is created a Storm Water Drainage Utility Fund into which all
charges, when collected, and all monies received from the sale of any related
facilities or equipment or any byproducts shall be placed. Such monies shall be
used first to pay the normal, reasonable and current costs of operating and
maintaining the facilities.
   (B)   (1)   There is a separate fund created for Storm Water Utility user
fees and storm sewer connection charges collected for properties that utilize
the regional storm water pond located on Outlot A of Thorvigs Addition.
      (2)   A percentage of this fund will be used to reimburse the developer
of Thorvigs Addition for its costs incurred in oversizing the regional storm
water pond on behalf of the city.
(Prior Code, § 720.05) (Ord. 2004-07, passed 10-6-2004; Ord. 2008-12, passed 8-
6-2008)
§ 158.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MONTHLY UTILITY REVENUE. The estimated monthly expenditures for planning and
inventories, capital expenditures, personnel and equipment and operation of the
Storm Water Utility, in accordance with the established city policy.
   STORM SEWER CONNECTION FEE. The fee charged for the connection and
availability of city storm sewer facilities.
   STORM WATER UTILITY USER FEE. The annual user charge developed for each
parcel of land for use of storm sewer facilities. This fee shall be determined
by the City Council, as adjusted from time to time.
   UTILITY FACTOR. The ratio of run-off volume, in inches, for a particular
land use, to the run-off volume, in inches for an average single-family
residential property, assuming a two-inch rainfall and natural resources
conservation services (NRCS) “Type B” soil conditions.
(Prior Code, § 720.07) (Ord. 2004-07, passed 10-6-2004; Ord. 2008-12, passed 8-
6-2008)
§ 158.05 USER FEE FACTORS.
   (A)   The Storm Water Utility user fee is determined by first determining
the percentage of total run- off in the city which is attributed to single-
family residential property. The fee per acre for single-family residential is
computed by computing the product for the run-off percentage and the Storm
Water Utility user fee revenue, divided by the estimated total acres of single-
family residential land use in the city. The per acre fee for all other
individual parcels shall be defined as the product of the single-family
residential per-acre fee, the appropriate utility factor and the total acreage
of the parcel. Single-family residential parcels shall be assessed on a per
household basis.
   (B)   The utility factors for various land uses are shown in the following
table:
Land Use Utility Factor
Land Use                      Utility Factor
Agricultural/cemeteries       Exempt
Commercial                    4.23
Golf                          0.25
Industrial                    3.30
Institutional                 3.30
Lakes/streams/wetlands        Exempt
Multi-family/place of worship 2.72
Parks/state-vacant/federal    Exempt
Public - occupied             4.23
Residential                   1.00
Road right-of-way             Exempt
Vacant/gravel pits            0.21
 
(Prior Code, § 720.09) (Ord. 2004-07, passed 10-6-2004; Ord. 2008-12, passed 8-
6-2008; Ord. 20231115-03, passed 11-15-2023)
§ 158.06 OTHER LAND USES.
   Other land uses not listed in the foregoing table are to be classified by
the City Administrator/Clerk- Treasurer by assigning them to classes most
nearly like the listed uses, from the standpoint of run-off volume for the
standard rainfall event. An appeal of such classifications from the
determination of the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer may be made to the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 720.11) (Ord. 2004-07, passed 10-6-2004)
§ 158.07 ADJUSTMENT OF CHARGES.
   The City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer may negotiate the Storm Water Utility
user fee for parcels based upon land use data supplied by affected property
owners which demonstrates a run-off volume for a standard rainfall event or
other circumstances substantially different from factors being used for such
parcels. Adjustments for Storm Water Utility user fees will not be made
retroactively.
(Prior Code, § 720.13) (Ord. 2004-07, passed 10-6-2004; Ord. 2008-12, passed -
-2008)
§ 158.08 STORM SEWER CONNECTION FEE.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   The city may impose a storm sewer connection fee based on:
         (a)   The square footage of the property to be charged, adjusted for a
reasonable calculation of storm water run-off;
         (b)   A reasonable classification of the types of premises to which
service is furnished;
         (c)   By reference to the quantity, pollution qualities and difficulty
of disposal of storm water run-off produced; or
         (d)   Any other equitable basis, including any combination of the
basis described in this subchapter, but excluding any reference to the amount
of water consumed.
      (2)   The storm sewer connection fee must be a fair and equitable share
of the amount reasonably calculated to pay total projected capital costs of the
storm water system within the area, including the cost of debt service and
related financing costs in connection with obligations issued by the city to
finance such improvements, depreciation, a reasonable reserve for capital
replacement and the costs of obtaining and complying with permits required by
law. In determining the storm sewer connection fee, the city may give
consideration to all costs of establishing the system, and of improvements,
enlargements and extensions necessary to adequately serve the area.
   (B)   Supplying information. The owner, occupant or person in charge of any
premises must supply the city with such information as the city may reasonably
request related to the use, development and area of the premises and the
imposition of any storm sewer connection fee. If the owner, occupant or person
in charge of the premises fails to or refuses to provide the information
requested, the storm sewer connection fee for the premises will be estimated
and billed in accordance with such estimate based upon the information then
available to the city.
(Prior Code, § 720.15) (Ord. 2004-07, passed 10-6-2004; Ord. 2008-12, passed 8-
6-2008)
§ 158.09 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following land uses are exempt from the Storm Water Utility user fee and
storm sewer connection fee:
   (A)   Public road right-of-way;
   (B)   Lakes;
   (C)   Wetlands;
   (D)   Agricultural;
   (E)   Utilities;
   (F)   Parks, state park, school forest; and
   (G)   Cemeteries.
(Prior Code, § 720.17) (Ord. 2004-07, passed 10-6-2004; Ord. 2008-12, passed 8-
6-2008)
§ 158.10 PAYMENT OF FEE.
   (A)   Storm water utility user fees. Storm water utility user fees are
billed to all water and sewer customers every month with water and sanitary
sewer bills. Storm water utility user fees will be billed to all non-water and
sewer customers on a quarterly basis. The fee is due and payable on the same
terms as water and sanitary utility bills. Any prepayment or overpayment of
charges will be retained by the city and applied against subsequent fees. All
Storm Water Utility user fees are due on the date specified by the city for the
respective account and shall be delinquent 30 days thereafter.
   (B)   Storm sewer connection fees. All storm sewer connection fees are
charges against the respective owner, lessees and occupants of the property and
are due on the date specified by the city for the respective account and shall
be delinquent 30 days thereafter.
(Prior Code, § 720.19) (Ord. 2004-07, passed 10-6-2004; Ord. 2008-12, passed 8-
6-2008)
§ 158.11 APPEAL.
   If a property owner or person responsible for paying the Storm Water Utility
user fee or storm sewer connection fee believes that a particular assigned fee
is incorrect, such a person may request that the fee be re-computed.
(Prior Code, § 720.21) (Ord. 2004-07, passed 10-6-2004; Ord. 2008-12, passed 8-
6-2008)
§ 158.12 ESTABLISHMENT OF TAX LIEN.
   (A)   Any past due Storm Water Utility user fees and storm sewer connection
fees will be certified to the County Auditor for collection with real estate
taxes against the property served by the utility established in this subchapter
for collection as other taxes are collected in the following year pursuant to
M.S. § 444.075, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time, and this code
of ordinances.
   (B)   In addition, the city may bring a civil action or take other legal
remedies to collect unpaid charges.
(Prior Code, § 720.23) (Ord. 2004-07, passed 10-6-2004; Ord. 2008-12, passed 8-
6-2008)
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
§ 158.25 FINDINGS.
   The city hereby finds that uncontrolled and inadequately planned use of
wetlands, woodlands, natural habitat areas, areas subject to soil erosion and
areas containing restrictive soils adversely affects the public health, safety
and general welfare by impacting water quality and contributing to other
environmental problems, creating nuisances, impairing other beneficial uses of
environmental resources and hindering the ability of the city to provide
adequate water, sewer, flood control and other community services.
(Prior Code, § 430.01) (Ord. 2008-05, passed 5-21-2008)
§ 158.26 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to promote, preserve and enhance the
natural resources within the city and protect these resources from adverse
effects occasioned by poorly sited development that would have an adverse and
potentially irreversible impact on water quality and unique and fragile
environmentally sensitive land; by minimizing conflicts and encouraging
compatibility between land disturbing and development activities and water
quality and environmentally sensitive lands; and by requiring detailed review
standards and procedures for land disturbing or development activities proposed
for the areas, thereby achieving a balance between urban growth and development
and the protection of water quality and natural areas.
(Prior Code, § 430.03) (Ord. 2008-05, passed 5-21-2008)
§ 158.27 SCOPE AND EFFECT.
   (A)   Applicability. Every applicant for a subdivision, PUD or major land
disturbance permit must submit a Storm Water Management Plan to the city for
review and approval. No land use approval or major land disturbance permit will
be issued by the city until approval of the storm water management plan has
been obtained.
   (B)   Exemptions. The provisions of this subchapter do not apply to:
      (1)   Any part of a subdivision or PUD if the preliminary plat has been
approved by the City Council on or before the effective date of this
subchapter;
      (2)   Any major land disturbing activity for which plans have been
approved by the controlling watershed management organization within six months
prior to the effective date of this subchapter;
      (3)   Installation of fences, signs, telephone or electrical poles and
other kinds of posts or poles;
and
      (4)   Emergency work to protect life, limb or property.
   (C)   Waiver.
      (1)   The City Council, upon recommendation by the Planning Commission,
may waive any requirement of this subchapter upon making a finding that
compliance with the requirement will involve an unnecessary hardship due to
limitations of the site conditions, and the waiver of such requirement will not
adversely affect the standards and requirements set forth in this subchapter.
      (2)   The City Council may require as a condition of the waiver, such
dedication or construction, or agreement to dedicate or construct physical
improvements, facilities, property or easements as may be necessary to
adequately meet this subchapter’s standards and requirements.
(Prior Code, § 430.05) (Ord. 2008-05, passed 5-21-2008)
§ 158.28 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Application. The applicant must make a written application for
approval of a Storm Water Management Plan by filing the application materials
with the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer. If the applicant is also applying
for a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (“NPDES”) permit, the
NPDES permit application materials may be submitted to the city as the
applicant’s Storm Water Management Plan application. However, the applicant
must supplement the NPDES Permit application materials with any information
required by this subchapter that is not included in the NPDES permit
application. All drawings and information submitted must be clearly legible and
printed in blue or black ink. The applicant must supply the city with two sets
of all drawings and information.
   (B)   Application information. The application must include the following
information:
      (1)   An application fee as set forth by §
36.02 of this code of ordinances;
      (2)   Required financial security;
      (3)   A Storm Water Management Plan. The Storm Water Management Plan must
contain the following information:
         (a)   Existing site map. A map of the existing site conditions showing
the site and the immediately adjacent properties which includes the following
information:
            1.   The name and address of the applicant;
            2.   A legal description of the site;
            3.   A north point;
            4.   The date upon which the map was created;
            5.   The scale of the drawing. The drawing must be prepared to
scale appropriate to the site of the project and suitable for the review to be
performed;
            6.   The number of sheets;
            7.   An insert map at a scale sufficient to identify the location
of the property and giving information such as the names of adjacent streets,
railroads, utilities, subdivisions, cities, towns and other landmarks;
            8.   The existing topography of the site with a contour interval
appropriate to the topography of the land but in no case having a contour
interval greater than two feet;
            9.   A delineation of all streams, rivers, public waters and
wetlands located on and immediately adjacent to the site. All off-site waters
that will receive discharge must also be identified if they are within one-half
mile of the site or if they are within one mile of the site and are designated
as “special” or “impaired” waters by the state’s Pollution Control Agency;
            10.   The location and dimensions of any existing surface storm
water drainage systems and the natural drainage patterns on and immediately
adjacent to the site delineating in which direction and at what rate the
surface storm water is conveyed from the site, identifying the receiving
stream, river, public water or wetland and setting forth those areas of the
unaltered site where the surface storm water collects; and
            11.   The location and description of any vegetative cover and a
delineation of any vegetation proposed to be removed.
         (b)   Site construction plan. A site construction plan that includes
the following information:
            1.   The location and dimensions of all proposed land disturbing
activities and any phasing of those activities;
            2.   The locations and estimated dimensions of all temporary soil
or dirt stockpiles;
            3.   The locations and dimensions of all construction site erosion
control measures necessary to meet the requirements of this subchapter and the
state;
            4.   A schedule of the anticipated start and completion dates of
each land disturbing activity including the installation of construction site
erosion control measures needed to meet the requirements of this subchapter;
and
            5.   Provisions for maintenance of the construction site’s erosion
control measures during the construction.
         (c)   Plan of final site conditions. A plan of final site conditions
that is on the same scale as the existing site map that shows all changes to
the site, including the following information:
            1.   The finished grading showing contours at the same interval as
provided above or as required to clearly indicate the relationship of proposed
changes to existing topography and remaining features;
            2.   A drainage plan of the developed site delineating in which
direction and at what rate storm water will be conveyed from the site and
setting forth the areas of the site where storm water will be allowed to
collect;
            3.   The proposed size, alignment and intended use of any
structures to be erected on the site;
            4.   A clear delineation and tabulation of all areas which will be
paved or surfaced, including a description of the surfacing material to be
used; and
            5.   Any other information pertinent to the particular project
which, in the opinion of the city, is necessary for the review of the project.
(Prior Code, § 430.07) (Ord. 2008-05, passed 5-21-2008)
§ 158.29 FEES; FINANCIAL SECURITY.
   (A)   Fees. In order to defray the administrative costs of processing
applications submitted pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter, a base
application fee as described in §
36.02 of this code of ordinances, is required. Additional costs for staff and
consulting time and materials expended by the city in the processing of the
application will also be required of the applicant at the rates set forth in §
36.02 of this code of ordinances. The city may require a deposit for these
fees.
   (B)   Letter of credit. Upon the submittal of an application for a Storm
Water Management Plan, the city shall require a letter of credit in such form
and amount as may be deemed necessary by the city to assure that the work, if
not completed in accordance with the reviewed plans and specifications and this
subchapter, will be corrected to eliminate any hazardous conditions. The amount
of the letter of credit may be reduced by the city.
(Prior Code, § 430.09) (Ord. 2008-05, passed 5-21-2008)
§ 158.30 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Process. A complete Storm Water Management Plan application shall be
forwarded by the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer to the City Engineer for
review in accordance with this subchapter. The Planning Commission must also
review the Storm Water Management Plan application and recommend approval,
approval with conditions or denial to the City Council. Following Planning
Commission review, the application must be reviewed by the City Council. The
application may be approved by the City Council subject to compliance with
conditions that are reasonable and necessary to ensure that the requirements of
this subchapter are met. Such conditions may include, among others, the
construction of structures, drainage facilities, storage basins and other
facilities; replacement of certain vegetation on the site; the establishment of
monitoring procedures; the staging of the work over time; the alteration of the
site’s design to ensure buffering; or requiring conveyance of certain lands or
interests therein to the city or other public entity. City Council action on
the application must be accomplished within 60 days following the date the
complete application was filed with the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer.
   (B)   Duration. City Council approval of a Storm Water Management Plan
application will expire one year after the date of approval unless construction
has commenced in accordance with the Storm Water Management Plan. However, the
applicant may make a written request to the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer
for an extension, so long as the request is received by the city prior to the
application’s expiration date. Upon receiving a request for an extension, the
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer should consult with the City Engineer on the
request and make a decision on the request within 30 days of receipt.
   (C)   Amendments and revisions. Any changes, revisions or amendments to an
approved Storm Water Management Plan must be reviewed and approved by the
Planning Commission and the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 430.11) (Ord. 2008-05, passed 5-21-2008)
§ 158.31 GENERAL PLAN STANDARDS.
   (A)   The following storm water management practices must be considered and
investigated by the applicant in developing a Storm Water Management Plan:
      (1)   Natural infiltration of precipitation on-site, if the property is
located outside of an area that is considered to be sensitive to ground water
contamination. The city encourages the infiltration of the first one-half inch
of run-off in permeable soils (NRCS hydrologic group A and B soils);
      (2)   Flow rate reduction by the use of open vegetated swales and natural
depressions;
      (3)   Storm water retention facilities;
      (4)   Storm water detention facilities. Detention facilities must be
designed and constructed according to specifications approved by the City
Engineer; and
      (5)   A combination of practices may be used in order to achieve the
minimum control requirements of this subchapter. The applicant must provide
justification for the method(s) selected.
   (B)   When possible, existing natural drainage ways, wetlands and vegetated
soil surfaces must be used in a Storm Water Management Plan to convey, store,
filter and retain storm water run-off before it is discharged to public waters.
   (C)   Development must be planned and conducted in a manner that will
minimize the extent of disturbed areas, run-off velocities, erosion potential
and reduce and delay run-off volumes. Disturbed areas must be stabilized and
protected as soon as possible and facilities or methods must be used to retain
sediment on the site.
   (D)   When development density, topographic features and soil and vegetation
conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle storm water run-off using
natural features and vegetation, various types of constructed facilities, such
as diversions, settling basins, skimming devices, dikes, waterways and ponds
may be used. The city encourages the use of best management practices, such as
using surface drainage, vegetation and infiltration rather than buried pipes
and human-made materials and facilities.
   (E)   When constructed facilities are to be used for storm water management,
documentation must be provided by an engineer or an individual qualified to
design and review the particular facility, that the facilities are designed and
constructed in accordance with all applicable local, state and federal laws and
regulations.
   (F)   Newly constructed storm water outfalls where the discharge eventually
flows to public waters must provide for filtering or settling of suspended
soils and skimming of surface debris before discharge.
   (G)   Storm Water Management Plans must be consistent with adopted watershed
management plans and ground water management plans prepared in accordance with
M.S. Chapter 103B, as it may be amended from time to time, and must be reviewed
and approved by the local watershed authority, if required.
   (H)   Hydrologic models and design methodologies in a Storm Water Management
Plan to be used for the determination of run-off and the analysis of storm
water management facilities must be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer.
Plans, specifications and computations for storm water management facilities
must be signed by a licensed professional engineer. All computations must
appear on the plans submitted for review, unless otherwise required by the City
Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 430.13) (Ord. 2008-05, passed 5-21-2008)
§ 158.32 PLAN CRITERIA FOR TEMPORARY EROSION CONTROL MEASURES AND FACILITIES.
   The following criteria apply to Storm Water Management Plans and for land
disturbing or development activities that result in run-off leaving the site or
run-off remaining on the site.
   (A)   Channeled run-off from adjacent areas that passes through the site
must be diverted around disturbed areas, if practical. If diversion is not
practical, the channel must be protected. Sheetflow run- off from adjacent
areas greater than 10,000 square feet must also be diverted around disturbed
areas, if practical. Diverted run-off must be conveyed in a manner that will
not erode the conveyance and receiving channels.
   (B)   All activities on the site must be conducted in a logical sequence to
minimize the area of bare soil that is exposed at any one time.
   (C)   Run-off from the entire disturbed area on the site must be controlled
by meeting either divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) or divisions (C)(1) and (C)(3)
below.
      (1)   All disturbed ground that is left inactive for 14 or more days must
be stabilized by seeding or installing sod. If the date is after September 15,
the ground must be covered by mulch or other equivalent erosion control
material.
      (2)   For sites that have more than ten acres that will be disturbed at
one time, or if a channel originates in the disturbed area, one or more
temporary or permanent sedimentation basins must be constructed. Each
sedimentation basin must have a volume below the normal water level of at least
1,800 cubic feet per acre of the area draining to the basin, be at least three
feet deep and must be constructed in accordance with accepted design
specifications. Sediment must be removed on a regular basis so that a depth of
at least three feet can be maintained. The sedimentation basin’s discharge rate
must also be sufficiently low enough so that it does not cause erosion along
the discharge channel or the receiving water.
      (3)   For all sites subject to this subchapter, silt fences, straw bales
or equivalent erosion control measures must be placed along all side and down
slopes of the site. If a channel or area of concentrated run-off passes through
the site, silt fences must be placed along the channel’s edges to reduce the
likelihood of sediment reaching the channel. A maintenance and inspection
schedule must be provided when using silt fences, straw bales or equivalent
erosion control measures.
   (D)   Any soil or dirt storage piles containing more than 20 cubic yards of
material must not be located with a down slope drainage length of less than 25
feet from the toe of the pile to a street or drainage channel. If the pile is
to remain for less than 14 days, erosion must be controlled by placing straw
bales or silt fence barriers around the pile. If the pile is to remain for more
than 14 days, it must be stabilized by adding mulch, vegetative cover, tarps or
other means. In-street utility repair or construction soil or dirt storage
piles located closer than 225 feet of a street or drainage channel must be
covered with tarps or suitable alternative control, if exposed for more than
seven days. Storm drain inlets must also be protected with straw bales or other
appropriate filtering barriers.
(Prior Code, § 430.15) (Ord. 2008-05, passed 5-21-2008)
§ 158.33 CRITERIA FOR PERMANENT STORM WATER FACILITIES.
   The following criteria apply to permanent storm water facilities on a site.
   (A)   An applicant must install or construct on, or for the proposed land
disturbing or development activity, all storm water management facilities
deemed necessary by the city engineer to manage the increased run-off so that
the two-year, ten-year and 100-year storm peak discharge rates existing before
the proposed development or land disturbing activity does not increase and
accelerated channel erosion does not occur as a result of the project. In
certain instances, the City Council may permit an applicant to make an in-kind
or monetary contribution to be used towards the development and maintenance of
community storm water management facilities designed to serve multiple land
disturbing and development activities that are being undertaken by more than
one party.
   (B)   The applicant should attempt to reduce the need to construct storm
water management facilities by incorporating the use of the site’s natural
topography and land covered such as wetlands, ponds, natural swales and
depressions as they exist before development to the degree that they can
accommodate the additional flow of water without compromising the integrity or
quality of the wetland or pond.
   (C)   If the Storm Water Management Plan involves the direction of some or
all of the run-off off of the site, the applicant must obtain any necessary
easements from the adjacent property owners concerning the flowage of the
water.
(Prior Code, § 430.17) (Ord. 2008-05, passed 5-21-2008)
§ 158.34 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Site dewatering. Water pumped from the site must be treated by
temporary sedimentation basins, grit chambers, sand filters, upflow chambers,
hydro-cyclones, swirly concentrators or other appropriate controls as
necessary. Water must not be discharged in a manner that causes erosion or
flooding of the site or the receiving channels or a wetland.
   (B)   Waste and material disposal. All waste and unused building materials,
including, but not limited to, garbage, cleaning wastes, debris, wastewater,
toxic or hazardous materials must be properly discharged off-site and not
permitted to be carried away by run-off into a receiving channel or storm sewer
system.
   (C)   Tracking. The site must have graveled roads, access drives and parking
areas of sufficient width and length to prevent sediment from being tracked
onto public or private roads. Any sediment reaching a private or public road
must be removed by street cleaning before the end of each work day. No flushing
is permitted.
   (D)   Drain inlet protection. All storm drain inlets must be protected with
straw bales, silt fence or equivalent barrier meeting requirements set forth in
the State Pollution Control Agency’s publication entitled Protecting Water
Quality in Urban Areas during construction until control measures are in place.
(Prior Code, § 430.19) (Ord. 2008-05, passed 5-21-2008) Penalty, see §
158.99
§ 158.35 NON-COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Notice of non-compliance. If the city finds that the work on the site
is not being performed in conformance with this subchapter and the submitted
Storm Water Management Plan, it shall issue a written notice of non-compliance
to the applicant that states the corrective measures to be taken.
   (B)   Stop work order. If the corrective measures identified in the notice
of non-compliance are not completed by the time period set forth in the notice,
the City Engineer or Engineer’s designee may issue an order for the city to
stop all inspections required for land use or building permit approvals for the
site until all corrective actions identified in the notice are completed. The
applicant must notify the City Engineer upon completion of all corrective
actions. Once the City Engineer has verified that all corrective actions
required have been taken, the Engineer shall inform the city and the city may
resume inspections on the site.
   (C)   Action against the financial security. If the corrective action
identified in the notice of non- compliance is not completed within the time
specified, the city may act against the financial security. The city may use
the funds from the financial security to reimburse itself for any costs
incurred in taking corrective action or performing remedial work to bring the
site into compliance.
   (D)   Emergency action. If circumstances exist such that noncompliance with
this subchapter poses an immediate danger to the public health, safety or
welfare, as determined by the city, the city may take emergency preventative
action on the site. Prior to taking emergency preventative action, the city
will make a reasonable attempt to contact and direct the applicant to take the
necessary action.
   (E)   Suspension or revocation of a major land disturbance permit. The city
may revoke or suspend a major land disturbance permit issued under the
provisions of Chapter 157 of this code of ordinances whenever the actions
contained in the notice of non-compliance are not taken within the time
specified. The city must notify the applicant of the suspension or revocation
in writing. The applicant may appeal the permit suspension or revocation to the
City Council within ten days of the date of the suspension or revocation
notice.
(Prior Code, § 430.21) (Ord. 2008-05, passed 5-21-2008)
§ 158.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed
for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this chapter, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more
than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
      (3)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time,
in either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
      (4) The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
      (5)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if any
person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this code,
the City Council or any city official designated by it may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
   (B)   Any person convicted of violating any provision of §§
158.25 through
158.35 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to
a fine or imprisonment as specified by state statute. Such penalty may be
imposed in addition to any other enforcement action taken by the city.
(Prior Code, § 430.21) (Ord. 2008-05, passed 5-21-2008)
CHAPTER 159: TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
Section
General Provisions
   
159.01   Limited federal preemption
   
159.02   Purpose
   
159.03   Definitions
Requirements and Licensing Criteria
   
159.15   Location requirements
   
159.16   Co-location requirements
   
159.17   Design requirements
   
159.18   Tower setbacks
   
159.19   Tower height
   
159.20   Separation or buffer requirements
   
159.21   Tower lighting
   
159.22   Signs and advertising
   
159.23   Construction requirements
   
159.24   Accessory buildings
   
159.25   Existing antennas and towers
   
159.26   Abandoned or unused towers or portions of towers
   
159.27   Number of towers and antennas
   
159.28   Antennas mounted on roofs, walls and existing towers
   
159.29   Inspections
   
159.30   Interference with public safety telecommunications
   
159.31   Permits; information required
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 159.01 LIMITED FEDERAL PREEMPTION.
   (A)   The city recognizes that the Federal Communications Act of 1934, as
amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, being 47 U.S.C. §§ 151 et seq.,
(the “Act”), grants the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) exclusive
jurisdiction over the regulation of the environmental effects of radio
frequency emissions from wireless communications facilities and primary
jurisdiction over the regulation of radio signal interference among users of
the radio frequency spectrum.
   (B)   Consistent with the Act, the regulation of towers and antennas in the
city will not have the effect of prohibiting any person from providing
telecommunications services.
(Prior Code, § 517.01) (Ord. 00-01, passed 3-15-2000; Ord. 20181003-01, passed
10-3-2018)
§ 159.02 PURPOSE.
   In order to accommodate the communication needs of residents and businesses
while protecting the public health, safety and general welfare of the
community, the city finds that these regulations are necessary in order to:
   (A)   Facilitate the provision of wireless communication services to the
residents and businesses of the city;
   (B)   Minimize adverse visual effects of towers through careful design and
siting standards;
   (C)   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through structural standards and setback requirements; and
   (D)   Maximize the use of existing and approved towers to accommodate new
wireless communication antennas in order to reduce the number of towers needed
to serve the community.
(Prior Code, § 517.01) (Ord. 00-01, passed 3-15-2000; Ord. 20181003-01, 10-3-
2018)
§ 159.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANTENNA. Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or
transmitting electromagnetic waves including, but not limited to, directional
antennas such as panels, microwave dishes, satellite dishes and omni-
directional antennas, except:
      (1)   A dish antenna two meters in diameter or less, located in an
industrial or commercial district;
      (2)   A dish antenna one meter or less in diameter, wherever located; and
      (3)   Facilities which an operator demonstrates are exempt from local
regulation and only subject to regulation by the Federal Communications
Commission such as certain amateur radio facilities.
   TOWER. Any ground, wall or roof mounted pole, spire, structure or
combination thereof taller than 15 feet, including supporting lines, cables,
wires, braces and masts intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an
antenna.
(Prior Code, § 517.03) (Ord. 00-01, passed 3-15-2000; Ord. 20181003-01, passed
10-3-2018)
REQUIREMENTS AND LICENSING CRITERIA
§ 159.15 LOCATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)    Towers and antennas in residentially zoned districts are a prohibited
use; except that:
      (1)   Towers supporting amateur radio operations, antennas and equipment
licensed by the FCC and conforming to all applicable provisions of this chapter
are allowed as a conditional use only: in the rear yard of residential parcels;
place of assembly sites when camouflaged as small steeples or bell towers; and
government, school, utility and institutional sites; and
      (2)   Antennas located on city property, buildings or infrastructure such
as water towers shall be a permitted use subject to obtaining a lease and any
other required approvals such as a building permit, and subject to the
availability of a suitable location at the site.
   (B)   Towers in all other zoning districts are allowed as conditional uses
subject to the provisions of §
163.326(E) and the additional requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   Antennas are a permitted use on any city property, buildings or
infrastructure such as water towers subject to obtaining a lease and any other
required approvals such as a building permit and subject to the availability of
a suitable location at the site.
(Prior Code, § 517.05) (Ord. 00-01, passed 3-15-2000; Ord. 20181003-01, passed
10-3-2018; Ord. 20231115-03, passed 11-15-2023)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 159.16 CO-LOCATION REQUIREMENTS.
   Towers erected, constructed or located within the city must comply with the
following requirements.
   (A)   No new tower shall be permitted as a conditional use unless the city
finds that the antenna planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on
an existing or approved tower within a one mile search radius of the proposed
tower due to one or more of the following reasons:
      (1)   The planned antenna would exceed the structural capacity of the
existing or approved tower as certified by a qualified and licensed
professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced,
modified or replaced to accommodate the planned antenna at a reasonable cost;
      (2)   Existing or approved towers within the search radius cannot
accommodate the planned antenna at a height necessary to function reasonably as
certified by a qualified and licensed professional engineer; and/or
      (3)   The applicant certifies and documents that it is infeasible to
locate the planned antenna upon an existing or approved tower for another
reason found to be legitimate by the City Council.
   (B)   Approval to develop, build, construct or erect a tower will not be
granted to a person on the basis that it is economically infeasible for the
person to co-locate or install an antenna on a tower or antenna support
structure owned by another person.
   (C)   A new tower must be designed structurally, electrically and in all
other respects, to accommodate both the applicants’ antennas and comparable
antennas for at least two additional users if the tower is over 100 feet in
height, or for at least one additional user if the tower is over 60 feet in
height. Towers must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas
upon the tower and to accept antennas mounted at varying heights.
(Prior Code, § 517.07) (Ord. 00-01, passed 3-15-2000; Ord. 20181003-01, passed
10-3-2018) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 159.17 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   In addition to the requirements of §
159.16(D) of this chapter, new or modified towers and antennas must meet the
following design requirements.
   (A)   Towers and antennas must be designed in accordance with applicable
laws and regulations such as the regulations of the Federal Aviation
Administration.
   (B)   Towers must be of a monopole design unless the party proposing
construction of the tower demonstrates that an alternative design is necessary
to meet engineering requirements.
   (C)   Tower locations must be maintained in a safe and reasonable condition
in order to prevent accidents. Tower locations must be adequately fenced in
order to deter trespass by children or other persons.
(Prior Code, § 517.09) (Ord. 00-01, passed 3-15-2000; Ord. 20181003-01, passed
10-3-2018) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 159.18 TOWER SETBACKS.
   Towers must conform with the following minimum setback requirements.
   (A)   Towers must be setback from the nearest property line or public
rights-of-way by a minimum distance equal to the height of the tower, including
all antennas and attachments.
   (B)   Towers may not be located between a principal structure and a public
street or other right-of-way used or dedicated for travel purposes.
   (C)   Tower setback and location requirements are subject to the variance
requirements and procedures located in §
163.326(G).
(Prior Code, § 517.11) (Ord. 00-01, passed 3-15-2000; Ord. 20181003-01, passed
10-3-2018) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 159.19 TOWER HEIGHT.
   (A)   Towers may not exceed a height of 30 feet in residentially zoned areas
where towers are allowed by conditional use permit, and may not exceed a height
of 130 feet in any other zoning district in the city.
   (B)   The height of towers is determined by measuring the vertical distance
from the tower’s point of contact with the ground or from grade with respect to
wall or rooftop mounted towers, to the highest point of the tower, including
all antennas and other attachments.
   (C)   Requests for tower variances are subject to those submittal
requirements in §
163.326(G). A site plan may be required to be submitted if deemed necessary by
the city.
(Prior Code, § 517.13) (Ord. 00-01, passed 3-15-2000; Ord. 20181003-01, passed
10-3-2018) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 159.20 SEPARATION OR BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Towers must be separated from residentially zoned lands by a minimum
of 90 feet or 150% of the height of the proposed tower whichever is greater.
The minimum tower separation distance is calculated and applied irrespective of
the city jurisdictional boundaries. Measurement of tower separation distances
for the purpose of compliance with this chapter is measured from the base of a
tower to the closest point of the proposed site, which abuts residentially
zoned lands.
   (B)   Towers must be separated by at least 1,500 feet from existing towers
or towers approved but not yet constructed at the time a permit is granted.
Separation distances are measured by drawing or following a straight line
between the base of the existing or approved structure and the proposed base,
pursuant to the site plan for the proposed tower.
(Prior Code, § 517.15) (Ord. 00-01, passed 3-15-2000; Ord. 20181003-01, passed
10-3-2018) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 159.21 TOWER LIGHTING.
   Towers may not be illuminated by artificial means including strobe lights,
unless the Federal Aviation Administration or other state or federal authority
for a particular tower specifically requires such lighting. If lighting is
required, fixtures should be positioned inward to reduce glare and reflection
onto adjacent properties. When incorporated into the particular design of the
tower, light fixtures used to illuminate ball fields, parking lots and similar
areas may be attached to the tower.
(Prior Code, § 517.17) (Ord. 00-01, passed 3-15-2000; Ord. 20181003-01, passed
10-3-2018) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 159.22 SIGNS AND ADVERTISING.
   The use of any portion of a tower for signs other than warning or equipment
information is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 517.19) (Ord. 00-01, passed 3-15-2000; Ord. 20181003-01, passed
10-3-2018) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 159.23 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Antennas and towers erected, constructed, or maintained in the city,
and all wiring therefor must comply with the requirements of this code
including this section.
   (B)   Towers must be certified by a qualified and licensed professional
engineer that such tower conforms to the latest structural standards, and wind
loading requirements of the Uniform Building Code.
   (C)   With the exception of necessary electric and telephone service and
connection lines approved by the city, no part of any antenna or tower nor any
lines, cable, equipment or wires or braces in connection with either may extend
across or over any part of the right-of-way, public street, highway, sidewalk
or property line.
   (D)   Towers and antennas must be designed to conform to accepted electrical
engineering methods and practices and to comply with the provisions of the
National Electrical Code.
   (E)   All signal and remote control conductors of low energy extending
substantially horizontally above the ground between a tower or antenna and a
structure, or between towers, must be at least eight feet above the ground at
all points, unless buried underground.
   (F)   A tower affixed to the ground must be protected to prevent or
discourage climbing of the tower by unauthorized persons.
   (G)   Towers must be constructed to conform to the requirements of the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
   (H)   Proposed development, construction or modification of a tower requires
review by an engineer selected by the city and permit fees shall be imposed for
purposes of fully covering the additional expense to the city.
   (I)   Fences constructed around or upon parcels containing towers must be
constructed in accordance with laws and regulations applicable to the fencing.
   (J)   Landscaping on parcels containing towers or support structures must be
in accordance with landscaping requirements identified in the site plan and
approved by the city.
(Prior Code, § 517.21) (Ord. 00-01, passed 3-15-2000; Ord. 20181003-01, passed
10-3-2018) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 159.24 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   A utility building or structure accessory to a tower, not exceeding 200
square feet in size, must be architecturally designed to blend in with the
surrounding environment, and meet the minimum setback requirements of the
underlying zoning district.
(Prior Code, § 517.23) (Ord. 00-01, passed 3-15-2000; Ord. 20181003-01, passed
10-3-2018) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 159.25 EXISTING ANTENNAS AND TOWERS.
   (A)   Antennas and towers in existence as of 3-23-2000, that do not conform
to or comply with this section may continue in use for the purpose now used and
as now existing, but may not be replaced or structurally altered without
complying in all respects with this chapter.
   (B)   If a non-conforming antenna or tower is damaged due to any reason or
cause whatsoever, the antenna or tower may be repaired and restored to its
former use, location and physical dimensions upon obtaining a building permit
therefor, but without otherwise complying with this chapter; provided, however,
that; if the cost of repairing the antenna or tower to the former use, physical
dimensions and location would be 10% or more of the cost of a new antenna or
tower of like kind and quality, then the antenna or tower may not be repaired
or restored, except in full compliance with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 517.25) (Ord. 00-01, passed 3-15-2000; Ord. 20181003-01, passed
10-3-2018) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 159.26 ABANDONED OR UNUSED TOWERS OR PORTIONS OF TOWERS.
   (A)   Abandoned or unused towers or portions of towers are to be removed as
provided in this chapter.
   (B)   Abandoned or unused towers and associated facilities must be removed
within 12 months of the cessation of operations of the site unless the Building
Official approves a time extension. A copy of the relevant portions of a signed
lease, which requires the applicants to remove the tower and associated
facilities upon cessation of operations at the site, must be submitted at the
time of application. In the event that a tower is not removed within 12 months
of the cessation of operations at a site, the tower and associated facilities
may be removed by the city, and the cost will be assessed against the property
as a special assessment pursuant to M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from
time to time.
   (C)   Unused portions of towers above a manufactured connection must be
removed within six months of the time of removal of antenna. The replacement of
portions of a tower previously removed requires the issuance of a new permit.
(Prior Code, § 517.27) (Ord. 00-01, passed 3-15-2000; Ord. 20181003-01, passed
10-3-2018) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 159.27 NUMBER OF TOWERS AND ANTENNAS.
   Only one tower may exist at any one time on any one parcel conforming to the
parcel requirements for the underlying zoning district within the city.
(Prior Code, § 517.29) (Ord. 00-01, passed 3-15-2000; Ord. 20181003-01, passed
10-3-2018) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 159.28 ANTENNAS MOUNTED ON ROOFS, WALLS AND EXISTING TOWERS.
   The Building Official may approve the placement of antennas on roofs, walls
and existing towers provided that the antennas meet the requirements of this
chapter and upon submittal of a final site and building plan and a report
prepared by a qualified and licensed professional engineer indicating the
existing structures or towers suitability to accept the antenna and the
proposed method of affixing the antenna to the structure. Complete details of
all fixtures and couplings and the precise point of attachment must be
indicated.
(Prior Code, § 517.31) (Ord. 00-01, passed 3-15-2000; Ord. 20181003-01, passed
10-3-2018) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 159.29 INSPECTIONS.
   Towers may be inspected periodically by the city’s Building Official to
determine compliance with original construction standards. Deviation from
original construction for which a permit is obtained constitutes a violation of
this chapter. Each tower owner must pay an annual inspection fee. In additional
to an annual inspection, the city may conduct inspections, at any time, upon
reasonable notice to the owner to determine if the tower complies with the
Uniform Building Code and other construction standards provided by the city
code, federal or state law.
(Prior Code, § 517.33) (Ord. 00-01, passed 3-15-2000; Ord. 20181003-01, passed
10-3-2018)
§ 159.30 INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC SAFETY TELECOMMUNICATIONS.
   Telecommunication services provided via antenna towers may not interfere
with public safety or city communications. All applications for placement of an
antenna or tower must be accompanied by an intermodulation study that provides
technical evaluation of existing and proposed public safety or city
transmissions and indicates all potential interference problems with public
safety or city facilities and transmissions.
(Prior Code, § 517.35) (Ord. 00-01, passed 3-15-2000; Ord. 20181003-01, passed
10-3-2018)
§ 159.31 PERMITS; INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   It is unlawful for any person to erect, construct or place or
re-erect, replace or repair any tower without first making application to the
Building Official and securing a permit.
      (2)   The applicant must provide at the time of application sufficient
information, including a site plan, to indicate that the construction,
installation and maintenance of the antenna and tower will not create a safety
hazard or damage to the property of other persons.
      (3)   The applicant must pay the fee prescribed in §
36.02 of this code of ordinances. An additional fee must be paid for the review
of any plans or other submissions by an engineer selected by the city.
(Prior Code, § 517.37)
   (B)   In addition to the information required elsewhere in this chapter,
applications for towers shall include the following supplemental information.
      (1)   A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer that
describes the tower height and design, including a cross-section, and
elevation. The report must include written evidence that the proposed structure
meets the structural requirements of this code and the Building Code;
      (2)   Documentation of steps the applicant will take to avoid
interference with established public safety telecommunications. A preliminary
or certified written statement from an engineer that the construction and
placement or the reception and transmission functions of the antenna and tower
will not interfere with public safety communications and the usual and
customary transmission or reception of radio, television or other
communications service enjoyed by adjacent properties;
      (3)   Information describing the tower’s capacity including the number
and type of antennas that it can accommodate;
      (4)   Certification that the proposed tower complies with regulations
administered by the Federal Aviation Administration;
      (5)   A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer, which
demonstrates the tower’s compliance with the aforementioned structural and
electrical standards;
      (6)   Written documentation that the applicant has made diligent but
unsuccessful efforts for permission to install or co-locate the applicant’s
telecommunications facilities on towers or antenna support systems located
within one mile of the proposed tower site, or written, technical evidence from
an engineer certifying that the proposed tower or antenna cannot be installed
or co-located on another person’s tower or antenna support system located
within a one mile radius of the proposed tower site and must be located at the
proposed site in order to meet the coverage requirements of the applicant’s
wireless telecommunications system;
      (7)   A copy of the tower’s lease or written agreement; and
      (8)   Site plan showing surrounding land parcels and uses within setback
requirements and other such information, including landscaping, as required in
this chapter. Plans must be submitted in electronic form for city. use in
making presentations and providing information to commissions, the public and
the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 517.39)
(Ord. 00-01, passed 3-15-2000; Ord. 20181003-01, passed 10-3-2018) Penalty, see
§
10.99
CHAPTER 160: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
160.01   Statutory authorization
   
160.02   Findings of fact
   
160.03   Statement of purpose
   
160.04   Lands to which chapter applies
   
160.05   Zoning Map establishment
   
160.06   Regulatory flood protection elevation
   
160.07   Interpretation
   
160.08   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
160.09   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
160.10   Severability
   
160.11   Definitions
   
160.12   Annexations
Zoning Overlay Districts
   
160.25   Overlay districts
   
160.26   Floodway District (FW)
   
160.27   Flood Fringe District (FF)
   
160.28   General Floodplain District
Criteria and Other Conditions
   
160.40   Subdivisions
   
160.41   Public utilities, railroads, roads and bridges
   
160.42   Manufactured homes and home parks; recreational vehicles
Administration and Enforcement
   
160.55   Zoning Administrator
   
160.56   Permit requirements
   
160.57   Board of Adjustment and Appeals
   
160.58   Conditional uses
   
160.59   Non-conforming uses
   
160.60   Amendments
 
   
160.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 160.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The legislature of the state has, in M.S. Chapters 103F and 462, as they may
be amended from time to time, delegated the responsibility to local government
units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
(Prior Code, § 530.01) (Ord. 2012-05, passed 3-7-2012)
§ 160.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   General. The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic
inundation, which results in potential loss of life, loss of property, health
and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures or flood protection and relief and impairment
of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and
general welfare.
   (B)   Methods used to analyze flood hazards. This chapter is based upon a
reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which is consistent with the
standards established by the state’s Department of Natural Resources.
   (C)   National Flood Insurance Program compliance. This chapter is adopted
to comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance
Program codified as 44 C.F.R. parts 59 through 78, as amended, so as to
maintain the city’s eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program.
(Prior Code, § 530.01) (Ord. 2012-05, passed 3-7-2012)
§ 160.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize those losses described above in §
160.02(A) of this chapter by provisions contained in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 530.01) (Ord. 2012-05, passed 3-7-2012)
§ 160.04 LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city
shown on the official zoning map or the attachments thereto as being located
within the boundaries of the Floodway, Flood Fringe or General Floodplain
Districts.
(Prior Code, § 530.03) (Ord. 2012-05, passed 3-7-2012)
§ 160.05 ZONING MAP ESTABLISHMENT.
   The official zoning map together with all materials attached thereto is
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The
attached material shall include the Flood Insurance Study, Pine County,
Minnesota and Incorporated Areas and Flood Insurance Rate Map, panels therein
numbered 27115C0400C, 27115C0411C, 27115C0413C, 27115C0557C and 27115C0576C,
all documents being dated 4-3-2012 and prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. The official zoning map shall be on file in the office of
the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer and the Zoning Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 530.03) (Ord. 2012-05, passed 3-7-2012)
§ 160.06 REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION.
   The regulatory flood protection elevation shall be an elevation no lower
than one foot above the elevation of the regional flood, plus any increases in
flood elevation caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from
designation of a floodway.
(Prior Code, § 530.03) (Ord. 2012-05, passed 3-7-2012)
§ 160.07 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the city and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal
of any other powers granted by state law.
   (B)   The boundaries of the flood overlay zoning districts shall be
determined by scaling distances on the official zoning map. Where
interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the
district as shown on the official zoning map, such as when there appears to be
a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, the decision
of the Zoning Administrator may be formally appealed to the Board of Adjustment
and Appeals. All decisions will be based on elevations on the regional (100-
year) flood profile, the ground elevations that existed on the site at the time
the city adopted these regulations or on the date of the first National Flood
Insurance Program map showing the area within the 100-year floodplain if
earlier and other available technical data. Persons contesting the location of
the district boundaries shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present
their case to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals and to submit technical
evidence.
(Prior Code, § 530.03) (Ord. 2012-05, passed 3-7-2012)
§ 160.08 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. The
regulations in this chapter are in addition to rather than in substitution of
regulations imposed by any other underlying zoning classification for
designated floodplains. In the event of any inconsistency between the
provisions of this chapter and other city code provisions, the more restrictive
provision shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 530.03) (Ord. 2012-05, passed 3-7-2012)
§ 160.09 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   This chapter does not imply that areas outside the floodplain districts or
land uses permitted within the districts will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Prior Code, § 530.03) (Ord. 2012-05, passed 3-7-2012)
§ 160.10 SEVERABILITY.
   If any paragraph, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder
of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
(Prior Code, § 530.03) (Ord. 2012-05, passed 3-7-2012)
§ 160.11 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. A use or structure on the same lot with, and of
a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or
structure.
   BASEMENT. Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor
or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of the
depth of excavation below ground level.
   CONDITIONAL USE. A specific type of structure or land use listed in the city
code that may be allowed, but only after an in-depth review procedure and with
appropriate conditions or restrictions as provided in the city’s Zoning Code or
Building Code and upon a finding that:
      (1)   Certain conditions as detailed in the city zoning ordinance exist;
and
      (2)   The structure or land use conforms to the comprehensive land use
plan and are compatible with the existing neighborhood.
   EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT. A method of determining the location of
floodway boundaries so that floodplain lands on both sides of a stream are
capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.
   FLOOD. A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the stage
of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry areas.
   FLOOD FREQUENCY. The frequency for which it is expected that a specific
flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
   FLOOD FRINGE. The portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway. FLOOD
FRINGE is synonymous with the term FLOODWAY FRINGE that is used in the Flood
Insurance Study for Pine County, Minnesota and Incorporated Areas.
   FLOODPLAIN. The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or
watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood.
   FLOOD-PROOFING. A combination of structural provisions, changes or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the
reduction or elimination of flood damages.
   FLOODWAY. The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and
those portions of the adjoining floodplain which are reasonably required to
carry or store the regional flood discharge.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including the
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area,
is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include the term “recreational vehicle”.
   OBSTRUCTION. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence,
stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across or projecting
into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory floodplain which may impede,
retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by
catching or collecting debris carried by the water.
   PRINCIPAL USE OR STRUCTURE. All uses or structures that are not accessory
uses or structures.
   REACH. A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a
stream or river influenced by a natural or human-made obstruction. In an urban
area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge crossings
would most typically constitute a REACH.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is 400
square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, is
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and
is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. For the
purposes of this chapter, the term RECREATIONAL VEHICLE shall be synonymous
with the term TRAVEL TRAILER or TRAVEL VEHICLE.
   REGIONAL FLOOD. A flood which is representative of large floods known to
have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can
be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year
recurrence interval. REGIONAL FLOOD is synonymous with the term BASE FLOOD used
in the flood insurance study.
   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. An elevation no lower than one foot
above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation
caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from designation of a
floodway.
   STRUCTURE. Any thing constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the
ground or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings,
factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, recreational
vehicles not meeting the exemption criteria specified in §
160.42(C)(1) of this chapter and other similar items.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Within any consecutive 365-day period, any
reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair),
repair after damage, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the
“start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures that
have incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or city health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the city code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of an “historic structure”; provided that, the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an
“historic structure”. For the purpose of this chapter, “historic structure”
shall be as defined in 44 C.F.R. § 59.1.
   VARIANCE. A modification of a specific permitted development standard
required by the city code including this chapter to allow an alternative
development standard not stated as acceptable in the city code, but only as
applied to a particular property for the purpose of alleviating a hardship,
practical difficulty or unique circumstance as defined and elaborated upon in
the city code.
(Prior Code, § 530.03) (Ord. 2012-05, passed 3-7-2012)
§ 160.12 ANNEXATIONS.
   The Flood Insurance Rate Map panels adopted by reference in §
160.05 of this chapter may include floodplain areas that lie outside of the
corporate boundaries of the city at the time of adoption of this chapter. If
any of these floodplain land areas are annexed into the city after the date of
adoption of this chapter, the newly annexed floodplain lands shall be subject
to the provisions of this chapter immediately upon the date of annexation into
the city.
(Prior Code, § 530.03) (Ord. 2012-05, passed 3-7-2012)
ZONING OVERLAY DISTRICTS
§ 160.25 OVERLAY DISTRICTS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Floodway District. The Floodway District shall include those areas
designated as “floodway” on the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in §
160.05 of this chapter.
      (2)   Flood Fringe District. The Flood Fringe District shall include
those areas designated as “floodway fringe”. The Flood Fringe District shall
include those areas shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, as adopted in §
160.05 of this chapter, as being within Zones AE, but being located outside of
the floodway.
      (3)   General Floodplain District. The General Floodplain District shall
include those areas designated as “Zone A” and “Zone AE” without a floodway on
the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in §
160.05 of this chapter.
   (B)   Compliance. No new structure or land shall hereafter be used and no
structure shall be constructed, located, extended, converted or structurally
altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter, the underlying
zoning classification and other applicable regulations which apply to uses
within the jurisdiction of this chapter. Within the Floodway, Flood Fringe and
General Floodplain Districts, all uses not listed as permitted uses or
conditional uses in §§
160.26,
160.27 and
160.28 of this chapter, respectively, shall be prohibited. In addition, it is
provided here that:
      (1)   New manufactured homes, replacement manufactured homes and certain
travel trailers and travel vehicles are subject to the general provisions of
this chapter and specifically §
160.42 of this chapter;
      (2)   Modifications, additions, structural alterations, normal
maintenance and repair, or repair after damage to existing non-conforming
structures and non-conforming uses of structures or land are regulated by the
general provisions of this chapter and specifically §
160.59 of this chapter; and
      (3)   As-built elevations for elevated or flood-proofed structures must
be certified by ground surveys and flood-proofing techniques must be designed
and certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as specified
in the general provisions of this chapter and specifically as stated in §§
160.55 through
160.58 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 530.05) (Ord. 2012-05, passed 3-7-2012)
§ 160.26 FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW).
   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted uses in the Floodway
District; provided that, the use is also listed in the city code as a permitted
or conditional use in the underlying zoning district. In the event that the use
is permitted in the Floodway District, but is listed as a conditional use in
the underlying zoning district, a conditional use permit is still required:
      (1)   General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting;
      (2)   Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas and airport
landing strips;
      (3)   Private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges,
archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks,
wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves,
target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, and single or
multiple purpose recreational trails; and
      (4)   Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas.
   (B)   Standards for floodway permitted uses.
      (1)   The use shall have a low flood damage potential.
      (2)   The use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district.
      (3)   The use shall not obstruct flood flows or increase flood elevations
and shall not involve structures, fill, obstructions, excavations or storage of
materials or equipment.
   (C)   Conditional Uses. The following uses are conditional uses in the
Floodway District; provided that, the use is also listed in the city code as a
permitted or conditional use in the underlying zoning district. In the event
that the use is conditional in the Floodway District, but is a permitted use in
the underlying zoning district, a conditional use permit is still required:
      (1)   Structures accessory to the uses listed in division (A) above and
the uses listed below;
      (2)   Extraction and storage of sand, gravel and other materials;
      (3)   Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves and water control
structures;
      (4)   Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines and
pipelines;
      (5)   Storage yards for equipment, machinery or materials;
      (6)   Placement of fill or construction offenses;
      (7)   Recreational vehicles either on individual lots of record or in
existing or new subdivisions or commercial or condominium type campgrounds,
subject to the exemptions and provisions of §
160.42(C) of this chapter; and
      (8)   Structural works for flood control such as levees, dikes and
floodwalls constructed to any height where the intent is to protect individual
structures and levees or dikes where the intent is to protect agricultural
crops for a frequency flood event equal to or less than the ten-year frequency
flood event.
   (D)   Standards for floodway conditional uses.
      (1)   No structure (temporary or permanent), fill (including fill for
roads and levees), deposit, obstruction, storage of materials or equipment, or
other uses may be allowed as a conditional use that will cause any increase in
the stage of the 100-year or regional flood or cause an increase in flood
damages in the reach or reaches affected.
      (2)   All floodway conditional uses are subject to the procedures and
standards contained in §
160.58 of this chapter.
      (3)   The conditional use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning
district.
      (4)   (a)   Fill, dredge spoil and all other similar materials deposited
or stored in the floodplain shall be protected from erosion by vegetative
cover, mulching, riprap or other acceptable method.
         (b)   Dredge spoil sites and sand and gravel operations shall not be
allowed in the floodway unless a long-term site development plan is submitted
which includes an erosion/sedimentation prevention element to the plan.
         (c)   As an alternative, and consistent with division (D)(4)(b) above,
dredge spoil disposal and sand and gravel operations may allow temporary on-
site storage of fill or other materials which would have caused an increase to
the stage of the 100-year or regional flood but only after the city has
received an appropriate plan which assures the removal of the materials from
the floodway based upon the flood warning time available. The conditional use
permit must be recorded with the property in the office of the County Recorder
or County Registrar of Titles, as appropriate.
      (5)   (a)   Accessory structures shall not be designed for human
habitation.
         (b)   Accessory structures shall be permissible in the underlying
zoning district.
         (c)   Accessory structures, if permitted, shall be constructed and
placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow
of flood waters.
            1.   Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the
longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow; and
            2.   So far as practicable, structures shall be placed
approximately on the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining structures.
         (d)   Accessory structures shall be elevated on fill or structurally
dry flood-proofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 flood-proofing
classifications in the State Building Code. As an alternative, an accessory
structure may be flood-proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 flood-proofing
classification in the State Building Code; provided, the accessory structure
constitutes a minimal investment, does not exceed 500 square feet in size at
its largest projection, and for a detached garage, if permitted in the
underlying zoning district, the detached garage is used solely for parking of
vehicles and limited storage. All flood-proofed accessory structures must meet
the following additional standards.
            1.   The structure must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure and shall be designed
to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
            2.   Any mechanical and utility equipment in a structure must be
elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or properly
flood-proofed.
            3.   To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there
must be a minimum of two “automatic” openings in the outside walls of the
structure having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. There must be openings on at
least two sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings must be no
higher than one foot above the lowest adjacent grade to the structure. Using
human intervention to open a garage door prior to flooding will not satisfy
this requirement for automatic openings.
      (6)   (a)   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of
flooding, flammable, explosive or potentially injurious to human, animal or
plant life is prohibited.
         (b)   Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if
readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning
and in accordance with a plan approved by the city.
      (7)   Structural works for flood control that will change the course,
current or cross section of protected wetlands or public waters shall be
subject to the provisions of M.S. Chapter 103G, as it may be amended from time
to time. City-wide structural works for flood control intended to remove areas
from the regulatory floodplain shall not be allowed in the floodway.
      (8)   A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the floodway shall not
cause an increase to the 100-year or regional flood and the technical analysis
must assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a stream.
(Prior Code, § 530.07) (Ord. 2012-05, passed 3-7-2012)
§ 160.27 FLOOD FRINGE DISTRICT (FF).
   (A)   Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be those uses of land or
structures listed as permitted or conditional uses in the underlying zoning
district(s) that comply with the standards for Flood Fringe District “permitted
uses” listed in division (B) below and the “standards for all flood fringe
uses” listed in division (E) below. If a use or structure could have been a
permitted use in the Flood Fringe District but is a conditional use in the
underlying zoning district, it shall be processed as a conditional use permit
and subject to the standards of divisions (B) and (E) below.
   (B)   Standards for flood fringe permitted uses.
      (1)   All structures, including accessory structures must be elevated on
fill so that the lowest floor, including basement floor is at or above the
regulatory flood protection elevation. The finished fill elevation for
structures shall be no lower than one foot below the regulatory flood
protection elevation and the fill shall extend at an elevation at least 15 feet
beyond the outside limits of the structure erected thereon.
      (2)   As an alternative to elevation on fill, accessory structures, if
permitted in the underlying zoning district, constitute a minimal investment
and do not exceed 500 square feet at their largest projection may be internally
flood-proofed in accordance with §
160.26(D)(5)(d) of this chapter.
      (3)   The cumulative placement of fill where at any one time in excess of
1,000 cubic yards of fill is located on the parcel shall be allowable only as a
conditional use, unless the fill is specifically intended to elevate a
structure in accordance with division (B)(1) above.
      (4)   The storage of any materials or equipment shall be elevated on fill
to the regulatory flood protection elevation.
      (5)   The provisions of division (E) below shall apply.
   (C)   Conditional uses. Conditional uses shall be those uses of land or
structures listed as permitted or conditional uses in the underlying zoning
district(s) that are not elevated on fill or flood-proofed in accordance with
divisions (A) and (B) above. Any use of land that does not comply with the
standards in divisions (B)(3) and (B)(4) above shall only be allowable as a
conditional use. An application for a conditional use shall be subject to the
standards and criteria and evaluation procedures specified in divisions (D) and
(E) below and §
160.58 of this chapter.
   (D)   Standards for flood fringe conditional uses.
      (1)   (a)   Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill may
be utilized to elevate a structure’s lowest floor above the regulatory flood
protection elevation. These alternative methods may include the use of stilts,
pilings, parallel walls or above-grade, enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or
tuck under garages. The base or floor of an enclosed area shall be considered
above-grade and not a structure’s basement or lowest floor if:
            1.   The enclosed area is above-grade on at least one side of the
structure;
            2.   It is designed to internally flood and is constructed with
flood resistant materials; and
            3.   It is used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage.
         (b)   The above-noted alternative elevation methods are subject to the
following additional standards.
            1.   Design and certification. The structure’s design and as-built
condition must be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
as being in compliance with the general design standards of the state’s
Building Code and, specifically, that all electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities must be at
or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or be designed to prevent
flood water from entering or accumulating within these components during times
of flooding.
            2.   Specific standards for above-grade, enclosed areas. Above-
grade, fully enclosed areas, such as crawl spaces or tuck-under garages, must
be designed to internally flood and the design plans must stipulate:
               a.   A minimum area of openings in the walls where internal
flooding is to be used as a flood-proofing technique. There shall be a minimum
of two openings on at least two sides of the structure and the bottom of all
openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. The automatic openings
shall have a minimum net area of not less than one square inch for every square
foot of enclosed area subject to flooding unless a registered professional
engineer or architect certifies that a smaller net area would suffice. The
automatic openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices; provided that, they permit the automatic entry and exit
of flood waters without any form of human intervention; and
               b.   That the enclosed area will be designed of flood resistant
materials in accordance with the FP-3 or FP-4 classifications in the State
Building Code and shall be used solely for building access, parking of vehicles
or storage.
      (2)   Basements, as defined by §
160.11 of this chapter, shall be subject to the following.
         (a)   Residential basement construction shall not be allowed below the
regulatory flood protection elevation.
         (b)   Non-residential basements may be allowed below the regulatory
flood protection elevation; provided, the basement is structurally dry flood-
proofed in accordance with division (D)(3) below.
      (3)   All areas of non-residential structures including basements to be
placed below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be flood-proofed
in accordance with the structurally dry flood- proofing classifications in the
State Building Code. Structurally dry flood-proofing must meet the FP-1 or FP-
2 flood-proofing classification in the State Building Code and this shall
require making the structure water-tight with the walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of
buoyancy. Structures flood-proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 classification shall not
be permitted.
      (4)   When at any one time more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill or other
similar material is located on a parcel for such activities as on-site storage,
landscaping, sand and gravel operations, landfills, roads, dredge spoil
disposal or construction of flood control works, an erosion/sedimentation
control plan must be submitted unless the city is enforcing a state approved
shoreland management ordinance. In the absence of a state approved shoreland
ordinance, the plan must clearly specify methods to be used to stabilize the
fill on site for a flood event at a minimum of the 100-year or regional flood
event. The plan must be prepared and certified by a registered professional
engineer or other qualified individual acceptable to the city. The plan may
incorporate alternative procedures for removal of the material from the
floodplain if adequate flood warning time exists.
      (5)   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of
flooding, flammable, explosive or potentially injurious to human, animal or
plant life is prohibited. Storage of other materials or equipment may be
allowed if readily removable from the area within the time available after a
flood warning and in accordance with a plan approved by the City Council. The
provisions of division (E) below shall also apply.
   (E)   Standards for all flood fringe uses.
      (1)   Vehicular access. All new principal structures must have vehicular
access at or above an elevation not more than two feet below the regulatory
flood protection elevation. If a variance to this requirement is granted, the
Board of Adjustment and Appeals must specify limitations on the period of use
or occupancy of the structure for times of flooding and only after determining
that adequate flood warning time and local flood emergency response procedures
exist.
      (2)   Commercial uses. Where the use is permitted in the underlying
zoning district, accessory commercial land uses, such as yards, railroad tracks
and parking lots may be located at elevations lower than the regulatory flood
protection elevation. However, the applicable permit shall not be granted by
the city in the absence of a flood warning system that provides adequate time
for evacuation if the area would be inundated to a depth and velocity such that
when multiplying the depth (in feet) times velocity (in feet per second) the
product number exceeds four upon occurrence of the regional flood.
      (3)   Manufacturing and industrial uses. Where the use is permitted in
the underlying zoning district, measures shall be taken to minimize
interference with normal plant operations especially along streams having
protracted flood durations. Certain accessory land uses such as yards and
parking lots may be located at lower elevations subject to requirements set out
in division (E)(2) above. In considering permit applications, due consideration
shall be given by the city if the proposed industry’s business requires that it
be located in a floodplain area.
      (4)   Fill. Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be
properly protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable
method. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (“FEMA”) has established
criteria for removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain
structures properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA’s
requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection
standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should
be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of
special flood hazard area designation will be requested.
      (5)   Affect. Floodplain developments shall not adversely affect the
hydraulic capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any tributary
watercourse or drainage system where a floodway or other encroachment limit has
not been specified on the city’s official zoning map.
      (6)   Recreational vehicles. Standards for recreational vehicles are
contained in §
160.42(C) of this chapter.
      (7)   Anchoring. All manufactured homes, if permitted in the underlying
zoning district must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or
frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable
state or city anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(Prior Code, § 530.09) (Ord. 2012-05, passed 3-7-2012)
§ 160.28 GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permissible uses.
      (1)   Permitted uses shall be those uses of land or structures listed as
permitted uses in §
160.26(A) of this chapter.
      (2)   All other permissible uses shall be subject to the floodway/flood
fringe evaluation criteria pursuant to division (B) below. The provisions of §
160.26 of this chapter shall apply if the proposed use is in the Floodway
District, and §
160.27 of this chapter shall apply if the proposed use is in the Flood Fringe
District.
   (B)   Procedures for floodway and flood fringe determinations within the
General Floodplain District.
      (1)   Upon receipt of an application for a building permit or other
approval within the General Floodplain District, the applicant shall be
required to furnish such of the following information as is deemed necessary by
the Zoning Administrator for the determination of the regulatory flood
protection elevation and whether the proposed use is within the Floodway or
Flood Fringe District:
         (a)   A typical valley cross-section(s) showing the channel of the
stream, elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel, cross-
sectional areas to be occupied by the proposed development and high water
information;
         (b)   Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the
ground, pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations, the size, location and
spatial arrangement of all proposed and existing structures on the site, and
the location and elevations of streets;
         (c)   Photographs showing existing land uses, vegetation upstream and
downstream and soil types; and
         (d)   Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow
line of the stream for at least 500 feet in either direction from the proposed
development.
      (2)   The applicant shall be responsible to submit one copy of the above
information to a designated engineer or other expert person or agency for
technical assistance in determining whether the proposed use is in the Floodway
or Flood Fringe District and to determine the regulatory flood protection
elevation. Procedures consistent with Minn. Rules parts 6120.5000 through
6120.6200 and 44 C.F.R. part 65 shall be followed in this expert evaluation.
The designated engineer or expert is strongly encouraged to discuss the
proposed technical evaluation methodology with the respective Department of
Natural Resources’ Area Hydrologist prior to commencing the analysis. The
designated engineer or expert shall:
         (a)   Estimate the peak discharge of the regional flood;
         (b)   Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood based
upon a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and overbank areas; and
         (c)   Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the regional
flood without increasing flood stages more than one-half foot. A lesser stage
increase than one-half foot shall be required if, as a result of the additional
stage increase, increased flood damages would result. An equal degree of
encroachment on both sides of the stream within the reach shall be assumed in
computing floodway boundaries.
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator shall present the technical evaluation and
findings of the designated engineer or expert to the City Council. The City
Council must formally accept the technical evaluation and the recommended
Floodway or Flood Fringe District boundary or deny the permit application. The
City Council, prior to official action, may submit the application and all
supporting data and analyses to FEMA, the Department of Natural Resources or
the city’s Planning Commission for review and comment. Once the Floodway and
Flood Fringe District boundaries have been determined, the City Council shall
refer the matter back to the Zoning Administrator who shall process the permit
application consistent with the applicable provisions of §§
160.26 and
160.27 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 530.11) (Ord. 2012-05, passed 3-7-2012)
CRITERIA AND OTHER CONDITIONS
§ 160.40 SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Review criteria. No land shall be subdivided which is unsuitable for
the reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment
facilities. All lots within the floodplain districts shall be able to contain a
building site outside of the Floodway District at or above the regulatory flood
protection elevation. All subdivisions shall have water and sewage treatment
facilities that comply with the provisions of this chapter and have road access
both to the subdivision and to the individual building sites no lower than two
feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation. For all subdivisions in
the floodplain, the Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries, the
regulatory flood protection elevation and the required elevation of all access
roads shall be clearly labeled on all required subdivision drawings and
platting documents.
   (B)   Floodway/flood fringe determinations in the General Floodplain
District. In the General Floodplain District, applicants shall provide the
information required in §
160.28(B) of this chapter to determine the l 00-year flood elevation, the
Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries and the regulatory flood
protection elevation for the subdivision site.
   (C)   Removal of special flood hazard area designation. FEMA has established
criteria for removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain
structures properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA’s
requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection
standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should
be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of
special flood hazard area designation will be requested.
(Prior Code, § 530.13) (Ord. 2012-05, passed 3-7-2012)
§ 160.41 PUBLIC UTILITIES, RAILROADS, ROADS AND BRIDGES.
   (A)   Public utilities. All public utilities and facilities such as gas,
electrical, sewer and water supply systems to be located in the floodplain
shall be flood-proofed in accordance with the State Building Code or elevated
to above the regulatory flood protection elevation.
   (B)   Public transportation facilities. Railroad tracks, roads and bridges
to be located within the floodplain shall comply with §§
160.26 and
160.27 of this chapter. Elevation to the regulatory flood protection elevation
shall be provided where failure or interruption of these transportation
facilities would result in danger to the public health or safety or where the
facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or
auxiliary roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where
failure or interruption of transportation services would not endanger the
public health or safety.
   (C)   On-site sewage treatment and water supply systems.
      (1)   Where public utilities are not provided:
         (a)   On-site water supply systems must be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; and
         (b)   New or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system
and discharges from the systems into flood waters and they shall not be subject
to impairment or contamination during times of flooding.
      (2)   Any sewage treatment system designed in accordance with the state’s
current statewide standards for on-site sewage treatment systems shall be
determined to be in compliance with this division (C).
(Prior Code, § 530.15) (Ord. 2012-05, passed 3-7-2012)
§ 160.42 MANUFACTURED HOMES AND HOME PARKS; RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing manufactured
home parks shall be subject to the provisions placed on subdivisions by §
160.40 of this chapter.
   (B)   (1)   The placement of new or replacement manufactured homes in
existing manufactured home parks or on individual lots of record that are
located in floodplain districts will be treated as a new structure and may be
placed only if elevated in compliance with §
160.27 of this chapter. If vehicular road access for pre-existing manufactured
home parks is not provided in accordance with §
160.27(E)(1) of this chapter, then replacement manufactured homes will not be
allowed until the property owner(s) develops a flood warning emergency plan
acceptable to the City Council.
      (2)   All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in
addition to applicable state or city anchoring requirements for resisting wind
forces.
   (C)   Recreational vehicles that do not meet the exemption criteria
specified in division (C)(1) below shall be subject to the provisions of this
chapter and as specifically required by divisions (C)(3) and (C)(4) below.
      (1)   Exemption. A recreational vehicle is exempt from the provisions of
this chapter if it is placed in any of the areas listed in division (C)(2)
below and meets the following criteria:
         (a)   Has current licenses required for highway use;
         (b)   Is “highway ready” meaning it is on wheels or has an internal
jacking system, and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities commonly used in campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks, and has
no permanent structural type additions attached to it; and
         (c)   The vehicle and associated use must be permissible in any
underlying zoning district.
      (2)   Areas exempted for placement of recreational vehicles. A
recreational vehicle that meets the criteria in division (C)(1) above is exempt
from the provisions of this chapter only if it is placed in one of the
following locations:
         (a)   Individual lot or parcel of record;
         (b)   Existing commercial recreational vehicle park or campground; or
         (c)   Existing condominium type association.
      (3)   Attached parcel. A recreational vehicle exempted in division (C)(1)
above, loses the exemption when development occurs on the parcel exceeding $500
for a structural addition to the recreational vehicle or exceeding $500 for an
accessory structure such as a garage or storage building. The recreational
vehicle and all additions and accessory structures will then be treated as a
new structure and shall be subject to the elevation/flood-proofing requirements
and the use of land restrictions specified in §§
160.26 and
160.27 of this chapter. There shall be no development or improvement on the
parcel or attachment to the recreational vehicle that hinders the removal of
the recreational vehicle to a flood-free location should flooding occur.
      (4)   New parks and campgrounds. New commercial recreational vehicle
parks or campgrounds and new residential type subdivisions and condominium
associations and the expansion of any existing similar use exceeding five units
or dwelling sites shall be subject to the following.
         (a)   Any new or replacement recreational vehicle will be allowed in
the Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts if permitted in the underlying zoning
district; and, provided that, the recreational vehicle and its contents are
placed on fill above the regulatory flood protection elevation and proper
elevated road access to the site exists in accordance with §
160.27(E)(1) of this chapter. No fill placed in the floodway to meet the
requirements of this section shall increase flood stages of the 100-year or
regional flood.
         (b)   All new or replacement recreational vehicles not meeting the
criteria of division (C)(4)(a) above may, as an alternative, be allowed as a
conditional use if permitted in the underlying zoning district and if they are
in accordance with the following provisions and the provisions of division (D)
below. The applicant must submit an emergency plan for the safe evacuation of
all vehicles and people during the 100-year flood to the city Zoning
Administrator for review and approval. The plan shall be prepared by a
registered engineer or other qualified individual, shall demonstrate that
adequate time and personnel exist to carry out the evacuation, and shall
demonstrate the provisions of divisions (C)(1)(a) and (C)(1)(b) above will be
met. All attendant sewage and water facilities for new or replacement
recreational vehicles must be protected or constructed so as to not be impaired
or contaminated during times of flooding in accordance with §
160.41(C) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 530.17) (Ord. 2012-05, passed 3-7-2012)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 160.55 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Zoning Administrator or other official designated by the City Council
shall administer and enforce this chapter. If the Zoning Administrator finds a
violation of the provisions of this chapter, he or she shall notify the person
responsible for the violation in accordance with the procedures stated in §
160.99 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 530.19) (Ord. 2012-05, passed 3-7-2012)
§ 160.56 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Permit required. A permit issued by the Zoning Administrator in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter shall be secured prior to the
erection, addition, modification, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance
and repair) or alteration of any building, structure or portion thereof; prior
to the use or change of use of a building, structure or land; prior to the
construction of a dam, fence or on-site septic system; prior to the change or
extension of a non-conforming use; prior to the repair of a structure that has
been damaged by flood, fire, tornado or any other source; and prior to the
placement of fill, excavation of materials or the storage of materials or
equipment within the floodplain.
   (B)   Application for permit. Application for a permit shall be made in
duplicate to the Zoning Administrator on forms furnished by the Zoning
Administrator and shall include the following where applicable: plans in
duplicate drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions and
elevations of the lot; existing or proposed structures, fill or storage of
materials; and the location of the foregoing in relation to the stream channel.
   (C)   State and federal permits. Prior to granting a permit or processing an
application for a conditional use permit or variance, the Zoning Administrator
shall determine that the applicant has obtained all necessary state and federal
permits.
   (D)   Certificate of zoning compliance for a new, altered or non-conforming
use. It shall be unlawful to use, occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any
building or premises or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed,
converted, altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of
zoning compliance has been issued by the Zoning Administrator stating that the
use of the building or land conforms to all requirements of the city code.
   (E)   Construction and use to be as provided on applications, plans,
permits, variances and certificates of zoning compliance. Permits, conditional
use permits or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of
approved plans and applications authorize only the use, arrangement and
construction set forth in the approved plans and applications, and no other
use, arrangement or construction. Any use, arrangement or construction at
variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and
punishable as provided by §
160.99 of this chapter.
   (F)   Certification. The applicant shall be required to submit certification
by a registered professional engineer, registered architect or registered land
surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Flood-proofing measures shall
be certified by a registered professional engineer or registered architect.
   (G)   Record of first floor elevation. The Zoning Administrator shall
maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including the basement)
of all new structures and alterations or additions to existing structures in
the floodplain. The Zoning Administrator shall also maintain a record of the
elevation to which structures or alterations and additions to structures are
flood-proofed.
   (H)   Notifications for watercourse alterations. The Zoning Administrator
shall notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the Commissioner
of the Department of Natural Resources prior to the city authorizing any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse. If the applicant has applied for a
permit to work in the beds of public waters pursuant to M.S. Chapter 103G, as
it may be amended from time to time, the permit application shall suffice as
adequate notice to the Commissioner of Natural Resources. A copy of the
notification shall also be submitted to the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA.
   (I)   Notification to FEMA when physical changes increase or decrease the
100-year flood elevation. As soon as is practicable, but not later than six
months after the date the supporting information becomes available, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA of the changes
by submitting a copy of the technical or scientific data.
(Prior Code, § 530.19) (Ord. 2012-05, passed 3-7-2012)
§ 160.57 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS.
   (A)   Rules. The Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall adopt rules for the
conduct of business and may exercise all of the powers conferred on the boards
by state law.
   (B)   Administrative review. The Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall hear
and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in
the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
   (C)   Variances. The Board of Adjustment and Appeals may authorize, upon
appeal in specific cases, the relief or variance from the terms of this chapter
as will not be contrary to the public interest and only for those circumstances
such as hardship, practical difficulties or circumstances unique to the
property under consideration. In the granting of the variance, the Board of
Adjustment and Appeals shall clearly identify in writing the specific
conditions that existed consistent with the criteria specified in this chapter,
any other zoning regulations in the city and applicable state law that
justified the granting of the variance. No variance shall have the effect of
allowing in any district uses prohibited in that district, permit a lower
degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood protection elevation for
the particular area or permit standards lower than those required by state law.
The following additional variance criteria of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency must be satisfied.
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued by the city within any designated
regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.
      (2)   Variances shall only be issued by the city upon a showing of good
and sufficient cause, a determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant and a determination that the
granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause
fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
   (D)   Hearings. Upon filing with the Board of Adjustment and Appeals of an
appeal from a decision of the Zoning Administrator, or an application for a
variance, the Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for a
hearing and give due notice to the parties in interest as specified by law. The
Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall submit by mail to the Commissioner of
Natural Resources a copy of the application for proposed variances sufficiently
in advance so that the Commissioner will receive at least ten days’ notice of
the hearing.
   (E)   Decisions. The Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall arrive at a
decision on the appeal or variance within the time required by law.
      (1)   In passing upon an appeal, the Board of Adjustment and Appeals may,
so long as such action is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter,
reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order, requirement,
decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator or other public official.
It shall make its decision in writing setting forth the findings of fact and
the reasons for its decisions.
      (2)   In granting a variance, the Board of Adjustment and Appeals may
prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards such as those specified in §
160.58(F) of this chapter, which are in conformity with the purposes of this
chapter.
      (3)   Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of
the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter punishable under §
160.99 of this chapter. A copy of all decisions granting variances shall be
forwarded by mail to the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources
within ten days of such action.
   (F)   Appeals. Appeals from any decision of the Board of Adjustment and
Appeals may be made, and as specified in the city’s Zoning Code.
   (G)   Flood insurance notice and record keeping.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant for a variance
that:
         (a)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up
to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage, or another such
amount as shall be set by the City Council from time to time; and
         (b)   Such construction below the 100-year or regional flood level
increases risks to life and property.
      (2)   Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance
actions. The city shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including
justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its
annual or biennial report submitted to the administrator of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
(Prior Code, § 530.19) (Ord. 2012-05, passed 3-7-2012)
§ 160.58 CONDITIONAL USES.
   Applications shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator who shall
forward the application to the Planning Commission for consideration. The City
Council shall hear and decide applications for conditional uses permissible
under this chapter. The City Council must consider the advice and
recommendation of the Planning Commission.
   (A)   Hearings. Upon filing with the Zoning Administrator an application for
a conditional use permit, the city shall submit by mail to the Commissioner of
Natural Resources a copy of the application for proposed conditional use
sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will receive at least ten
days’ notice of the hearing.
   (B)   Decisions. In granting a conditional use permit the city shall
prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards, in addition to those specified
in division (F) below, which are in conformity with the purposes of this
chapter. Violations of the conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the
terms under which the conditional use permit is granted, shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter punishable pursuant to §
160.99 of this chapter. A copy of all decisions granting conditional use
permits shall be forwarded by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources
within ten days of the action.
   (C)   Procedures for conditional use permit applications within all
Floodplain Districts.
      (1)   The applicant must furnish the following information and additional
information as deemed necessary by the city for determining the suitability of
the particular site for the proposed use:
         (a)   Plans in triplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions and elevation of the lot, existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, flood-proofing measures and the relationship of the above
to the location of the stream channel; and
         (b)   Specifications for building construction and materials, flood-
proofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement, storage of
materials, water supply and sanitary facilities.
      (2)   One copy of the information described in division (C)(1) above must
be transmitted to a designated engineer or other expert person or agency for
technical assistance, where necessary, in evaluating the proposed project in
relation to flood heights and velocities, the seriousness of flood damage to
the use, the adequacy of the plans for protection and other technical matters.
      (3)   Based upon the technical evaluation of the designated engineer or
expert, the City Council shall determine the specific flood hazard at the site
and evaluate the suitability of the proposed use in relation to the flood
hazard.
   (D)   Factors upon which the decision shall be based. The City Council shall
consider all relevant factors specified in other provisions of this chapter,
and:
      (1)   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments;
      (2)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others or they may block bridges, culverts or other
hydraulic structures;
      (3)   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of
these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions;
      (4)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (5)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the city;
      (6)   The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location;
      (7)   The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding
for the proposed use;
      (8)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and
development anticipated in the foreseeable future;
      (9)   The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and
floodplain management program for the area;
      (10)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
      (11)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and
      (12)   Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this
chapter.
   (E)   Time for acting on application. The City Council shall act on an
application in the manner described above within the time required by law. The
City Council shall render a written decision on the application.
   (F)   Conditions. Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the
purpose of this chapter, the City Council shall attach conditions to the
granting of a conditional use permit as it deems necessary to fulfill the
purposes of this chapter. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to,
the following:
      (1)   Modification of waste treatment and water supply facilities;
      (2)   Limitations on period of use, occupancy and operation;
      (3)   Imposition of operational controls, sureties and deed restrictions;
      (4)   Requirements for construction of channel modifications,
compensatory storage, dikes, levees and other protective measures; and
      (5)   Flood-proofing measures, in accordance with the State Building Code
and this chapter. The applicant shall submit a plan or document certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect that the flood-proofing measures
are consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation and associated
flood factors for the particular area.
   (G)   Inconsistent procedures. In the event of an inconsistency between the
provisions of §§
160.55 through
160.58 of this chapter and any other city code provision regarding a
conditional use, the provisions of §§
160.55 through
160.58 of this chapter shall apply when the parcel or parcels under
consideration are regulated by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 530.19) (Ord. 2012-05, passed 3-7-2012)
§ 160.59 NON-CONFORMING USES.
   (A)   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful
before the passage or amendment of this chapter, but which is not in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter may be continued subject to the following
conditions.
   (B)   Historic structures, as defined in §
160.11 of this chapter, shall be subject to the provisions of divisions (B)(1)
through (B)(5) below.
      (1)   No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged or altered in a
way that increases its non- conformity.
      (2)   Any structural alteration or addition to a non-conforming structure
or non-conforming use that would result in increasing the flood damage
potential of that structure or use shall be protected to the regulatory flood
protection elevation in accordance with any of the elevation on fill or flood-
proofing techniques (i.e., FP-1 through FP-4 flood-proofing classifications)
allowable in the state’s Building Code, except as further restricted in
divisions (B)(3) and (B)(6) below.
      (3)   The cost of all structural alterations or additions to any non-
conforming structure over the life of the structure shall not exceed 50% of the
market value of the structure unless the conditions of this chapter are
satisfied. The cost of all structural alterations and additions must include
all costs such as construction materials and a reasonable cost placed on all
manpower or labor. If the cost of all previous and proposed alterations and
additions exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure, then the structure
must meet the standards of §§
160.26 or
160.27 of this chapter for new structures depending upon whether the structure
is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts, respectively.
      (4)   If any non-conforming use is discontinued for 12 consecutive
months, any future use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter.
The Assessor shall notify the Zoning Administrator in writing of instances of
non-conforming uses that have been discontinued for a period of 12 months.
      (5)   If any non-conforming use or structure is substantially damaged, as
defined in §
160.11 of this chapter, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter. The applicable provisions for establishing new
uses or new structures in §§
160.26,
160.27 or
160.28 of this chapter apply based on whether the use or structure is in the
Floodway, Flood Fringe or General Floodplain Districts, respectively.
      (6)   If a substantial improvement occurs, as defined in §
160.11 of this chapter, from any combination of a building addition to the
outside dimensions of the existing building or a rehabilitation,
reconstruction, alteration or other improvement to the inside dimensions of an
existing non-conforming building, then the building addition and the existing
non-conforming building must meet the requirements of §§
160.26 or
160.27 of this chapter for new structures, depending upon whether the structure
is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts, respectively. A non-conforming
structure shall not be substantially improved if the structure is located in
the floodway.
(Prior Code, § 530.21) (Ord. 2012-05, passed 3-7-2012)
§ 160.60 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   The floodplain designation on the official zoning map shall not be
removed from floodplain areas unless it can be shown that the designation is in
error or that the area has been filled to or above the elevation of the
regulatory flood protection elevation and is contiguous to lands outside the
floodplain. Special exceptions to this rule may be permitted by the
Commissioner of Natural Resources if the Commissioner determines that, through
other measures, lands are adequately protected for the intended use.
   (B)   All amendments to this chapter, including amendments to the official
zoning map, must be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of Natural
Resources prior to adoption. Changes in the official zoning map must meet
FEMA’s Technical Conditions and Criteria and must receive prior FEMA approval
before adoption. The Commissioner of Natural Resources must be given ten days’
written notice of all hearings to consider an amendment to this chapter and the
notice shall include a draft of the section amendment or technical study under
consideration.
(Prior Code, § 530.25) (Ord. 2012-05, passed 3-7-2012)
§ 160.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variances or conditional uses) shall
constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by law.
      (1)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for
any crime which is a misdemeanor under this chapter, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more
than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
      (3)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time,
in either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
      (4) The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
      (5)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if any
person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this code,
the City Council or any city official designated by it may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. The actions
may include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   In responding to a suspected section violation, the city may
utilize the full array of enforcement actions available to it including, but
not limited to prosecution and fines, injunctions, after-the-fact permits,
orders for corrective measures or a request to the National Flood Insurance
Program for denial of flood insurance availability to the violating party. The
city will act in good faith to enforce its official controls and to correct
section violations to the extent possible so as not to jeopardize its
eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program.
      (2)   When a section violation is either discovered by or brought to the
attention of the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Administrator shall
immediately investigate the situation and document the nature and extent of the
violation of the city code. As soon as is reasonably possible, this information
will be submitted to the appropriate Department of Natural Resources’ and the
FEMA Regional Office along with the city’s plan of action to correct the
violation to the degree possible.
   (C)   The Zoning Administrator shall notify the suspected party of the
requirements of this chapter and all other provisions of the city code and the
nature and extent of the suspected violation of these provisions. If the
structure or use is under construction or development, then the Zoning
Administrator may order the construction or development immediately halted
until a proper permit or approval is granted by the city. If the construction
or development is already completed, then the Zoning Administrator may either:
      (1)   Issue an order identifying the corrective actions that must be made
within a specified time period to bring the use or structure into compliance
with the city code; or
      (2)   Notify the responsible party to apply for an after-the-fact permit/
development approval within a specified period of time not to exceed 30 days.
   (D)   If the responsible party does not appropriately respond to the Zoning
Administrator within the specified period of time, each additional day that
lapses shall constitute an additional violation of this chapter and shall be
prosecuted accordingly. The Zoning Administrator shall also upon the lapse of
the specified response period notify the landowner to restore the land to the
condition which existed prior to the violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 530.23) (Ord. 2012-05, passed 3-7-2012)
CHAPTER 161: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
   
161.01   Title; scope
   
161.02   Conflicts
   
161.03   Definitions
   
161.04   Restrictions, generally
   
161.05   Procedures; procedural exceptions
   
161.06   Sketch plats
   
161.07   Preliminary plats
   
161.08   Final plats
   
161.09   Improvements
   
161.10   Land dedication, easements and covenants
   
161.11   Plats; restrictive covenants
   
161.12   Variances
   
161.13   Fees required
   
161.14   Enforcement and violations
§ 161.01 TITLE; SCOPE.
   (A)   Title. This chapter may be cited and referred to as “the Sandstone
subdivision regulations”.
   (B)   Purpose. The city finds that regulation of the subdivision of real
property in the city is necessary for the following purposes:
      (1)   To ensure the orderly, economic and safe development of land in the
city;
      (2)   To insure the adequate and timely provision of urban services and
facilities; and
      (3)   To protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare.
   (C)   Scope. This chapter is adopted pursuant to M.S. § 462.358, as it may
be amended from time to time. A proposed subdivision of property in the city
must be submitted to the city for review and approval before being filed for
record with the appropriate county officer, as defined in this chapter. The
provisions of this chapter apply to property or a project to which the State
Condominium Law, M.S. Chapter 515, as it may be amended from time to time,
applies.
(Ord. passed - -1999)
§ 161.02 CONFLICTS.
   Where the requirements of this chapter are either more or less restrictive
than comparable requirements imposed by other pertinent laws, ordinances,
statutes or other regulations, the regulations that are more restrictive or
impose higher standards govern.
(Ord. 2007-01, passed 2-7-2007)
§ 161.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. Public or private right-of-way designed to serve primarily as a means
of secondary access to the side or rear of adjacent properties whose principal
frontage is on a street.
   APPLICANT. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or the owner’s
designated representative. Where the APPLICANT is not the owner of the land the
written consent of the owner is required, accompanied by a statement of the
representative’s legal interest, if any, in the land.
   APPROPRIATE COUNTY OFFICER. The county recorder of Pine County or the
registrar of titles of Pine County.
   BLOCK. An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by
streets, railroads, waterways, other natural barriers, the exterior boundary of
the subdivision or any combination of the preceding.
   BUILDING. Any structure which is built for the support, shelter or enclosure
of persons, animals or chattels.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The formally adopted comprehensive development plan of
the city, composed of maps, charts, diagrams and text describing and explaining
the recommended policies and programs to guide the city’s future development
and redevelopment.
   DIRECTOR. The person designated by the City Administrator to administer the
provisions of this chapter.
   EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner to either the public or an individual
for the use of a portion of the owner’s property for certain specified purposes
(e.g., drives, utilities and the like).
   FINDINGS OF FACT. Written findings embodied in a resolution of the body
making the findings.
   LOT. The smallest unit of land created by a subdivision that meets minimal
requirements of both this chapter and the Chapter 163 of this code of
ordinances; each LOT is individually depicted and numbered on the subdivision
plat.
   LOT SPLIT. The subdivision of an existing lot of record; this may include
creating new lots for building purposes or dividing a lot for combination with
existing or adjacent lots of record.
   OUTLOT. Unbuildable land so delineated on a plat.
   PARCEL. A parcel of land of any legal description or size.
   PARCEL OF RECORD. A parcel of land of any legal description or size that is
recorded with the appropriate county officer.
   PLAT, FINAL. The final formally approved layout of the proposed subdivision
showing the same information as the preliminary plat, complying with the
requirements of this section and any additional requirements imposed by the
council and prepared in the form required by the appropriate county office and
by M.S. § 505, as it may be amended from time to time.
   PLAT, PRELIMINARY. A tentative layout of the proposed subdivision prepared
for the purpose of formal review by the city; the PRELIMINARY PLAT shows lots,
blocks, streets and other features relevant to the development of the property,
but not in the detail or final form of the final plat.
   PLAT, SKETCH. A rough drawing of a proposed subdivision intended for
informal review by the city; the SKETCH PLAT is not typically drawn as
accurately as the preliminary plat and usually does not contain all the
information normally required of a preliminary plat.
   POLE BARN. A post frame treated wood structure with wood posts set directly
into the ground without a foundation wall and covered with agricultural grade
metal walls and roof panels (26 gauge or less).
   RESTRICTIVE COVENANT. A contract or agreement entered into between private
parties establishing restrictions on the development or use of property other
than those established by this chapter or the
Chapter 163.
   STREET. A public or private right-of-way designed to serve as a means of
principal access to adjacent properties and includes a public or private right-
of-way that is not an alley.
   SUBDIVISION. As a verb, the process of separating a parcel of land into two
or more parcels for the purpose of building or conveyance including the
division of previously subdivided property; as a noun, the term means the
product resulting from the separation of a parcel into two or more parcels: the
term also includes activity regulated by the State Condominium Law.
   SURVEY, CERTIFIED. A scaled drawing prepared by a registered land surveyor
of a parcel indicating the location and dimension of property lines and, if
appropriate, the location and dimensions of existing or proposed buildings; a
survey visually depicts a parcel’s legal description and may also show
additional information such as topographic data and the location of recorded
easements.
   ZONING CODE. Section 515 of what is known as “the Sandstone City Code”,
being
Chapter 163 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 2007-01, passed 2-7-2007; Ord. 20210317-01, passed 3-17-2021)
§ 161.04 RESTRICTIONS, GENERALLY.
   (A)   General rule. It is unlawful for a person to convey land or to attempt
to file for record a conveyance of land that is described by metes and bounds,
by reference to an unapproved subdivision plat or by reference to an unapproved
registered land survey unless otherwise authorized by this section or approved
by the City Council. This provision does not apply to a conveyance of land
described in M.S. § 462.358, subd. 4b, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Building permits. A building permit or other permit will not be issued
by the city for the construction of a building, structure or other improvement
to land in the city unless the requirements of this section have been complied
with.
   (C)   Taxes. A proposed subdivision of land will not be considered by the
city unless past due taxes and special assessments thereon have been paid in
full or arrangements for their payment satisfactory to the city have been made.
   (D)   Flood hazard. Land will not be subdivided if the council determines
that the land is unsuitable for development because of flood hazard unless
corrective, measures consistent with the zoning code can be feasibly
accomplished.
   (E)   Conditions. The city council may impose additional conditions on
subdivisions where deemed necessary for the protection and promotion of the
public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 2007-01, passed 2-7-2007) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 161.05 PROCEDURES; PROCEDURAL EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Procedures.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (B) below, when land in the city is
proposed to be subdivided, the owner of the land or the owner’s authorized
representative must apply for and secure approval of the proposed subdivision
in accordance with the following procedure:
         (a)   Sketch plat (optional);
         (b)   Preliminary plat; and
         (c)   Final plat.
      (2)   Subdivision review will be carried out simultaneously and
coordinated with applicable flexible zoning regulations and floodplain
regulations contained in Chapter 163.
   (B)   Procedural exceptions.
      (1)   (a)   Combinations of adjacent complete parcels of record may be
approved administratively by the director. When a combination is requested for
the purpose of obtaining a building permit, or for the purpose of meeting
minimum development standards imposed by this section or any other provision of
this code, the city must be provided with:
            1.   Satisfactory evidence that the combination has been recorded
with the appropriate county officer;
            2.   A signed, notarized affidavit stating the purpose for which
the combination is requested; and
            3.   A certified survey of the lots to be combined as deemed
necessary by the Director.
         (b)   When a combination is requested solely for the purpose of
receiving a single tax statement for adjacent parcels, the applicant must
present satisfactory evidence that the parcels involved are complete parcels of
record. There is no fee for a parcel combination.
      (2)   (a)   The division of a parcel of record that was combined for the
sole purpose of receiving a single tax statement may be approved
administratively by the Director. The applicant must submit:
            1.   Satisfactory evidence that the previous combination was made
solely for the purpose of receiving a single tax statement;
            2.   Satisfactory evidence that the proposed manner of division
corresponds to the legal descriptions of the parcels which existed prior to the
combination; and
            3.   A certified survey of the parcels being divided as deemed
necessary by the Director to show the lots in the division meet all current
code requirements.
         (b)   The Director may require that a proposed division of tax
combined real estate follow the procedures for either a lot split or a normal
subdivision plat. There is no fee for a parcel division.
      (3)   Lot splits may be approved by submission of a certified survey and
legal description indicating the proposed manner of division, provided that the
division can be described in fractional or proportional parts by reference to
the legal descriptions existing of record on the date of the request. A lot
split will not be approved for a parcel described by metes and bounds. Lot
splits require City Council approval, following review and recommendation by
the Planning Commission. Pursuant to M.S. § 462.358, as it may be amended from
time to time, approval of a lot split by the City Council is deemed to include
waiver of the prohibitions against conveyance of property as contained in this
chapter. Lot splits are approved by the City Council following the same hearing
procedures required for a normal subdivision. The Director may waive the
technical information requirements of a normal subdivision determined to be
unnecessary. The normal preliminary plat and final plat procedures will be
waived. The Director may require that a proposed lot split be processed by
means of the normal subdivision plat procedure. Submission of a lot split for
approval must be accompanied by the same fee required for a plat.
      (4)   Minor subdivision of platted lots or unplatted property may be
approved by means of a certificate of survey, registered land survey or final
plat, in lieu of the standard platting procedure. Some of the following
provisions of this chapter may be exempted if all of the following conditions
exist:
         (a)   The subdivision will result in no more than three lots;
         (b)   Conditions on and around the tract to be subdivided are well-
defined;
         (c)   No future streets are needed or proposed to provide access to
the newly created lots or to existing lots;
         (d)   The subdivision will not obstruct planned future streets;
         (e)   The subdivision will not obstruct future subdivisions on
adjoining unplatted lands;
         (f)   The subdivision meets all lot area and lot dimension
requirements and building setback requirements;
         (g)   No further subdivision is expected. Further subdivision of the
tract from which lots were created under this minor subdivision procedure will
require following the platting procedures in this chapter; and
         (h)   Required easements are conveyed to the city in a appropriate
manner.
   (3)   Minor subdivisions require City Council approval, following
recommendation by the Planning Commission. Pursuant to M.S. § 462.358, as it
may be amended from time to time, approval of a minor subdivision by the City
Council is deemed to include waiver of the prohibitions against conveyance of
property.
(Ord. 2007-01, passed 2-7-2007; Ord. 20210317-01, passed 3-17-2021)
§ 161.06 SKETCH PLATS.
   (A)   Submission. When a subdivision of property is proposed, a sketch plat
may, in the Director’s judgment, be prepared and submitted for review.
Submission of a sketch plat is not normally required, but is encouraged. The
Director may require a sketch plat if the proposed subdivision presents
substantial problems or difficulties on its face.
   (B)   Initiation. Submission of a sketch plat is the initiation of the plat
approval process.
   (C)   Content. The sketch plat must be a conceptual plan of the proposed
subdivision.
   (D)   Review and approval. Sketch plats are reviewed by the Director and,
upon the request or approval of the applicant, by the Planning Commission.
Sketch plat review is for the purpose of identifying potential problems,
suggesting design considerations and otherwise discussing the requirements of
this chapter, other ordinances and the comprehensive plan and their objectives
as they apply to the parcel of land contained in the application. The review of
a submitted sketch plat is for purposes of discussion and comment only. The
applicant may not infer any future approval of a preliminary or final plat
based upon the sketch plan plat review. Vested rights to a particular
subdivision plan do not accrue because of favorable comments made by either the
director or the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 2007-01, passed 2-7-2007; Ord. 20210317-01, passed 3-17-2021)
§ 161.07 PRELIMINARY PLATS.
   (A)   Submission.
      (1)   Except as provided §
161.05, when a subdivision of property is proposed, a preliminary plat must be
prepared and submitted by the applicant for approval. Requests for review and
approval of preliminary plats are filed with the Director on an approved
application form, accompanied by ten copies of the plat and other required
information items.
      (2)   Application must be made at least two weeks prior to the Planning
Commission meeting at which formal action is requested.
   (B)   Fee. The fee for preliminary plat review and approval is set in §
36.02 of this code of ordinances.
   (C)   Content. A preliminary plat drawn to a scale of not greater than one
inch to 100 feet prepared by a licensed surveyor and with the legal
description, dated and showing:
      (1)   A location map outlining the area to be subdivided and its relation
to the remainder of the city.
      (2)   A location map outlining the area to be subdivided and its relation
to adjacent properties.
      (3)   North arrow, scale and acreage of the subject property;
      (4)   Existing and proposed topographic contours at intervals of five
feet or less, as determined by the director, for the property and adjacent
properties;
      (5)   Wetlands, drainagewavs, 100-year floodplain, slopes and the
ordinary high water mark (if applicable);
      (6)   Unusual topographic or physiographic features, including, but not
limited to, waterways, steep slopes, wooded areas and the like;
      (7)   Soils as determined by hand borings on a random basis, to determine
depth to ground water at lower elevations and suitability for sewage treatment
systems. At least one boring for each unit unless waived by the Planning
Commission:
      (8)   Location of existing wells and sewage treatment systems;
      (9)   Existing and proposed city sewer and/or water system extensions and
connections with grades shown;
      (10)   Existing underground storage tanks;
      (11)   Names and addresses of the fee owner developer, and surveyor;
      (12)   Existing and proposed streets (including state highway, county
road or county highway), utilities and public facilities on the property and,
where appropriate, the manner of coordination of these items with adjacent
properties;
      (13)   Proposed layout of lots and blocks including approximate
dimensions of each and manner of numbering;
      (14)   The outlet for and means of disposal of surface waters from the
proposed platted area;
      (15)   The locations of ingress and egress to the proposed platted area;
      (16)   Structure setback lines from streets, alleys and lot lines;
      (17)   Existing zoning classification and the zoning classification of
adjacent parcels;
      (18)   Areas of proposed green space and public dedication, other than
streets or walkways;
      (19)   Name of the proposed subdivision;
      (20)   Proposed easements or existing easements, public or private, to be
maintained and the purpose for which they are provided;
      (21)   Stages of development proposed, along with proposed timeline; and
      (22)   Other information deemed necessary by the Director.
   (D)   Additional information required.
      (1)   The licensed surveyor shall provide a separate plan showing the
location and types of trees on the property, along with replacement plan (if
applicable) in accordance with City Code 830.
      (2)   The licensed surveyor shall provide information (if applicable)
regarding significant historical sites, wildlife habitat areas and endangered,
threatened, rare or critical species.
   (E)   Preliminary plats; review. Preliminary plats must be reviewed by the
Planning Commission. The Planning Commission must hold a public hearing on the
proposed subdivision. Notice of the public hearing must be published as
provided by law. Individual notices of the public hearing must be mailed to
each owner of record of property located within 350 feet of the exterior
boundaries of the proposed subdivision at least five days prior to the public
hearing. Failure of a property owner to receive the notice does not invalidate
the proceedings. The publication and mailing notice process is performed by the
city.
   (F)   Preliminary plats; road review.
      (1)   Any proposed preliminary plat which includes lands abutting upon
state rail bank property or upon any existing or established trunk highway or
proposed highway which has been designated by a centerline order filed in the
office of the county recorder shall first be presented by the city to the
commissioner of transportation for written comments and recommendations. Plats
must be submitted for review at least 30 days prior to the city taking final
action.
      (2)   Preliminary plats involving state rail bank property or both a
trunk highway and a highway under county jurisdiction shall be submitted by the
city to the county highway engineer and to the commissioner of transportation.
Plats must be submitted for review at least 30 days prior to the city taking
final action.
      (3)   If any proposed preliminary plat or initial plat filing includes
land bordering either state rail bank property or an existing or proposed
county road, highway or county state-aid highway, and the property, road or
highway is designated on a map or county highway plan filed in the office of
the County Recorder or registrar of titles, then the plat or plat filing must
be submitted by the city to the County Engineer within five business days after
receipt by the city of the preliminary plat or initial plat filing for written
comments and recommendations.
      (4)   Final action on such plat by the city shall not be taken until
after the required comments and recommendations of the Commissioner of
Transportation or the County Highway Engineer have been received or until the
30 day period has elapsed.
      (5)   Within ten days following a city’s approval of a preliminary plat,
the city shall submit to the County Board notice of its approval, along with a
statement addressing the disposition of any written comments or recommendations
made by the County Engineer. In the event the city does not amend the plat to
conform to the recommendations made by the County Engineer, representatives
from the county and city shall meet to discuss the differences and determine
whether changes to the plat are appropriate prior to final approval.
   (G)   Reports. The Director, upon submission of a preliminary plat for
review and approval, must prepare a report on the proposal for the Planning
Commission and the City Council. Copies of the report and the submissions of
the applicant must be provided to the Planning Commission at least five days
prior to the public hearing. The report must be entered in and made a permanent
part of the record of the public hearing.
   (H)   Conduct of hearing. At the public hearing, the Planning Commission
will consider the report and recommendation of the director along with the
comments of members of the public. The Planning Commission may question the
applicant regarding the proposal, request additional information of the
applicant, or retain expert testimony at the expense of the applicant.
   (I)   Actions. The Planning Commission acts on the proposed subdivision in
one of the following ways:
      (1)   Recommends the City Council approve the preliminary plat as
submitted;
      (2)   Recommends the City Council approve the preliminary plat with
modifications or conditions;
      (3)   Recommends the City Council deny the preliminary plat;
      (4)   Postpone action on the preliminary plat to the next regular meeting
of the planning commission or to a later date agreed to by the applicant(s); or
      (5)   With the consent of the applicant(s), tables action on the
preliminary plat.
   (J)   Procedure. Unless postponed or tabled the recommendation of the
planning commission with findings of fact is forwarded to the council for its
consideration. If the Planning Commission postpones consideration of the
proposed subdivision, the applicant must be provided with a written statement
of the reasons for such action and the facts on which the action is based.
      (1)   A preliminary plat may not be postponed more than once without the
consent of the applicant, and may only be postponed to the next regular meeting
of the Planning Commission or to a later date agreed to by the applicant.
Following initial postponement or failure of the applicant and commission to
agree to a satisfactory later date, the applicant may request the Planning
Commission to forward the preliminary plat with or without recommendation to
the City Council for consideration. A decision to forward the preliminary plat
without recommendation is at the discretion of the Planning Commission.
      (2)   The Planning Commission may table the preliminary plat only with
the consent of the applicant. Thereafter, the Planning Commission will consider
the proposed subdivision at a regular meeting requested by one of its members
or by the applicant.
   (K)   City Council consideration.
      (1)   The preliminary plat must be forwarded to the City Council after
consideration of the plat by the Planning Commission. The City Council must be
provided with copies of the Director’s report, the submissions of the
applicant, the minutes of the commission’s public hearing including the
commission’s findings of fact. These items will be made a permanent part of the
record of the meeting of the City Council. Consideration of the preliminary
plat by the City Council must be scheduled not more than 30 days following the
date the plat was forwarded by the Planning Commission, unless otherwise agreed
to by the applicant.
      (2)   The City Council may hold a public hearing as part of its
deliberations on the proposed subdivision. If the City Council determines to
hold a public hearing, the procedures of §
161.07 must be complied with. The City Council may question the applicant
regarding the proposal, to request additional information of the applicant, or
retain expert testimony at the expense of the applicant.
   (L)   City Council action. The City Council acts on the proposed subdivision
in one of the following ways:
      (1)   Approves the preliminary plat as submitted;
      (2)   Approves the preliminary plat with modifications or conditions;
      (3)   Disapproves the preliminary plat;
      (4)   Postpones action on the preliminary plat to the next regular
meeting of the City Council or to such later date agreed to by the applicant;
or
      (5)   With the consent of the applicant, tables action on the preliminary
plat.
   (M)   Findings. Action by the City Council approving, approving with
modifications or disapproving a preliminary plat must be accompanied by
findings of fact. The applicant must be provided with written documentation of
the City Council’s action stating the reasons for the City Council’s decision.
If the City Council postpones consideration of the proposed subdivision, the
applicant must be provided with a written statement of the reasons for that
action. A preliminary plat may not be postponed more than once without the
consent of the applicant, and must be postponed to the next regular meeting of
the City Council, or a later date agreed to by the applicant. Following initial
postponement or failure of the applicant and council to agree upon a later
date, the applicant may request that the City Council act to approve, approve
with modifications or disapprove the preliminary plat, unless the preliminary
plat is postponed or tabled. The City Council, with the consent of the
applicant, may table the preliminary plat and thereafter the City Council will
consider the proposed subdivision at a regular council meeting as requested by
a City Council member or by the applicant.
   (N)   Time limit. Approval of a preliminary plat is valid for one year from
the date of the approval, unless prior to or within that one year period an
extension is granted by the City Council. If after the one year period or
extension thereof a final plat has not been submitted for review and approval,
the approval of the preliminary plat is void.
(Ord. 2007-01, passed 2-7-2007; Ord. 20210317-01, passed 3-17-2021)
§ 161.08 FINAL PLATS.
   (A)   Submission. Upon approval or approval with modifications of the
preliminary plat by the City Council, the applicant may proceed to prepare the
final plat for review and approval. Except as provided in §
161.05 a final plat is required for all subdivisions. Requests for review and
approval of final plats are filed with the director on an approved application
form, accompanied by ten copies of the final plat and any other required
submissions. Application must be made at least two weeks prior to the City
Council meeting at which formal action is requested.
   (B)   Fee. The fee for final plat review and approval is set by the schedule
in §
36.02 of this code of ordinances.
   (C)   Final plat; form. Final plats must be prepared at a scale not less
than one inch to 100 feet, and consistent with M.S. Chapter 505, as it may be
amended from time to time, and rules of the appropriate county officer. Two
exact transparent reproducible copies of the final plat must be submitted for
official certification and execution by the city. Multiple sheets with match
lines and master index may be used. The final plat must be consistent with the
approved preliminary plat and must comply with all conditions or modifications
imposed by the council. The final plat must also include the following:
      (1)   Primary control points approved by the appropriate county officer,
or descriptions to such control points, by which all dimensions, angles,
bearings and similar data on the plat referenced;
      (2)   Boundary lines, right-of-way lines for all streets and alleys,
easements and property lines with accurate dimensions, bearings, deflection
angles, radii, arcs, central angles or curves;
      (3)   Names of rights-of-way and the width of each;
      (4)   Location and description of monuments to be placed or maintained;
      (5)   Certification as to accuracy of the plat by a certified surveyor;
      (6)   Language dedicating for public use any streets or other rights-of-
way, easements, parks or other public lands or ways required by this chapter or
imposed as a condition of approval by the City Council; and
      (7)   Spaces for certification of approval to be signed by the Mayor and
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer and official seal of the city.
   (D)   Final plat; content. The final plat must be accompanied by the
following items if required by the Director:
      (1)   An abstract of title or certificate of title for the land contained
in the proposed subdivision;
      (2)   An express written, irrevocable offer of dedication of all public
streets, municipal uses, utilities, parks, public easements and the like as
shown on the final plat;
      (3)   A warranty deed and title policy in the name of the city, for each
parcel proposed for dedication (the title policy will be in an amount
determined necessary by the city), and if required by the director a title
opinion from the City Attorney;
      (4)   As may be required by this chapter, a letter of credit, cash escrow
deposit or other security determined acceptable by the attorney in an amount
equal to 100% of the engineer’s estimate of the costs for improvements required
to be installed by the subdivider; and
      (5)   As may be required by this chapter a contract establishing the
subdivider’s obligation to complete the required improvements.
   (E)   Final plat; review; approval. The Director will compare the final plat
with the preliminary plat and conditions or modifications imposed by the City
Council. The City Attorney will examine the abstract of title or certificate of
title to ascertain that the land contained within the proposed subdivision is
in the name of the applicant and that it is free and clear of all encumbrances
or liens. The City Attorney will also review the offers of dedication and
warranty deeds attached thereto. The Director will review the final plat for
accuracy in its preparation and compliance with city codes and requirements.
The engineer will certify that the financial surety, if required, is of
sufficient amount.
   (F)   Final plat; City Council consideration. Upon completion of the review
of the final plat and submissions by the Director and City Attorney, the
Director must schedule the final plat for consideration of the City Council. If
the review of the final plat by the Director or City Attorney identifies
deficiencies in the final plat or the required submissions, the applicant will
be notified by the director. Noted deficiencies must be corrected prior to
consideration of the final plat by the City Council. Unless deficiencies in the
final plat or required submissions have been noted, the final plat must be
scheduled for City Council consideration no later than 60 days after its
submission to the Director.
   (G)   Final plat; City Council action. When considering the final plat, the
City Council must be provided with certifications by the Director and City
Attorney that the final plat and required submissions conform to the
requirements of this section. The City Council must then act to approve or
disapprove the final plat. The City Council’s action must be based upon
findings of fact, and the applicant will be provided with written documentation
of the City Council’s action. The City Council may postpone or table
consideration of the final plat. Unless the final plat is postponed or tabled,
failure of the City Council to act on the plat within 60 days of the receipt of
the final plat is approval.
   (H)   Final plat; execution. The Mayor and City Administrator/Clerk-
Treasurer must affix their signatures and the official seal of the city to the
final plat. The City Council must accept by separate resolution the lands and
improvements offered for public dedication. The applicant must file approved
subdivisions and all accompanying legal documents with the appropriate county
officer.
(Ord. 2007-01, passed 2-7-2007; Ord. 20210317-01, passed 3-17-2021)
§ 161.09 IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Required improvements.
      (1)   Responsibility. The subdivider is responsible for completing the
improvements required by this chapter and as stipulated by the City Council in
its approval of the final plat. The required improvements must be completed to
the satisfaction of the Director.
      (2)   Required improvements. Unless waived pursuant to division (A)(3)
below, the following improvements must be completed and paid for by the
subdivider as approved in the development contract:
         (a)   Curb and gutter;
         (b)   Sidewalks;
         (c)   Watermains;
         (d)   Sanitary sewers;
         (e)   Utility services;
         (f)   Street paving;
         (g)   Alley paving;
         (h)   Storm sewers and culverts;
         (i)   Bridges;
         (j)   Pedestrian paths and walks;
         (k)   Monuments;
         (l)   Necessary approved alterations to natural drainage ways;
         (m)   Temporary street signs;
         (n)   Reforestation and landscaping;
         (o)   Miscellaneous items as agreed upon by the City Council and the
subdivider; and
         (p)   Miscellaneous items as contained in the design standards of this
chapter.
      (3)   Waiver. The City Council may waive required improvements deemed to
be necessary or which the city may itself undertake. The city may construct the
improvements as public improvements and assess all or part of the cost thereof
against benefitted properties. A waiver must be requested by the subdivider and
must be considered by the City Council at the time of preliminary or final plat
approval.
      (4)   Required plans. Prior to the commencement of construction of any
required improvements, the subdivider must submit sufficiently detailed plans,
profiles and specifications for the required improvements for the review and
approval of the engineer. The plans, profiles and specifications must comply
with and other provisions of this code. The subdivider is responsible for
obtaining permits required for construction of the improvements.
   (B)   Improvements; bond.
      (1)   Form.
         (a)   The subdivider must provide the city with a letter of credit,
cash escrow or other acceptable security in an amount equal to 100% of the
director’s estimate of costs for the required improvements. The surety must be
submitted simultaneously with the request for approval of the final plat. The
surety must:
            1.   Name the city as obligee,
            2.   Specify the improvements that the surety secures; and
            3.   Stipulate that the surety secures the dedication of all the
specified improvements and land, as required by the City Council, free and
clear of encumbrances and liens.
         (b)   The subdivider may submit separate sureties for separate
required improvements. Prior to approval of the final plat by the City Council
the City Attorney must review the submitted bond, or other security, as to its
conformance with statutory provisions, form, sufficiency and manner of
execution. The required bond must be furnished in addition to a standard form
development contract.
      (2)   Waiver. The City Council may waive the requirement that the
subdivider provide a bond or other security. In such case, the City Council
must be provided with a signed, legally enforceable development contract
specifying the required improvements and the subdivider’s responsibility to
complete them. The development contract must also specify that the city may
undertake completion of the required improvements and assess the cost of same
against the land contained in the subdivision upon failure of the applicant to
satisfactorily complete the improvements. The contract must stipulate an agreed
upon date for completion of the required improvements not later than two years
from the date of approval of the development contract. The contract must be
submitted at the time of final plat consideration by the City Council. The City
Council may either waive the required bond submission and subsequently approve
the development contract or require that a bond be submitted prior to approval
of the final plat. If the development contract is accepted by the City Council,
the approval of the final plat is conditional pending satisfactory completion
of the required improvements. If the security is waived and a development
contract is submitted the final plat may not be signed or recorded until the
required improvements have been completed to the satisfaction of the director.
      (3)   Governmental units. Governmental units to which these bond and
contract requirements apply may file in lieu of the bond or contract a
certified resolution, from the officers or agencies empowered to act on their
behalf, agreeing to comply with the provisions of this subsection.
   (C)   Improvements; completion.
      (1)   Time. Required improvements must be completed within a time period
specified by the council. At the request of the subdivider and on the
recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City Council may extend the
completion deadline for a period of one year provided the term of the required
security is extended.
      (2)   Quality. The subdivider must request inspection of completed
improvements by the Director. The Director will inspect improvements for
compliance with the approved final plat, the submitted plans, profiles and
specifications for the improvements and the quality of their construction. Upon
a finding that the improvements have been satisfactorily completed, the
Director must certify their completion by letter to the subdivider and the City
Council. Upon a finding that improvements have not been satisfactorily
completed, the Director must certify the deficiencies by letter to the
subdivider and the City Council.
      (3)   Remedies. If the required improvements have not been satisfactorily
completed by the completion deadline, the City Council may:
         (a)   Extend the deadline for completion of the improvements for a
period of not to exceed one year;
         (b)   Declare any submitted bonds or other securities in default and
apply funds obtained from such to complete the required improvements;
         (c)   Declare the development contract, if such has been entered into,
to be violated and thereupon undertake to complete the required improvements,
assessing the cost of same against the land contained in the subdivision; or
         (d)   When no improvements have been commenced, rescind its previous
approval of the final plat and, if the plat has been recorded, undertake
necessary action to vacate the plat or the public rights-of-way contained
therein.
      (4)   Bond waiver. If the bond requirement has been waived and a
development contract entered into, the director must certify satisfactory
completion of the required improvements prior to the execution of the final
plat by the Mayor and City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer.
      (5)   Building permits. A building permit for private construction may
not be issued for land in a subdivision for which the final plat has not been
recorded with the appropriate county officer. A building permit for private
construction may not be issued for more than 60% of the lots or dwelling units
contained in a subdivision for which all required improvements have not been
completed. When the subdivision is to be accomplished in stages this
requirement applies to each phase.
      (6)   Release. Bonds or other security held by the city to secure
required improvements will be released one year following the date of
certification of satisfactory completion of the improvements by the Director.
(Ord. 2007-01, passed 2-7-2007; Ord. 20210317-01, passed 3-17-2021)
§ 161.10 LAND DEDICATION, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS.
   (A)   Dedications. The City Council may require dedication of public
improvements and lands designated on the plat or intended for public use. The
city may require reservations and dedications for improvements that are not to
be undertaken or completed immediately or as part of an approved subdivision.
These requirements include, but are not limited to, lands for public utilities,
streets and park and recreation facilities. The city may approve or disapprove
the locations of lands proposed for dedication pursuant to this subsection. The
provisions of §§
154.020 through
154.026, park dedications, apply to these dedications.
   (B)   Streets. The final plat must indicate the location and reservation of
rights-of-way, public and private, in the proposed subdivision.
   (C)   Utilities.
      (1)   The city requires that easements be provided for the location of
public utilities and that proper legal instruments accomplishing that be
provided prior to the approval of final plat. The final plat must show the
location of the easements.
      (2)   The city may require the dedication of certain lands in fee simple
for public utility use where deemed necessary or desirable in the public
interest. In such case the dedication will be accomplished by submission of a
warranty deed and a written irrevocable offer of dedication prior to approval
of the final plat.
      (3)   Unless authorized by the City Council, private water, sanitary or
storm sewer facilities may not be constructed within a proposed subdivision to
meet the requirements of this section.
(Ord. 2007-01, passed 2-7-2007; Ord. 20210317-01, passed 3-17-2021)
§ 161.11 PLATS; RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS.
   Restrictive covenants may not appear on the face of a plat. The City Council
may not impose a condition in the form of a restrictive covenant as part of its
approval of a final plat.
(Ord. 2007-01, passed 2-7-2007; Ord. 20210317-01, passed 3-17-2021)
§ 161.12 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Authority. The city may consider and grant variances to the provisions
of this section when it finds that this section imposes unusual hardship to the
subdivider in the use of his or her land. Unusual hardship includes, but is not
limited to, inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems.
   (B)   Procedure. Variances will be processed and granted in accordance with
§
163.326.
   (C)   Criteria. A variance may be granted only if the City Council finds
that all of the following circumstances exist:
      (1)   The variance is in harmony with the general purposes and intent of
the code;
      (2)   The variance is consistent with the comprehensive plan;
      (3)   The subdivider proposes to use the property in a reasonable manner
not permitted by this
code;
      (4)   Unique circumstances apply to the property which do not apply
generally to other properties in the same zone or vicinity and result from lot
size or shape, topography or other circumstances over which the owner of the
property has had no control. That the unique circumstances do not result from
the actions of the subdivider;
      (5)   The variance does not alter the essential character of the
neighborhood; and
      (6)   Economic conditions alone do not constitute unusual hardship.
   (D)   Conditions. The city may impose such conditions upon the premises
benefitted by the variance as may be necessary to comply with the standards
established by this chapter or to reduce or minimize the effect of such
variance upon other properties in the neighborhood, and to better carry out the
intent of the variance. The condition must be directly related to and must bear
a rough proportionality to the impact created by the variance.
(Ord. 2007-01, passed 2-7-2007; Ord. 2011-09, passed - -2011; Ord. 20210317-01,
passed 3-17-2021)
§ 161.13 FEES REQUIRED.
   In order to defray the administrative costs of processing requests for
review and approval of sketch plats, preliminary plats, final plats, variances,
appeals or amendments a base fee as described in §
36.02 of this code of ordinances. In order to defray the additional costs of
processing requests for applications submitted pursuant to the provisions of
this section, additional costs for staff and consulting time and materials
expended by the city in the processing of the applicant’s requests may be
required of the applicant.
(Ord. 2007-01, passed 2-7-2007; Ord. 2011-09, passed - -2011; Ord. 20210317-01,
passed 3-17-2021) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 161.14 ENFORCEMENT AND VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The Director must enforce the provisions of this chapter and bring to
the attention of the City Attorney any violations or lack of compliance with
this section.
   (B)   A building permit may not be issued for property found to be in
violation of this chapter until the violation has been corrected.
(Ord. 2011-09, passed - -2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 162: SIGNS
Section
General Provisions
   
162.01   Purpose
   
162.02   Scope
   
162.03   Message substitution
   
162.04   Definitions
   
162.05   General rules; prohibited signs
   
162.06   Regulation by zone
   
162.07   Non-conforming signs
   
162.08   Construction, location and design specifications
   
162.09   Conflict, severability and effective date
Administration and Enforcement
   
162.20   Code Administrator
   
162.21   Permit application
   
162.22   Permit fees
   
162.23   Permit issuance and denial
   
162.24   Permit conditions, refunds and penalties
   
162.25   Inspection upon completion
   
162.26   Variances
   
162.27   Violations
   
162.28   Removal of signs by Code Administrator
   
162.29   Appeals
 
   
162.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 162.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to maintain, enhance and improve
the aesthetic environment of the city by preventing visual clutter that is
harmful to the appearance of the community; improve the visual appearance of
the city while providing for effective means of communication, consistent with
constitutional guarantees and the city’s goals of public safety and aesthetics;
and to provide for the safety of the traveling public by limiting distractions,
hazards and obstructions. This will be accomplished by regulation of the
display, erection, use and maintenance of signs. The use of signs is regulated
according to land use zoning districts, as defined in the Zoning Code. The
placement and scale of signs are regulated primarily by type and length of
street frontage, though lot size, investment and surrounding conditions must
also be considered. A sign is not permitted as a main or accessory use, except
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. This chapter is not intended
to, and does not restrict speech on the basis of its content, viewpoint or
message. No part of this chapter shall be constructed to favor commercial
speech over non-commercial speech. To the extent that any provision of this
chapter is ambiguous, the provision shall be interpreted not to regulate on the
basis of speech content and the interpretation resulting in the least
restriction on the content of the sign’s message shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 415.01) (Ord. 2007-08, passed 5-16-2007; Ord. 20210421-01,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 162.02 SCOPE.
   This chapter does not relate to building design. This chapter does not
regulate official traffic or government signs; the copy and message of signs;
signs not intended to be viewed from a public right-of-way; window displays;
product dispensers and point of purchase displays; scoreboards on athletic
fields; gravestones; barber poles; commemorative plaques; the display of street
numbers; or any display or construction not defined herein as a sign. Thus, the
primary intent of this chapter is to regulate signs intended to be viewed from
any vehicular or pedestrian public right-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 415.01) (Ord. 2007-08, passed 5-16-2007; Ord. 20210421-01,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 162.03 MESSAGE SUBSTITUTION.
   For every type of sign permitted by this chapter, any non-commercial message
may be legally substituted.
(Prior Code, § 415.01) (Ord. 2007-08, passed 5-16-2007; Ord. 20210421-01,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 162.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED SIGN. A sign that no longer identifies or advertises a bona fide
business, lessor, service, owner, product or activity, or for which the owner
cannot be found.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The Code Administrator or the Administrator’s designated
representative.
   AREA. See SIGN, AREA OF.
   AWNING. A shelter projecting from a support by the exterior wall of a
building constructed of non-rigid materials on a supporting framework.
   AWNING SIGN. A sign painted on, printed on or attached flat against the
surface of an awning.
   BANNER. A sign made of fabric or any non-rigid material with no enclosing
framework.
   BILLBOARD. Any structure or portion thereof on which a message is displayed
and has a sign area of 100 square feet or more.
   BUILDING. As defined in this code of ordinances.
   CITY. The City of Sandstone.
   CLEARANCE (OF A SIGN). The smallest vertical distance between the grade of
the adjacent street, highway or street curb and the lowest point of any sign,
including framework and embellishments, extending over that grade.
   COPY. The graphic content of a sign surface in either permanent or removable
letter, pictographic, symbolic or alphabetic form.
   DIRECTIONAL/INFORMATION SIGN. An on-premise sign giving directions,
instructions or facility information (e.g., parking or exit and entrance
signs). May contain logo or symbol; provided that, the logo or symbol may not
comprise more than 20% of the total sign area.
   DOUBLE-FACED SIGN. A sign with two faces, essentially back-to-back.
   ELECTRIC AWNING SIGN. An internally illuminated fixed space-frame structure
with translucent, flexible reinforced covering designed in awning form and with
graphics or copy applied to the visible surface of the awning.
   FACADE. The entire building front including the parapet.
   FACE OF SIGN. The area of a sign on which the copy is placed.
   FESTOONS. A string of ribbons, tinsel, small flags or pinwheels.
   FLASHING SIGN. An illuminated sign in which such illumination is not kept
stationary or constant in intensity.
   FREESTANDING SIGN. A sign supported permanently upon the ground by poles or
braces and not attached to any building.
   GOVERNMENT SIGN. Any temporary or permanent sign erected and maintained by
the city, county, state or federal government or a school district.
   HEIGHT (OF A SIGN). The vertical distance measured from the highest point of
the sign, excluding decorative embellishments, to the grade of the adjacent
street or the surface grade beneath the sign, whichever is less. (Compare
CLEARANCE.)
   IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A sign whose copy is limited to the name and address of
a building, institution or person or to the activity or occupation being
identified.
   ILLEGAL SIGN. A sign which does not meet the requirements of this code and
which has not received legal non-conforming status.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign with an artificial light source incorporated
internally or externally for the purpose of illuminating the sign.
   INCIDENTAL SIGN. A small sign, emblem, or decal informing the public of
goods, facilities or services available on the premises (e.g., a credit card
sign or a sign indicating hours of business).
   LOT. A parcel of land legally defined on a subdivision map recorded with the
Assessment Department or Land Registry Office, or a parcel of land defined by a
legal record or survey map.
   MANSARD. A sloped roof or roof-like facade architecturally comparable to a
building wall.
   MULTIPLE-FACED SIGN. A sign containing three or more faces, not necessarily
in back-to-back configuration.
   NAMEPLATE. A non-electric on-premise identification sign giving only the
name, address or occupation of an occupant or group of occupants.
   OCCUPANCY. The portion of a building or premises owned, leased, rented or
otherwise occupied for a given use.
   OFF-PREMISES SIGN. Any sign with a commercial message which directs the
attention of the public to a business that is not on the same premises where
such business sign is located.
   OFF-SITE DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A sign which provides directional assistance to
access an establishment conveniently and safely.
   ON-PREMISES SIGN. A sign which pertains to the use of the premises and/or
property on which it is located.
   OWNER. A person recorded as such on official records. For the purposes of
this chapter, the OWNER of property on which a sign is located is presumed to
be the owner of the sign unless facts to the contrary are officially recorded
or otherwise brought to the attention of the Code Administrator (e.g., a sign
leased from a sign company).
   PENNANT. Any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, not containing a
message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, pole or string, designed to
move in the wind.
   PARAPET. The extension of a false front or wall above a roof line.
   POINT OF PURCHASE DISPLAY. Advertising of a retail item accompanying its
display (e.g., an advertisement on a product dispenser, tire display and the
like).
   POLE COVER. Cover enclosing or decorating poles or other structural supports
of a sign.
   PORTABLE SIGN. Any sign designed to be moved easily and not permanently
affixed to the ground or to a structure or building.
   PREMISES. A parcel of land with its appurtenances and buildings which,
because of its unity of use, may be regarded as the smallest conveyable unit of
real estate.
   PROJECTING SIGN. A sign, other than a flat wall sign, which is attached to
and projects from a building wall or other structure not specifically designed
to support the sign.
   ROOF SIGN. Any sign erected over or on the roof of a building.
   SIGN. Any letter, word or symbol, poster, picture, statuary, reading matter
or representation in the nature of announcement, message or visual
communication, whether painted, posted, printed, affixed or constructed, which
is displayed outdoors for informational or communicative purposes.
   SIGN, AREA OF.
      (1)   PROJECTING AND FREESTANDING. The area of a freestanding or
projecting sign may have only one side of any double- or multiple-faced sign
counted in calculating its area. The area of the sign is to be measured as
follows if the sign is composed of one or more individual cabinets. A
rectilinear line of not more than eight sides is to be drawn around and
enclosing the perimeter of each cabinet or module. The area will then be summed
and totaled to determine total area. The perimeter of measurable area may not
include embellishments such as pole covers, framing, decorative roofing,
support structures and the like; provided that, there is no written copy on the
embellishments.
      (2)   WALL SIGN. The area must be within a single, continuous perimeter
composed of any rectilinear line geometric figure which encloses the extreme
limits of the message. If the sign is composed of individual letters of or
symbols using the wall as the background with no added decoration, the total
sign area is to be calculated by measuring the area within the perimeter of
each symbol or letter. The combined areas of the individual fixtures will be
considered the total sign area.
   SNIPE SIGN. A temporary sign or poster affixed to a tree, fence and the
like.
   SUBDIVISION IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A freestanding or wall sign identifying a
recognized subdivision, condominium complex or residential development.
   UNDER-CANOPY SIGN. A sign suspended beneath a canopy, ceiling, roof or
marquee.
   USE. The purpose for which a building, lot, sign or structure is intended,
designed, occupied or maintained.
   WALL SIGN. A sign attached essentially parallel to and extending not more
than 24 inches from the wall of a building with no copy on the sides or edges.
This definition includes painted, individual letter and cabinet signs, and
signs on a mansard.
   WINDOW SIGN. A sign installed inside a window and intended to be viewed from
the outside.
(Prior Code, § 415.03) (Ord. 2007-08, passed 5-16-2007; Ord. 2011-06, passed 4-
20-2011; Ord. 20210421-01, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 162.05 GENERAL RULES; PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   (A)   General. It is unlawful for any person to erect, place or maintain a
sign in the city, except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Prohibited signs. The following types of signs are prohibited in all
districts:
      (1)   Abandoned signs;
      (2)   Search lights (except as allowed in § 162.06 of this chapter);
      (3)   Signs imitating or resembling official traffic or government signs
or signals;
      (4)   Snipe signs or signs attached to trees, telephone poles, public
benches, streetlights or placed on any public property or public right-of-way;
      (5)   Signs placed on vehicles or trailers which are parked or located
for the primary purpose of displaying the sign (this does not apply to allowed
portable signs or to signs or lettering on buses, taxis or vehicles operating
during the normal course of business);
      (6)   Flashing signs;
      (7)   Inflatable devices;
      (8)   Off-premises signs (with the exception of billboards and off-
premises signs located in the Professional Light/Industrial Business Park and
Prospective Interchange Development Districts, as allowed by §
162.06(F) of this chapter); and
      (9)   No sign unless erected by, or required by, a government agency or
temporarily erected to protect the health and safety of the general public,
such as emergency or warning signs, shall be located within or above any public
rights-of-way or on any public property or utility pole. Projecting wall signs
complying with other provisions of this chapter are an exception.
   (C)   Permits required. Unless otherwise provided by this chapter, all signs
require permits and payment of fees as described in §
162.22 of this chapter. A permit is not required for the maintenance of a sign
or for a change of copy on painted, printed or changeable copy signs.
   (D)   Signs not requiring permits. The following types of signs are exempt
from permit requirements, but must be in conformance with all other
requirements of this chapter:
      (1)   One non-illuminated sign for each street frontage of a construction
project, not to exceed 48 square feet per sign in sign area in residential
districts or 64 square feet per sign in sign area in all other zoning
districts. The signs may be erected 60 days prior to beginning of construction
and shall be removed within 30 days following completion of construction;
      (2)   One non-illuminated attached building nameplate per occupancy, not
to exceed two square feet in sign area;
      (3)   Signs with a non-commercial message that are posted from August 1
in any general election year until ten days following the general election and
13 weeks prior to any special election until ten days following the special
election;
      (4)   Government signs;
      (5)   One sign with a commercial message displayed in the yard of
property within a residential district that does not exceed 15 square feet in
sign area and one sign with a commercial message displayed on a property
located in any other zoning district that does not exceed 32 square feet in
sign area. Both types of signs must be removed within 15 days after the closing
on the sale or lease of the property;
      (6)   Window signs;
      (7)   Banners, pennants and festoons;
      (8)   Flags. Flags on flagpoles shall not exceed 40 square feet in area.
No single property shall fly more than three flags at one time. Flagpoles shall
not exceed 40 feet in height. Wall-mounted flags shall be limited to one flag
per property and shall not exceed 20 square feet in area;
      (9)   Temporary special events sign(s) and decoration(s) for special
events, grand openings or holidays. The signs and decorations may be erected 45
days prior to a special event or holiday and shall be removed within five days
following the event. For grand openings, such signs may be used for no more
than a total of 30 days; and
      (10)   One sign smaller than five square feet in sign area may be posted
on any parcel of land; except that, the sign must display only non-commercial
messages and may not be illuminated.
   (E)   Lighting. Unless otherwise prohibited by this chapter, all signs may
be illuminated. External illumination for signs shall be so constructed and
maintained that the source of light is not visible from the public right-of-way
or residential property. All illuminated signs shall comply with all applicable
electric codes and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 415.05) (Ord. 2007-08, passed 5-16-2007; Ord. 2011-06, passed 4-
20-2011; Ord. 2015-01, passed 1-21-2015; Ord. 16-05, passed 10-19-2016; Ord.
20210421-01, passed 4-21-2021) Penalty, see §
162.99
§ 162.06 REGULATION BY ZONE.
   (A)   Signs permitted in all zoning districts. The following signs are
allowed in all zoning districts: all signs not requiring permits.
   (B)   Signs permitted in Traditional and Suburban Residential Districts,
Prospective Interchange Development District and Public Recreation/Open Space
District. Signs are allowed as follows in Traditional and Suburban Residential
Districts, Prospective Interchange Development District and Public Recreation/
Open Space District:
      (1)   In the Prospective Interchange Development District, this chapter
only applies to properties used for residential and public recreational
purposes. Signs on commercial properties are regulated by division (F) below;
      (2)   All signs as permitted in division (A) above;
      (3)   One subdivision identification sign per street frontage,
neighborhood, subdivision or development, not to exceed 48 square feet in sign
area in each location;
      (4)   One identification sign per entrance to apartment or condominium
complex, not to exceed 36 square feet in sign area in each location;
      (5)   For permitted non-residential uses, including places of assembly,
one freestanding sign, not to exceed 48 square feet in sign area, and one wall
sign not to exceed 48 square feet in sign area; and
      (6)   All allowed freestanding signs shall have a maximum height limit of
six feet and shall have a setback of 15 feet from any public right-of-way.
   (C)   Signs permitted in the Historic Downtown District. Signs are allowed
as follows in the Historic Downtown District:
      (1)   All signs as permitted in division (A) above;
      (2)   One freestanding sign, or low profile sign per building having
street frontage not to exceed one square foot in sign area for each lineal foot
of total building street frontage. Such signs may not exceed a height of 25
feet and must be set back at least ten feet from property lines or in line with
existing structures. Freestanding signs shall maintain a minimum clearance of
ten feet over any pedestrian use and 14 feet over any vehicular way;
      (3)   One wall sign or electric awning sign with sign area not to exceed
15% of aggregate area of building elevation on which the sign is installed;
      (4)   One under-canopy sign for each separate occupancy or separate
entrance not to exceed eight square feet in sign area. Under-canopy signs must
have a minimum clearance of eight feet to grade;
      (5)   Incidental signs not to exceed four square feet of sign area per
occupancy;
      (6)   One directional/information sign of no more than nine square feet
of sign area;
      (7)   Where an occupancy is on a corner lot, a minimum clear view zone is
to be maintained in a triangulated area at the point of intersection to allow
an unobstructed view of oncoming traffic; and
      (8)   No sign shall impede pedestrian access to or use of an established
sidewalk.
   (D)   Signs permitted in the Industrial District. Signs are allowed as
follows in the Industrial Districts:
      (1)   All signs as permitted in division (A) above;
      (2)   One freestanding sign per building having street frontage not to
exceed three square feet of sign area for each lineal foot of total building
street frontage. No freestanding sign shall have a sign area in excess of 100
square feet. Signs must not project beyond property lines nor exceed a height
of 25 feet. Where street frontage exceeds 300 lineal feet, only one additional
freestanding sign may be allowed per 300-foot increment;
      (3)   One wall sign or electric awning sign. The sign area of a wall sign
shall not exceed 30% of the aggregate square footage of the wall area upon
which it is installed. An electric awning sign shall not exceed 30% of the
aggregate square footage of the wall area upon which it is installed;
      (4)   Projecting signs may be used instead of any wall or freestanding
signs; provided, they do not project beyond the property line and maintain a
clearance of ten feet over pedestrian areas and 14 feet over vehicular ways;
      (5)   Roof signs may be allowed, but only in instances where no other
sign types can provide effective identification. Roof signs shall be
constructed so as to conceal all structure and fastenings. The height of the
roof sign shall not exceed 20% of the total height of the building to which it
is attached;
      (6)   One under-canopy sign for each separate occupancy or separate
entrance not to exceed eight square feet in sign area. Under-canopy signs must
have a minimum clearance of eight feet to grade;
      (7)   Incidental signs not to exceed four square feet in aggregate area
per occupancy;
      (8)   One directional/information sign of no more than 12 square feet of
sign area; and
      (9)   No sign shall impede pedestrian access to or use of an established
sidewalk.
   (E)   Signs permitted in the Highway Mixed Use District. Signs are allowed
as follows in the Highway Mixed Use District:
      (1)   All signs as permitted in division (A) above;
      (2)   One freestanding sign per building having street frontage not to
exceed three square feet of sign area for each lineal foot of total building
street frontage. No freestanding sign shall have a sign area in excess of 100
square feet. Signs must not project beyond property lines nor exceed a height
of 25 feet, Where street frontage exceeds 300 lineal feet, only one additional
freestanding sign may be allowed per 300-foot increment;
      (3)   One wall sign or electric awning sign. The sign area of a wall sign
shall not exceed 30% of the aggregate square footage of the wall area upon
which it is installed. An electric awning sign shall not exceed 30% of the
aggregate square footage of the wall area upon which it is installed;
      (4)   Projecting signs may be used instead of any wall or freestanding
signs provided they do not project beyond the property line and maintain a
clearance of ten feet over pedestrian areas, and 14 feet over vehicular ways;
      (5)   Roof signs may be allowed but only in instances where no other sign
types can provide effective identification. Roof signs shall be constructed so
as to conceal all structure and fastenings. The height of the roof sign shall
not exceed 20% of the total height of the building to which it is attached;
      (6)   One under-canopy sign for each separate occupancy or separate
entrance not to exceed eight square feet in sign area. Under-canopy signs must
have a minimum clearance of eight feet to grade;
      (7)   Incidental signs not to exceed four square feet in aggregate area
per occupancy;
      (8)   One directional/information sign of no more than 12 square feet of
sign area;
      (9)   The total amount of sign area permitted on a property shall be
limited to one square foot of sign area for each linear foot of property right-
of-way frontage, with a maximum of 120 square feet;
      (10)   A sign may not be placed or designed so as to simulate or
interfere with traffic-control devices or official highway directional/
information signs; and
      (11)   No sign shall impede pedestrian access to or use of an established
sidewalk.
   (F)   Signs permitted in the Professional/Light Industrial Business Park and
the Prospective Interchange Development Districts. Signs are allowed as follows
in the Professional/Light Industrial Business Park and Prospective Interchange
Development Districts:
      (1)   In the Prospective Interchange Development District, this chapter
only applies to properties used for commercial purposes. Signs on residential
and public recreational properties are regulated by division (B) above;
      (2)   All signs as permitted in division (A) above;
      (3)   One freestanding sign per building having street frontage not to
exceed three square feet of sign area for each lineal foot of total building
street frontage. No freestanding sign shall have a sign area in excess of 100
square feet. Signs must not project beyond property lines nor exceed a height
of 25 feet. Where street frontage exceeds 300 lineal feet, only one additional
freestanding sign may be allowed per 300-foot increment;
      (4)   One wall sign or electric awning sign. The sign area of a wall sign
shall not exceed 30% of the aggregate square footage of the wall area upon
which it is installed. An electric awning sign shall not exceed 30% of the
aggregate square footage of the wall area upon which it is installed;
      (5)   Projecting signs may be used instead of any wall or freestanding
signs provided they do not project beyond the property line and maintain a
clearance of ten feet over pedestrian areas, and 14 feet over vehicular ways;
      (6)   Roof signs may be allowed but only in instances where no other sign
types can provide effective identification. Roof signs shall be constructed so
as to conceal all structure and fastenings. The height of the roof sign shall
not exceed 20% of the total height of the building to which it is attached;
      (7)   One under-canopy sign for each separate occupancy or separate
entrance not to exceed eight square feet in sign area. Under-canopy signs must
have a minimum clearance of eight feet to grade;
      (8)   Incidental signs not to exceed four square feet in aggregate area
per occupancy;
      (9)   One directional/information sign of no more than 12 square feet of
sign area;
      (10)   Billboards are permitted subject to the following requirements.
         (a)   The total amount of billboard sign area permitted on a property
shall be limited to one square foot of sign area for each linear foot of
property right-of-way frontage, with a maximum of 300 square feet.
         (b)   Each billboard structure shall consist of no more than two sign
faces.
         (c)   The billboard’s height shall not exceed 35 feet; however, where
conditions warrant (such as visual impairment or other unusual conditions),
maximum height may be increased with a Planning Commission review and City
Council approval.
         (d)   The billboard must be located at least 500 feet from all other
billboards.
         (e)   The billboard must be located no closer than 300 feet from any
property that is in a residential district.
         (f)   There shall be no more than one type of message per sign face.
Side by side panels are prohibited.
         (g)   Design standards established by the Planning Commission shall be
followed.
         (h)   A conditional use permit is required.
      (11)   All freestanding signs located within 1,000 feet of a controlled
freeway including entrances and exits may be installed to a maximum height of
75 feet or 25 feet above freeway grade, whichever is less. The signs must be
on-premise signs and must be freestanding only. Where conditions warrant (such
as visual impairment or other unusual conditions), maximum height may be
increased with Planning Commission review and City Council approval;
      (12)   The total amount of sign area permitted on a property (including
any billboards) shall be limited to one square foot of sign area for each
linear foot of property right-of-way frontage, with a maximum of 300 square
feet; and
      (13)   A sign may not be placed or designed so as to simulate or
interfere with traffic-control devices or official highway directional/
informational signs.
(Prior Code, § 415.07) (Ord. 2007-08, passed 5-16-2007; Ord. 2012-07, passed 8-
15-2012; Ord. 16-05, passed 10-19-2016; Ord. 20210421-01, passed 4-21-2021)
Penalty, see §
162.99
§ 162.07 NON-CONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   Determination of legal non-conformity. Any sign legally existing at
the time of passage of this chapter that does not conform to the provisions of
this chapter shall be considered a legal non- conforming sign and may be
continued through repair, replacement, restoration, maintenance or improvement,
but not including, expansion. EXPANSION shall be defined as any structural
alteration, change or addition that is made outside of the original sign
structure, sign area or design.
   (B)   Unsafe signs. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the return of a
sign structure that has been declared unsafe by the Code Administrator to a
safe condition.
   (C)   Discontinuance or change. When any legal non-conforming sign is
discontinued for a period of time of more than one year, or is changed to a
conforming sign, any future sign shall be in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter.
   (D)   Removal. Any legal non-conforming sign shall be removed and shall not
be repaired, replaced or rebuilt if it is damaged by fire or similar peril to
the extent of greater than 50% of its market value at the time of destruction
and no sign permit has been applied for within 180 days of the date of
destruction. The Code Administrator shall be responsible for making the
determination of whether a non- conforming sign has been destroyed greater than
50% of its market value at the time of destruction. In making that
determination, the Code Administrator shall consider the market value of the
entire sign at the time prior to the destruction and the replacement value of
the existing sign.
   (E)   Conditions. In the event that a sign permit is applied for within 180
days of the date of destruction and the sign did not withstand damage greater
than 50% of its market value at the time of destruction, the city may impose
reasonable conditions upon the sign permit in order to mitigate any newly
created impact on adjacent properties.
   (F)   Change. A lawful non-conforming sign shall not be changed to a similar
non-conforming sign or to a more restrictive non-conforming sign.
(Prior Code, § 415.09) (Ord. 2007-08, passed 5-16-2007; Ord. 20210421-01,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 162.08 CONSTRUCTION, LOCATION AND DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   General requirements. All signs shall conform to the requirements of
this chapter whether or not a sign permit is required. All signs shall be
constructed in a manner and of a material that they shall be safe and
substantial. All signs shall be properly secured, supported and braced and
shall be kept in good repair so that public safety and traffic safety are not
compromised. All signs shall conform to the National Electric Code as adopted
by the state, if applicable.
   (B)   Maintenance.
      (1)   Exposed surfaces on the sign shall be kept clean and painted if
paint is required. Defective parts shall be replaced.
      (2)   The area on the property around the sign on which it is erected
shall be properly maintained and clear of brush, long grass, weeds, debris,
rubbish and other obstacles.
      (3)   All burned-out light bulbs or damaged panels on a sign shall be
immediately replaced.
   (C)   Sign copy. All sign copy shall be fastened securely to the sign face
and maintained on a regular basis. Any missing sign copy shall be replaced
immediately. Any sign copy that is outdated must be removed within 30 days of
becoming outdated.
   (D)   Location. No sign shall be located as to obscure any existing sign. No
sign shall be attached to or placed upon any building in a manner as to
obstruct any window or door or fire escape or be attached to any fire escape.
No sign shall impede pedestrian access to or use of an established sidewalk.
   (E)   Interference with traffic. A sign shall not be located within 50 feet
of any street, traffic sign or signal, intersection, driveway or crosswalk. A
sign may be located closer than 50 feet if it can be shown that the sign will
not interfere with the ability of drivers and pedestrians to see the traffic
sign or signal, intersection, driveway or crosswalk and the sign will not
distract drivers, nor cause any interference with the traffic sign or signal.
   (F)   Banners. Banners shall be strongly constructed and be securely
attached to their supports. They shall be repaired or removed as soon as they
are damaged or torn.
(Prior Code, § 415.11) (Ord. 2007-08, passed 5-16-2007; Ord. 20210421-01,
passed 4-21-2021) Penalty, see §
162.99
§ 162.09 CONFLICT, SEVERABILITY AND EFFECTIVE DATE.
   (A)   This chapter and its parts are declared to be severable. If any
section, division, clause, sentence, word, provision or portion of this chapter
is declared to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent
jurisdiction, that declaration shall not affect the validity of this chapter as
a whole. All parts of this chapter not declared invalid or unconstitutional
shall remain in full force and effect as if the portion so declared or adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid was not originally part of this chapter, even if
the surviving parts of this chapter result in greater restrictions after any
unconstitutional or invalid provisions are stricken.
   (B)   The City Council declares that it would have enacted the remaining
parts of this chapter even if it had known that such portion thereof would be
declared or adjudged unconstitutional or invalid. If any part of this chapter
is found to be in conflict with any other code provision or with any part of
this chapter, the most restrictive or highest standard shall prevail. If any
part of this chapter is explicitly prohibited by federal or state statutes,
that part shall not be enforced.
(Prior Code, § 415.15) (Ord. 2007-08, passed 5-16-2007; Ord. 20210421-01,
passed 4-21-2021)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 162.20 CODE ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The Code Administrator is appointed by the City Council and is
authorized to process applications for permits and variances, schedule public
hearings as required and enforce and carry out all provisions of this code. The
Code Administrator may promulgate regulations and procedures consistent with
this function.
   (B)   The Code Administrator may, upon presentation of proper credentials,
enter or inspect any building, structure or premises in the city for the
purpose of inspection of a sign and its structural and electrical connections
to ensure compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances. The inspections
must be carried out during business hours unless an emergency exists.
(Prior Code, § 415.13) (Ord. 2007-08, passed 5-16-2007; Ord. 20210421-01,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 162.21 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Application for a permit for the erection or relocation of a sign is made to
the Code Administrator upon a form provided by the Code Administrator and must
include the following information:
   (A)   Name and address of the owner of the sign;
   (B)   Street address or location of the property on which the sign is to be
located, along with the name and address of the property owner;
   (C)   The type of sign or sign structure as defined in this chapter;
   (D)   A site plan with measurements showing the proposed location of the
sign along with the locations and dimensions of all existing signs on the same
premises;
   (E)   Specifications and drawings showing the materials, design, dimensions,
structural supports and electrical components of the proposed sign;
   (F)   The written consent of the owner of the property, if the applicant is
not the property owner;
   (G)   The name of the person erecting the sign, if not the applicant;
   (H)   A statement as to whether any electronic lights on the sign will be
flashing or not; and
   (I)   A statement as to whether the sign will be single-faced, double-faced
or multi-faced.
(Prior Code, § 415.13) (Ord. 2007-08, passed 5-16-2007; Ord. 20210421-01,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 162.22 PERMIT FEES.
   Applications for permits filed with the Code Administrator must be
accompanied by a payment of the initial permit fee for each sign as required by
§
36.02 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 415.13) (Ord. 2007-08, passed 5-16-2007; Ord. 20210421-01,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 162.23 PERMIT ISSUANCE AND DENIAL.
   (A)   The Code Administrator will issue a permit for the erection,
structural alteration or relocation of a sign within five days of receipt of a
valid application, provided that the sign complies with all applicable laws and
regulations of the city. The permit shall be valid for a period of one year (or
unlimited duration).
   (B)   In all applications, where a matter of interpretation arises, the more
specific definition or higher standard shall prevail. When a permit is denied,
the Code Administrator must within five days, give a written notice to the
applicant along with a brief statement of the reasons for denial, citing code
sections and interpretation of possible non-conformity. The Code Administrator
may suspend or revoke an issued permit for any false statement or
misrepresentation of fact in the application.
(Prior Code, § 415.13) (Ord. 2007-08, passed 5-16-2007; Ord. 20210421-01,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 162.24 PERMIT CONDITIONS, REFUNDS AND PENALTIES.
   If a permit is denied, the permit fee will be refunded to the applicant. If
no inspections have been made and no work authorized by the permit has been
performed, the permit fee, except for $15, may be refunded to the applicant
upon request, provided that the permit is returned to the Code Administrator
within ten days of issuance. If any sign is installed or placed on any property
prior to receipt of a permit, the specified permit fee shall be doubled.
However, payment of the doubled fee shall not relieve any person of any other
requirements or penalties prescribed in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 415.13) (Ord. 2007-08, passed 5-16-2007; Ord. 20210421-01,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 162.25 INSPECTION UPON COMPLETION.
   A person installing, structurally altering or relocating a sign for which a
permit has been issued must notify the Code Administrator upon completion of
the work. The Code Administrator may require a final inspection, including an
electrical inspection and inspection of footings on freestanding signs. The
Code Administrator may require at the time of issuance of a permit that written
notification for an inspection be submitted prior to the installation of
certain signs.
(Prior Code, § 415.13) (Ord. 2007-08, passed 5-16-2007; Ord. 20210421-01,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 162.26 VARIANCES.
   (A)   When requesting a permit, the applicant may apply to the Code
Administrator for a variance from the requirements of this code. A variance may
be granted by the Council where the literal application of the code would
create practical difficulties for the sign user and all of the following
criteria are met:
      (1)   The applicant proposes to use the property in a reasonable manner
not permitted by this code;
      (2)   The variance does not alter the essential character of the
neighborhood;
      (3)   Unique circumstances apply to the property which do not apply to
other properties in the same zone or vicinity and result from lot size or
shape, topography or other circumstances over which the owner of the property
has had no control. The unique circumstances do not result from the actions of
the applicant;
      (4)   The granting of the variance is in harmony with the general
purposes and intent of this code;
      (5)   The variance is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan; and
      (6)   Economic conditions alone do not constitute practical difficulties.
   (B)   In granting a variance, the Council may attach additional conditions
necessary to carry out the spirit and purpose of this chapter in the public
interest. The conditions must be directly related to and must bear a rough
proportionality to the impact created by the variance.
   (C)   Refer to §
163.326 for the process and procedure to follow for obtaining a variance.
(Prior Code, § 415.13) (Ord. 2007-08, passed 5-16-2007; Ord. 2011-09, passed 8-
17-2011; Ord. 20210421-01, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 162.27 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   When, in the opinion of the Code Administrator, a violation of the
code exists, the Code Administrator may issue a written order to the alleged
violator. The order must specify those sections of the code which the
individual may be in violation of and state that the individual has 15 days
from the date of the order in which to correct the alleged violation or to
appeal to the Council.
   (B)   If, upon inspection, the Code Administrator finds that a sign is
abandoned or structurally, materially or electrically defective, or in any way
endangers the public, the Code Administrator must issue a written order to the
owner of the sign and occupant of the premises stating the nature of the
violation and requiring them to repair or remove the sign within 15 days of the
date of the order.
   (C)   In cases of emergency, the Code Administrator may cause the immediate
removal of a dangerous or defective sign without notice. Signs removed in this
manner must present a hazard to the public safety as defined in the local
building or traffic codes.
(Prior Code, § 415.13) (Ord. 2007-08, passed 5-16-2007; Ord. 20210421-01,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 162.28 REMOVAL OF SIGNS BY CODE ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   (1)   The Code Administrator may cause the removal of an illegal sign
in cases of emergency, or for failure to comply with the written orders of
removal or repair.
      (2)   After removal or demolition of the sign, a notice must be mailed to
the sign owner stating the nature of the work and the date on which it was
performed and demanding payment of the costs as certified by the Code
Administrator.
   (B)   If the amount specified in the notice is not paid within 30 days of
the notice, it shall become an assessment upon a lien against the property of
the sign owner, and will be certified as an assessment against the property
together with a 5% penalty for collection in the same manner as the real estate
taxes in accordance with M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to
time.
   (C)   The owner of the property upon which the sign is located is presumed
to be the owner of all signs thereon unless facts to the contrary are brought
to the attention of the Code Administrator, as in the case of a leased sign.
   (D)   For purposes of removal, the definition of sign includes all sign
embellishments and structures designed specifically to support the sign.
(Prior Code, § 415.13) (Ord. 2007-08, passed 5-16-2007; Ord. 20210421-01,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 162.29 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any failure to respond to an application within 30 days of receipt of
any decision rendered by the Code Administrator in denying a permit or variance
or in alleging a violation of this chapter may be appealed to the Council or
Board within 60 days of the Code Administrator’s receipt of application.
   (B)   The action being appealed will be held in abeyance pending the
decision of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 415.13) (Ord. 2007-08, passed 5-16-2007; Ord. 20210421-01,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 162.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed
for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this chapter, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more
than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
      (3)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time,
in either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
      (4) The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
      (5)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if any
person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this code,
the City Council or any city official designated by it may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
   (B)   At the city’s sole discretion, an administrative citation may be
issued in accordance with §§
10.35 through
10.41 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 415.13) (Ord. 2007-08, passed 5-16-2007; Ord. 20210421-01,
passed 4-21-2021)
CHAPTER 163: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
163.001   Title
   
163.002   Purpose
   
163.003   Application
   
163.004   Definitions
   
163.005   Off-street parking and loading
   
163.006   Fences
   
163.007   Architectural standards
   
163.008   General district provisions
   
163.009   Non-conforming buildings, structures and uses
Traditional Residential District
   
163.020   Purpose
   
163.021   Permitted uses
   
163.022   Permitted accessory uses
   
163.023   Interim uses
   
163.024   Conditional uses
   
163.025   Performance standards
   
163.026   Other requirements
Suburban Residential District
   
163.040   Purpose
   
163.041   Permitted uses
   
163.042   Accessory uses
   
163.043   Interim uses
   
163.044   Conditional uses
   
163.045   Yards abutting public street or highway right-of-way
   
163.046   Performance standards
   
163.047   Other requirements
Historic Downtown District
   
163.060   Purpose
   
163.061   Permitted uses
   
163.062   Accessory uses
   
163.063   Interim uses
   
163.064   Conditional uses
   
163.065   Performance standards
   
163.066   Other requirements
Highway Mixed Use District
   
163.080   Purpose
   
163.081   Permitted uses
   
163.082   Interim uses
   
163.083   Conditional uses
   
163.084   Accessory uses
   
163.085   Performance standards
Prospective Interchange Development District
   
163.100   Purpose
   
163.101   Permitted uses
   
163.102   Accessory uses
   
163.103   Interim uses
   
163.104   Conditional uses
   
163.105   Performance standards
   
163.106   Other standards and requirements
Professional/Light Industrial Business Park District
   
163.120   Purpose
   
163.121   Permitted uses
   
163.122   Accessory uses
   
163.123   Conditional uses
   
163.124   Performance standards
   
163.125   Other standards and requirements
Industrial District
   
163.140   Purpose
   
163.141   Permitted uses
   
163.142   Accessory uses
   
163.143   Conditional uses
   
163.144   Lot area and setback requirements
   
163.145   Other standards and requirements
   
163.146   Additional requirements
Public Recreation and Open Space District
   
163.160   Purpose
   
163.161   Compatibility
   
163.162   Lot density requirements
   
163.163   Performance standards
   
163.164   Permitted accessory uses
   
163.165   Conditional uses
Heliport Overlay District
   
163.180   Statutory authorization
   
163.181   Findings of fact
   
163.182   Statement of purpose
   
163.183   Definitions
   
163.184   Air space obstruction zoning
   
163.185   Land use safety zoning
   
163.186   Heliport map
   
163.187   Non-conforming uses
   
163.188   Permits
   
163.189   Variance
   
163.190   Hazardous marking and lighting
   
163.191   Appeals
   
163.192   Conflicts
   
163.193   Air space zones
   
163.194   Safety zone boundaries
Manufactured Home Park Overlay District
   
163.205   Description
   
163.206   Purpose
   
163.207   Special requirements
   
163.208   Individual site performance standards
   
163.209   Permitted uses
   
163.210   Accessory uses
   
163.211   Buffer yard requirements
Single-Family Residential Planned Unit Development District (R-PUD)
   
163.225   Purpose
   
163.226   Requirements
   
163.227   Permitted, accessory, interim and conditional uses
   
163.228   Procedures
   
163.229   Amendment and control
   
163.230   Conflict
Commercial Planned Development District (C-PUD)
   
163.245   Purpose
   
163.246   Permitted, accessory, interim and conditional uses
   
163.247   Performance standards
   
163.248   Procedures
   
163.249   Amendment and control
   
163.250   Conflict
Kettle River Wild and Scenic River District (KR)
   
163.265   Purpose
   
163.266   Intent
   
163.267   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
163.268   District application
   
163.269   Establishment of district
   
163.270   Variances
   
163.271   Notification procedures
   
163.272   Uses
   
163.273   Application; minimum requirements
General Shoreland District
   
163.285   Purpose
   
163.286   District application
   
163.287   District boundaries
   
163.288   Uses
   
163.289   Minimum requirements
   
163.290   Notification requirements
   
163.291   Variances
   
163.292   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Recreational Vehicle Park Overlay District (RV)
   
163.305   Purpose
   
163.306   Definitions
   
163.307   Permitted uses
   
163.308   Accessory uses
   
163.309   Conditional uses
   
163.310   Review and approval procedures for initial development or expansion
   
163.311   Design and operation standards
   
163.312   Site plan requirements
   
163.313   Design standards
   
163.314   Registration
Enforcement; Compliance with General Requirements
   
163.325   Administration and enforcement
   
163.326   Zoning compliance
   
163.327   General conditions
 
   
163.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 163.001 TITLE.
   This chapter may be cited and referred to as the “Zoning Ordinance of the
City of Sandstone”. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted
by M.S. § 462.357, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 515.01) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021)
§ 163.002 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety, morals
and general welfare and, more specifically, to achieve the following goals:
   (A)   To develop a community that provides a full range of opportunities for
personal development and participation in community affairs;
   (B)   To promote the orderly development of the city;
   (C)   To improve and ensure safety in transportation movements, especially
within neighborhoods;
   (D)   To improve safety from fire and other dangers;
   (E)   To control the density of development in the city so that property can
be adequately served by such governmental facilities, such as streets, schools,
recreation, fire protection and utility systems;
   (F)   To ensure that the ecology and natural environment of the city is
protected;
   (G)   To build a distinctive physical environment through a desirable and
workable arrangement between natural features, land uses and the transportation
system;
   (H)   To promote an economic base capable of supporting a desirable standard
of living for city residents;
   (I)   To upgrade the city’s image;
   (J)   To conserve the value of the city’s land and structures;
   (K)   To provide every resident of the city with the choice of a decent home
suited to varied needs in a suitable environment for daily living;
   (L)   To achieve the goals and policies set forth in the municipal
comprehensive plan; and
   (M)   To guide and direct new growth and avoid leap-frog and scattered
development.
(Prior Code, § 515.01) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 2007-12, passed 6-
20-2007; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-20-2021)
§ 163.003 APPLICATION.
   (A)   This chapter applies to land located within the corporate limits of
the city and to land outside those boundaries if appropriate action is taken by
the city as provided by law.
   (B)   This chapter applies to unincorporated territory in Sandstone
Township; provided that, Sandstone Township or Pine County have not adopted
zoning regulations that are applicable to these areas.
   (C)   The provisions of this section are the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. Where a condition
imposed by a provision of this section on land is either more restrictive or
less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions of
this section or of any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulation, the regulations that are more restrictive and impose higher
standards or requirements control.
(Prior Code, § 515.03) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 2007-12, passed 6-
20-2007; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-20-2021)
§ 163.004 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. A use or structure, or portion of a structure,
subordinate to and serving the principal use on the same lot.
   AGRICULTURAL USES. The growing of produce on farms, including, but not
limited to, field crop farming, fruit growing, nurseries without buildings,
truck gardening or one roadside stand for the sale of products grown on the
premises.
   ALLEY. A public or private right-of-way of at least 20 feet in width
designed to provide a secondary access to abutting property.
   ALTERATIONS. A change, addition or modification in:
      (1)   Construction or type of occupancy; or
      (2)   Structural members of a building, such as walls or partitions,
columns, beams or girders.
   APARTMENT. A room, or multi-room living area with a kitchen; the term
includes a unit in buildings with two or more dwelling units.
   BASEMENT, CELLAR. The portion of a building between floor and ceiling, which
is partly below and partly above grade, but so located that the vertical
distance from grade to the floor below is less than the vertical distance from
grade to ceiling.
   BLUFF.
      (1)   A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff or embankment, having
the following characteristics:
         (a)   Part or all of the feature is located in a shoreland area;
         (b)   The slope rises at least 25 feet above the normal high water
mark of the waterbody;
         (c)   The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a point 25
feet or more above the normal high water mark averages 30% or greater; and
         (d)   The slope must drain toward the water body.
      (2)   An area with an average slope of less than 18% over a distance of
50 feet or more is not considered part of the BLUFF.
   BUILDING. A structure having a roof built for the shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals or materials.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the established grade
to the highest point of the roof surface for flat roofs, to the deck line of
mansard roofs and to the average height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip
and gambrel roofs. Where a building is located on sloping terrain, the HEIGHT
may be measured from the average ground level of the grade at the building
wall.
   BUSINESS. An establishment, occupation, employment or enterprise in which
merchandise is manufactured, exhibited, stored, sold or where services are
offered for sale.
   CLUB or LODGE. A non-profit association of persons who are bona fide members
paying dues.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The municipal comprehensive plan consisting of a
compilation of goals, statements, standards, programs and maps for guiding the
physical, social and economic development of the city and its environment,
including any unit or part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to
such plan or parts thereof.
   CONDITIONAL USE. A use classified as conditional generally may be
appropriate or desirable in a specified zone, but requiring special approval
because if not carefully located or designed, it may cause special problems
such as excessive height or bulk or traffic congestion.
   CORNER LOT. A lot within a plat that is bounded on two sides by intersecting
streets.
   DWELLING, DWELLING UNIT. A residential building or portion thereof, not
including hotels, motels, boarding or rooming houses, nursing homes, tourist
homes, recreational vehicles or tents.
   EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner for a specific use by persons or
agencies other than the owner.
   EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS CHAPTER. October 24, 2002.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICES. Overhead or underground systems and structures used by
public utilities or governmental departments or commissions for the purposes of
providing electric, gas, steam, water, sanitary sewer, telephone, cable
television and Internet services or other services required for the protection
of the public health, safety or general welfare, including towers, poles,
wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, vaults, laterals, cables
(including fiber optic cables), fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, stations,
substations, switching and relay facilities, water and sewage pumps, lift
stations and accessories in connection therewith, but not including buildings
or structures that are specifically described in this definition. ESSENTIAL
SERVICES do not include antennas or towers that are regulated by
Chapter 159 of this code of ordinances.
   EXTERIOR STORAGE. (Including open storage.) The storage of goods, material,
equipment, except common household gardening and ground care.
   FAMILY. One person or two or more persons living together as a single
housekeeping unit.
   FARM. A tract of land, which is principally used for agricultural purposes
such as the production of crops, livestock or poultry farming; the term
includes agricultural, dwelling and accessory buildings and structures
necessary to the operation of the FARM.
   FINAL PLAT. The map or plan of record of a subdivision, and any accompanying
material required by the City Council.
   FLOOR AREA.
      (1)   For the purpose of calculating the number of off-street parking
spaces required, FLOOR AREA means the sum of the gross horizontal area of the
floors of a building measured to the centers of all partitions, except areas
used for storage, building maintenance, toilets, window show cases, dressing
rooms, employees’ cafés, conference rooms or utilities.
      (2)   For all other purposes, FLOOR AREA means the sum of the gross
horizontal area of the floors of a building measured to the centers of
partitions. The FLOOR AREA of a residence does not include the area of attached
garages, enclosed breezeways, porches, basements or cellars, or any area used
for retailing activities, the production or processing of goods or offices.
   FRONTAGE. The boundary of a lot that abuts an existing or dedicated public
street.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building or accessory portion of the principal
building that is used to store automotive vehicles or recreational equipment by
a resident of the property.
   GARAGE, REPAIR. A building for the repair or maintenance of motor vehicles;
the term does not include factory assembly of such vehicles, auto wrecking
yards or junk yards.
   GRADE. The slope of a road, street or other public way, specified in percent
of the feet of vertical change in elevation for each 100 feet horizontally.
   HOME OCCUPATION.
      (1)   A use of commercial nature conducted by an occupant entirely within
the dwelling or accessory buildings which use is clearly incidental and
secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes and does not
change the residential character thereof.
         (a)   HOME OCCUPATION, TYPE 1. A home occupation, the commercial
nature of which involves providing a service to a limited number of people who
are predominantly acquaintances. Generates less than ten auto trips per week.
No employees beyond owner. No signage or other advertising done either on- or
off-premise. Would include businesses that are similar in nature to tutoring or
music lessons performed on an individual basis. (Allowed in all Residential,
Historic Downtown, and Highway Mixed-Use Districts.)
         (b)   HOME OCCUPATION, TYPE 2. A home occupation, the commercial
nature of which involves providing a service to people or organizations that do
not receive the service at the property from which is it being provided.
Generates less than 25 auto trips per week, including deliveries and employees.
No more than two employees, in addition to the owner, working on site. No
signage done either on or off-premise. Would include businesses that are
similar in nature to telephone sales, consulting, or web design. (Allowed in
all Residential, Historic Downtown and Highway Mixed-Use Districts.)
         (c)   HOME OCCUPATION, TYPE 3. A home occupation, the commercial
nature of which involves providing a service or product to people or
organizations within the home. Generates less than 60 auto trips per week,
including deliveries. No more than two employees, in addition to the owner
working on site. May include on-premise signage. May include retail sales of
items manufactured on-premise. Would include businesses that are similar in
nature to chiropractic service, artist studio or craft shop. (IUP required in
all Residential Districts; allowed in Historic Downtown, Highway Mixed Use, and
Prospective Interchange Districts.)
         (d)   HOME OCCUPATION, TYPE 4. A home occupation, the commercial
nature of which involves providing a service or product to people or
organizations off site. Generates less than 60 auto trips per week, including
deliveries. All employees do the majority of their work off-premise. May
include on-premise storage or warehousing of work-related materials. Would
include businesses that are similar in nature to lawn care services and off-
premise sandblasting services. (IUP required in all Residential and Historic
Downtown Districts; allowed in Highway Mixed Use and Prospective Interchange
Districts.)
      (2)   Each HOME OCCUPATION in the city shall require a permit. HOME
OCCUPATION permits are not transferable to a new owner/renter/occupant, thus
the permit will not run with the property, nor be transferable to a different
property.
      (3)   (a)   All business activities, including storage, shall be inside
buildings or completely screened from adjacent properties.
         (b)   All activities shall be clearly incidental to the use of the
property for residential purposes. Not more than 25% of the gross floor area of
the residence or 50% of the gross floor area of a garage or storage building
shall be used for commercial purposes.
         (c)   No HOME OCCUPATION shall be conducted between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless the occupation is contained entirely within the
principal building, does not constitute a nuisance to surrounding properties
and will not require any on-street parking facilities.
         (d)   Not more than two non-residents may be employed on the premises
by the HOME OCCUPATION.
         (e)   On the premises, retail sales will be allowed only of products
manufactured on those premises, unless specifically authorized by conditional
use permit.
         (f)   No articles for sale shall be displayed so as to be visible from
the street.
         (g)   All activities will be controlled to prevent nuisance problems
of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, fumes or litter.
         (h)   The HOME OCCUPATION shall not generate more than two customer
vehicles at one time. Off-street parking shall be provided, but no more than
two spaces shall be allowed for customer use.
         (i)   No mechanical or electrical equipment shall be used if the
operation of the equipment interferes unreasonably with the desired quiet
residential environment of the neighborhood or if the health and safety of the
residents is endangered. No equipment shall be used in the HOME OCCUPATION
which will create electrical interference to surrounding properties.
         (j)   A person having a HOME OCCUPATION shall provide proof of meeting
the above requirements upon request by the city.
      (4)   Yard sales and garage sales do not require a HOME OCCUPATION
permit, so long as they do not exceed seven cumulative days in one calendar
year.
      (5)   One automobile displayed for sale on a property shall not require a
HOME OCCUPATION permit so long as not more than two automobiles are sold over
30 cumulative days per calendar year.
   HOTEL. A building which provides a common entrance lobby, halls and stairway
and in which people can be lodged.
   HORTICULTURE. Uses and structures designed for the storage of products and
machinery pertaining to horticultural activities.
   INSTITUTIONAL RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES. Nursing homes, certified and non-
certified boarding care homes, supervised living facilities, group homes,
housing with services establishments, board and lodging facilities (with the
exception of hotels, rooming houses and private pay senior housing) and adult
foster care homes.
   INTERIM USE. A temporary use of property until a particular date, until the
occurrence of a particular event, or until zoning regulations no longer permit
it.
   JUNK YARD. An open area where waste and used materials are bought, sold,
exchanged, stored, packed, disassembled or handled, including, but not limited
to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber, wires and bottles. A JUNK
YARD includes an auto wrecking yard, but does not include uses that are
entirely within enclosed buildings or city approved recycling centers.
   LOADING SPACE. An off-street space on the same lot with a building or group
of buildings, for temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and
unloading merchandise or materials.
   LOCAL STREET. A street of limited continuity used primarily for access to
the abutting properties and higher order streets.
   LODGING ROOM. A room rented as sleeping and living quarters, but without
cooking facilities. In a suite of rooms without cooking facilities, each room,
which provides sleeping accommodation, will be counted as one LODGING ROOM.
   LONG-TERM CARE FACILITIES. Congregate residential facilities that have a
housing with services license from the state that provide or coordinate
personal services, 24-hour supervision and assistance (scheduled and
unscheduled), activities and health-related services.
   LOT. Parcel of land intended for transfer of ownership or for building
development.
   LOT DEPTH. The shortest distance between the front and rear lot lines,
measured at the side yard setback line.
   LOT LINE. The lines bordering a lot.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. The boundary of a lot abutting a public street right-of-
way. In the case of a corner lot, the front is the lot side having the shortest
dimension on a public street or the owner may select either street lot line as
the FRONT LOT LINE.
   LOT LINE, REAR. The boundary of a lot, which is opposite the front lot line.
If the REAR LOT LINE is less than ten feet in length, or if the lot forms a
point at the rear, the REAR LOT LINE is a line ten feet in length within the
lot, connecting the side lot lines and parallel to the front lot line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. The boundary of a lot that is not a front lot line or a rear
lot line.
   LOT SPLIT. A subdivision of a platted parcel or parcels of land into two
lots along an existing public street not involving the opening, widening or
extension of a public street.
   LOT WIDTH. The shortest distance between the side lot lines, measured within
the first 30 feet of the lot depth, commencing at the front yard setback line.
   MANUFACTURED OR MOBILE HOME PARK. A site, lot, field or tract of land under
single ownership, designated, maintained or intended for the placement of two
or more occupied homes. The term includes buildings, structures, vehicles or
enclosures intended for use as part of the equipment of the mobile or
manufactured home park.
   MOTEL (TOURIST COURT). A building or group of detached, semi-detached or
attached buildings containing guest rooms or dwellings, with garage or parking
space conveniently located to each unit, designed, used or intended to be used
primarily for the accommodation of persons with automobiles.
   NON-CONFORMING USE. A building, structure or land lawfully occupied by an
actual and active use established on the effective date of this chapter that
does not conform with the use regulations for the zoning district in which it
is located.
   NORMAL HIGH WATER MARK. A mark delineating the highest water level that has
been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the
landscape. In areas where the NORMAL HIGH WATER MARK is not evident, setbacks
will be measured from the stream bank.
   NURSERY, LANDSCAPE. A business growing and selling trees, flowering and
decorative plants and shrubs and which may be conducted within or outside a
building for the purpose of landscape construction.
   NURSING HOME. A state licensed facility used to provide care for aged or
infirm persons who require nursing care and related services as defined by M.S.
§ 144A.01, as it may be amended from time to time.
   OPEN SALES LOT (EXTERIOR STORAGE). A land used or occupied for the purpose
of buying and selling any goods, materials or merchandise and for the storing
of same under the open sky prior to sale.
   PARKING SPACE. A suitably surfaced and permanently maintained area on
privately-owned property either within or outside of a building of sufficient
size to store one standard automobile.
   PLACE OF ASSEMBLY. A building or space that is principally used as a place
where people of the same faith or religion regularly assemble for worship.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). An area of land, controlled by a single
entity, the plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk or type of
dwelling, density, lot coverage or required open space to the regulations in
any zoning district.
   PLAT. The drawing or map of a subdivision prepared for filing of record
pursuant to M.S. Chapter 505, as it may be amended from time to time, and
containing all elements and requirements set forth in the city’s subdivision
regulations.
   PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE OR USE. One which determines the predominant use as
contrasted to accessory use or structure.
   PROPERTY OWNER; OWNER. The fee owner of land, or the beneficial owner of
land whose interest is previously one of possession and enjoyment; the term
includes, but is not limited to, vendees under contract for deed and
mortgagors.
   RECREATIONAL, PUBLIC. Includes all uses such as tennis courts, ball fields,
picnic areas and the like; areas commonly provided for the public at parks,
playgrounds, community centers and other sites owned and operated by a unit of
government for the purpose of providing recreation.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Any watercraft, pull or pop up camper/tent trailer,
all-terrain vehicle, motor home, five-foot wheel camper trailer, travel camper
trailer, RV or other similar vehicle. A RECREATIONAL VEHICLE does not include
enclosed or open utility trailers; provided that, they are not carrying
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   SERVICE STATION. A place where gasoline, kerosene or other motor fuel
lubricating oil or grease for operating motor vehicles is offered for sale to
the public, and deliveries are made directly into motor vehicles. The term
includes greasing, oiling or the sale of automobile accessories, on the
premises, minor repairs, incidental body and fender work, painting and
upholstering, the replacement of parts and motor services to passenger
automobiles, trucks not exceeding one and one-half tons’ capacity. The term
includes major repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles
or trailers, body or frame repair or spray painting.
   SETBACK. The minimum distance between a structure or sanitary facility and a
road, highway or property line.
   STREET. A public or private right-of-way that permits access by vehicles to
abutting properties.
   STREET, MAJOR or THOROUGHFARE. A street that serves, or is designed to
serve, heavy flows of traffic and which is used primarily as a route for
traffic between communities and other heavy traffic generating areas or both.
   STREET WIDTH. The distance between the lines delineating the right-of-way of
a street, including boulevards.
   STRUCTURE. Any thing constructed, the uses of which requires more or less
permanent location on the ground, or attached to something having a permanent
location on the ground.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of a parcel of land into two or more lots or
parcels by a plat, lot split or registered land survey. The term includes re-
subdivision and, when appropriate to the context, will relate to the process of
subdividing or to the land subdivided.
   TOWNHOUSE. A single-family building attached by common walls with other
single-family buildings, and oriented so that exits open to the outside.
   THOROUGHFARE. An arterial street.
   USE. The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is
designated, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied, utilized or
maintained.
   WAREHOUSING. The storage of materials or equipment within an enclosed
building.
   YARD. A required open space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed by
a structure from its lowest level to the sky, except as permitted in this
chapter. The YARD extends along the lot line at right angles to the lot line to
a depth or width specified in the setback regulations for the zoning district
in which the lot is located. For earth-sheltered buildings and buildings
covered with earth berms, the line of the building is measured from the
exterior surface of the building regardless of whether it is above or below
grade.
   YARD, FRONT. The yard extending between side lot lines across the front of a
lot from the principal structure to the street right-of-way.
   YARD, REAR. A yard extending between the side yard lines across the rear of
the lot from the principal structure to the rear lot line.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard extending between the principal structure and the side of
lot lines and the front and rear yards.
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The person charged with enforcement of this chapter.
   ZONING DISTRICT. An area within which the regulations and requirements
governing use are uniform.
(Prior Code, § 515.01) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 2010-01, passed 2-
17-2010; Ord. 2011-04, passed 4-20-2011; Ord. 2013-03, passed 10-16-2013; Ord.
2015-04, passed 8-19-2015; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-20-2021; Ord. 20231115-02,
passed 11-15-2023; Ord. 20231115-03, passed 11-15-2023)
§ 163.005 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   (A)   General standards. The following regulations and requirements apply to
off-street parking and loading facilities in all zoning districts in the city.
      (1)   Reduction of existing off-street parking space or lot area. Off-
street parking spaces and loading spaces or parking lot areas existing upon the
effective date of this section may not be reduced in number or size unless the
number exceeds the requirements set forth herein for a similar new use.
      (2)   Suburban Residential District. Within the Suburban Residential
District, off-street parking and any related drives within a parking area may
not be located nearer than 20 feet to a street or highway right-of-way.
      (3)   Historic Downtown District. The off-street parking standards do not
apply to properties located in the Historic Downtown District.
      (4)   Change of use or occupancy of land. A change of use or occupancy of
land already dedicated to a parking area, parking spaces or loading spaces may
not be made, nor may any sale of land, division or subdivision of land be made
which reduces area necessary for parking, parking stalls or parking
requirements below the minimum prescribed by this section.
      (5)   Change of use or occupancy of buildings. A change of use or
occupancy of a building or buildings, including additions thereto, requiring
more parking area is not permitted until there is furnished additional parking
spaces required by this section.
      (6)   Computation of spaces required. In computing the number of parking
or loading spaces required, the following rules apply:
         (a)   Floor space means the gross floor area of the specific use;
         (b)   Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required will
be construed to be the nearest whole number; and
         (c)   The parking space requirement for a use not specifically
mentioned herein is the same as required for a similar use as determined by the
Zoning Administrator.
      (7)   Maintenance. The lessee and the owner of the principal use, uses or
buildings must maintain in a neat and adequate manner, the parking space,
accessways, striping, landscaping and required screening.
   (B)   Design of off-street parking and loading space. Off-street parking and
loading spaces must be designed as follows.
      (1)   Generally. Off-street parking areas must be so designed that
vehicles are parked in an orderly fashion. Site plans must show proposed
parking spaces, driveways, loading areas, landscaping and screening, and the
parking area must conform to such site plans. Aisle entrances must be kept
clear by appropriate design.
      (2)   Size. A parking space may not be less than nine feet wide and 20
feet in length and will in no case be less than 180 square feet in area. Access
aisles must serve each space adequately.
      (3)   Surfacing.
         (a)   Areas intended to be utilized for parking space and driveways
must be surfaced with materials suitable to control dust and drainage.
         (b)   Off-street parking areas, except for single-family residences,
must be paved with concrete or plant mixed bituminous surface.
         (c)   In addition to the minimum number of required parking spaces, 3%
of the gross parking area lying more than 20 feet from the street right-of-way
must be improved and maintained with landscaping of grass and evergreens or
other approved plants or ornamental materials.
      (4)   Striping. Except for single-, two-family and townhouses, parking
stalls must be marked with white painted lines not less four inches wide.
      (5)   Lighting. Lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area
must be arranged to reflect the light away from adjoining property, abutting
the residential uses and public rights-of-way.
      (6)   Curbing and landscaping. Except for single-, two-family and
townhouses, open off-street parking must have a perimeter curb barrier around
the entire parking lot, and the curb barrier may not be closer than five feet
to any lot line. Grass, plantings or surfacing material must be provided in
areas bordering the parking area.
      (7)   Location. Required parking spaces must be off-street and located on
the same lot as the building or use to be served. Required off-street parking
spaces may be provided within the principal building for which they are
required. Except in the case of single-, two-family and townhouses, parking
areas requiring backing into a public street are prohibited.
      (8)   Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). ADA standards must be
followed where required.
   (C)   Schedule of off-street parking requirements.
Use Spaces Required
Use                                                            Spaces Required
                                                               2 per dwelling
                                                               unit (1 per
Apartments and townhouses                                      dwelling unit
                                                               for elderly/
                                                               senior apartment
                                                               buildings)
                                                               1 per 150 square
Banks                                                          feet of floor
                                                               area
Barber shops and beauty parlors                                2, plus 1.5 per
                                                               chair
                                                               5 per lane, in
                                                               addition to
Bowling alleys                                                 spaces required
                                                               for restaurant
                                                               facilities
                                                               0.4 times
                                                               maximum lawful
Congregate living facilities                                   number of
                                                               occupants, plus
                                                               1 space for each
                                                               employee
                                                               0.10 times floor
Fast food take-out establishments and drive-in restaurants     area in square
                                                               feet in
                                                               restaurants
                                                               1 per 50 square
Funeral homes                                                  feet of floor
                                                               area
Furniture, appliance, household equipment, area carpet and     1 per 800 square
hardware stores, repair, contractor’s showrooms, museums and feet of floor
galleries
                                                               1 per pump, in
                                                               addition to
                                                               stopping places
                                                               adjacent to
                                                               pumps and in
Gas stations                                                   addition to
                                                               spaces required
                                                               for retail
                                                               stores and
                                                               service
                                                               establishments
                                                               1.2 per room in
                                                               addition to
Hotels/motels/bed and breakfast facilities                     spaces required
                                                               for restaurant
                                                               facilities
Laundromats                                                    0.5 per machine
                                                               0.5 per dwelling
                                                               unit and 1 for
Long-term care/assisted living facilities                      each employee on
                                                               the largest
                                                               shift
                                                               1 per 100 square
                                                               feet of waiting
Medical and dental offices                                     room area and 1
                                                               per doctor or
                                                               dentist employee
Places of assembly                                             0.35 times the
                                                               seating capacity
                                                               1.2 per 100
Restaurants (except drive-ins)                                 square feet of
                                                               floor area
Single- and two-family dwellings                               2 per dwelling
                                                               unit
                                                               1 per 500 square
Warehouses                                                     feet of floor
                                                               area
For uses not specifically listed above, the requirements listed below are
applicable.
                                                               1 per 300 square
   Offices                                                  feet of floor
                                                               space
                                                               0.75 times
                                                               maximum number
   Other commercial and industrial uses                     of employees on
                                                               premises at one
                                                               time
                                                               1 per 150 square
                                                               feet of floor
   Retail stores and service establishments                 space and
                                                               outdoor sales
                                                               space
NOTES TO TABLE:
When calculation in accordance with the foregoing list results in requiring a
fractional space, fraction less than is disregarded and fraction of 1/2 or more
requires 1 space.
 
(Ord. 20210721-01, passed 7-21-2021) Penalty, see §
163.999
§ 163.006 FENCES.
   (A)   General. It is unlawful for any person to erect, place or relocate a
fence in the city except in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Permit required. All fences require a fence permit and payment of fees
as described in §
36.02 of this code of ordinances. A permit is not required for the maintenance
of a fence.
   (C)   Safety hazards. Fences shall not be erected where they create a visual
safety hazard in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator.
   (D)   Location and orientation.
      (1)   Fences shall sit on the property of the property owner installing
the fence; fences may abut, but not sit directly on side lot lines of adjacent
parcels.
      (2)   The “good side” of the fence shall face abutting properties,
meaning that the posts shall face in toward the property on which the fence
sits and the finished face of the fence shall face abutting properties. If the
fence is within two feet of a property line, the adjoining property owner
abutting the fence is allowed to finish the side of the fence facing his or her
property.
   (E)   Maintenance. Fences shall be maintained to retain their aesthetic
quality, screening abilities and function. Missing boards, rusting wire and
posts and peeling paint shall be taken care of at the owner’s expense as they
occur.
   (F)   District standards: city fence standards. Refer to the following
table.
                               Setback from Allowable Prohibited Height at
Zoning District Maximum Height ROW          Material  Features   Corner/Traffic
                                                                 Visibility
                                                                  Height at
Zoning       Maximum      Setback from Allowable    Prohibited    Corner/
District     Height       ROW          Material     Features      Traffic
                                                                  Visibility
                          10 feet**
                          Fences,                   Barbed or
                          walls, shrub              electrified   Max height of
                          plantings    Metal, wood, (except where 2.5 feet
Highway      84 inches (7 less than    concrete,    specific      within 14
Mixed Use    feet)*       2.5 feet in  brick, vinyl approval has  feet of the
                          height are   or smooth    been given by corner (see
                          allowed up   wire         the Planning  diagram
                          to the                    Commission)   below)
                          property
                          line
                          10 feet**
                          Fences,                   Barbed or
                          walls, shrub              electrified   Max height of
                          plantings    Metal, wood, (except where 2.5 feet
Historic     72 inches (6 less than    concrete,    specific      within 14
Downtown     feet)*       2.5 feet in  brick, vinyl approval has  feet of the
                          height are   or smooth    been given by corner (see
                          allowed up   wire         the Planning  diagram
                          to the                    Commission)   below)
                          property
                          line
                          10 feet**
                          Fences,                   Barbed or
                          walls, shrub              electrified   Max height of
                          plantings    Metal, wood, (except where 2.5 feet
             96 inches (8 less than    concrete,    specific      within 14
Industrial   feet)*       2.5 feet in  brick,       approval has  feet of the
                          height are   vinyl, or    been given by corner (see
                          allowed up   smooth wire  the Planning  diagram
                          to the                    Commission)   below)
                          property
                          line
                          10 feet**
                          Fences,                   Barbed or
                          walls, shrub              electrified   Max height of
Professional              plantings    Metal, wood, (except where 2.5 feet
Light/       96 inches (8 less than    concrete,    specific      within 14
Industrial   feet)*       2.5 feet in  brick, vinyl approval has  feet of the
Business                  height are   or smooth    been given by corner (see
Park                      allowed up   wire         the Planning  diagram
                          to the                    Commission)   below)
                          property
                          line
                          10 feet**
                          Fences,                   Barbed or
                          walls, shrub              electrified   Max height of
Prospective               plantings    Metal, wood, (except where 2.5 feet
Interchange  96 inches (8 less than    concrete,    specific      within 14
Development  feet)*       2.5 feet in  brick, vinyl approval has  feet of the
District                  height are   or smooth    been given by corner (see
                          allowed up   wire         the Planning  diagram
                          to the                    Commission)   below)
                          property
                          line
                          10 feet**
                          Fences,                   Barbed or
                          walls, shrub              electrified   Max height of
                          plantings    Metal, wood, (except where 2.5 feet
Public       72 inches (6 less than    concrete,    specific      within 14
Recreation/  feet)*       2.5 feet in  brick,       approval has  feet of the
Open Space                height are   vinyl, or    been given by corner (see
                          allowed up   smooth wire  the Planning  diagram
                          to the                    Commission)   below)
                          property
                          line
                          10 feet**
                          Fences,                   Barbed or
                          walls, shrub              electrified   Max height of
                          plantings    Metal, wood, (except where 2.5 feet
Suburban     72 inches (6 less than    concrete,    specific      within 14
Residential  feet)*       2.5 feet in  brick, vinyl approval has  feet of the
                          height are   or smooth    been given by corner (see
                          allowed up   wire         the Planning  diagram
                          to the                    Commission)   below)
                          property
                          line
             Front yard:
             48 inches (4 10 feet**
             feet)                                  Barbed or
                          Fences,                   electrified   Max height of
                          walls, shrub Metal, wood, (except where 2.5 feet
Traditional               plantings    concrete,    specific      within 14
Residential  Side and     less than    brick, vinyl approval has  feet of the
             rear yard:   2.5 feet in  or smooth    been given by corner (see
             72 inches (6 height are   wire         the Planning  diagram
             feet)*       allowed up                Commission)   below)
                          to the
                          property
                          line
NOTES TO TABLE:
*Maximum height may be increased with approval by the Planning Commission and/
or the relevant road authority.
 
**Setback from ROW may be modified by the Planning Commission on a case-by-case
basis in circumstances where the ROW extends deep into a property (for example,
sometimes the MN DOT ROW will extend excessively onto what would normally be
considered a property owner’s yard).
 
   (G)   Traffic visibility diagram.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c4982d58f6c8f0b169be5b94d2c02e8c4d2cfd59/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1922.png]
(Ord. 20210421-03, passed 4-21-2021) Penalty, see §
163.999
§ 163.007 ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   The following architectural requirements shall apply to all
residential structures in the city.
      (1)   All manufactured dwellings must comply with all zoning regulations
for the zone in which they are located and they must be built and installed in
accordance with M.S. §§ 327.31 to 327.35, as they may be amended from time to
time.
      (2)   A building permit and any other required permit must be obtained.
      (3)   All dwellings must be placed on permanent foundations that comply
with Uniform Building Code and are solid for the complete circumference of the
dwelling.
      (4)   Roof lines of all dwellings must have at least a five-twelfths’ (5/
12) pitch.
      (5)   The side of the structure facing the street must include a
functional front entry and window.
      (6)   The minimum width of all dwellings must be at least 24 feet
measured from face of exterior wall across the narrowest portion.
      (7)   All dwellings must be constructed of conventional exterior dwelling
type material. Sheet metal siding or sheet metal roofs are prohibited.
      (8)   All dwellings must be built according to the Uniform Building Code.
      (9)   All dwellings being moved into the city shall meet all applicable
building codes and conform to the land use ordinance building standards as
described in the city’s Zoning Code as well as the requirements of
Chapter 118 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   This section does not apply to dwellings placed in a licensed
manufactured home park or trailer park.
(Ord. 20210317-03, passed 3-17-2021) Penalty, see §
163.999
§ 163.008 GENERAL DISTRICT PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Establishment of districts. The following zoning districts are
established and continued:
      (1)   Traditional Residential;
      (2)   Suburban Residential;
      (3)   Historic Downtown;
      (4)   Highway Mixed Use;
      (5)   Prospective Interchange Development;
      (6)   Professional/Light Industrial;
      (7)   Business Park;
      (8)   Industrial;
      (9)   Public Recreation/Open Space;
      (10)   Kettle River Wild and Scenic Floodplain;
      (11)   General Shoreland;
      (12)   Commercial Planned Unit Development;
      (13)   Residential Planned Unit Development;
      (14)   Recreational Vehicle Park;
      (15)   Manufactured Home Park; and
      (16)   Heliport.
   (B)   Map.
      (1)   The location and boundaries of the districts established by this
section are set forth on the zoning map entitled “Zoning Map of Sandstone”. The
zoning map is on file with the Zoning Administrator. The zoning map and the
notations, references and other information shown on the map have the same
force and effect as if fully set forth herein and are made a part of this
section by reference.
      (2)   If a use is not specifically permitted in a zoning district, the
use is prohibited. The City Council or the Planning Commission, as the case may
be, on its own initiative or upon request of the property owner, may conduct a
study to determine if the proposed use is acceptable and if so what zoning
district would be most appropriate and to determine conditions and standards
relating to development of the use.
      (3)   The City Council, Planning Commission or property owner, upon
completion of the study, may, if appropriate, initiate an amendment to this
section to provide for the use under consideration.
   (C)   Annexation; detachment. If changes in the city limits remove land from
the city, district boundaries are construed as moving with the city limits. If
land is annexed to the city, the land is designated by the comprehensive plan
of the city.
   (D)   Zoning district boundaries.
      (1)   Boundaries indicated approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways, alleys or railroad lines are to be construed as following
those center lines.
      (2)   Boundaries indicated approximately following platted lot lines are
to be construed as following those lot lines.
      (3)   Boundaries indicated as following shorelines are to be construed
following those shorelines, and if the shoreline is changed, are to be
construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries indicated
approximately following the center lines of streams, rivers, lakes or other
bodies of water are to be constructed as following those center lines.
      (4)   Boundaries indicated approximately following the city limits are to
be construed as following the city limits.
      (5)   Where a district boundary line divides a lot that was in a single
ownership on the effective date of this section, the extension of the
regulations for either portion of the lot beyond the district line into the
remaining portion of the lot may be interpreted by the Planning Commission upon
request of the owner.
   (E)   District regulations. Except as otherwise provided, the regulations of
this section within each district are minimum regulations and apply uniformly
to each class or kind of structure or land.
      (1)   Buildings, structures or land may not be used or occupied, and a
building structure or part thereof may not be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, except in conformity with the
regulations for the district in which it is located.
      (2)   A building or other structure may not be erected or altered to
exceed the height or bulk, to accommodate or house a greater number of
families, to occupy a greater percentage of lot area, to have narrower or
smaller rear yard, front yard, side yard or other open spaces than herein
required; or in any other manner contrary to the provision of this section.
      (3)   A yard or lot existing on the effective date of this section may
not be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements of this
section.
(Ord. passed - -2007)
§ 163.009 NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES.
   (A)   (1)   The purpose of this section is to provide for the regulation of
non-conforming buildings, structures and uses and to specify those
requirements, circumstances and conditions under which non-conforming
buildings, structures and uses will be operated and maintained. This section
establishes separate districts, each of which is an appropriate area for the
location of uses that are permitted in that district.
      (2)   It is necessary and consistent with the establishment of these
districts that non-conforming buildings, structures and uses not be permitted
to continue without restriction. It is the intent of this section that all non-
conforming uses are eventually brought into conformity.
   (B)   A non-conforming structure or use lawfully existing on the effective
date of this section may not be enlarged, but may be continued at the size and
in the manner of operation existing on that date, except as otherwise specified
in this section.
   (C)   Nothing in this section prevents the placing of a structure in safe
condition when the structure is declared unsafe by the Building Official
providing the necessary repairs may not constitute more than 50% of fair market
value of the structure. The City Assessor determines the value.
   (D)   A non-conforming building, structure or use may not be moved to
another lot or to any other part of the parcel of land upon which the same was
constructed or was conducted on the effective date of this section unless the
movement brings the non-conformance into compliance with the requirements of
this section.
   (E)   If a lawful non-conforming use of any structure or land in any
district has been changed to a conforming use, it may not thereafter be changed
to any non-conforming use.
   (F)   Lawful non-conforming use of a structure or parcel of land may be
changed to lessen the non-conformity of use. Once a non-conforming structure or
parcel of land has been changed, it may not thereafter be so altered to
increase the non-conformity.
   (G)   If a non-conforming building, structure or use is destroyed to the
extent of more than 50% of its fair market value, as determined by the City
Assessor, then without further action by the City Council, the building and the
land on which the building was located or maintained is, from and after the
date of the destruction, subject to all the regulations specified by this
section for the district in which such land the buildings are located. A
building that is damaged to an extent of less than 50% of its value may be
restored to its former condition. The Building Official makes the estimate of
the extent of damage or destruction.
   (H)   If a lawful non-conforming use of a structure or land is discontinued
for a period of six months, future use of the structure or lands must conform
to the provisions of this section.
   (I)   Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing or
related to a lawful non-conforming use is permitted, including necessary non-
structural repairs and incidental alterations that do not physically extend or
intensify the non-conforming use.
   (J)   Alterations may be made to a building containing lawful non-conforming
residential units when the alterations will improve the livability thereof;
provided they will not increase the number of dwelling units or size or volume
of the building.
   (K)   A proposed structure that will, under this section, become non-
conforming, but for which a building permit has been lawfully granted prior to
the effective date of this section, may be completed in accordance with the
approved plans; provided construction is started within 60 days of the
effective date of this code, is not abandoned for a period of more than 120
days and continues to completion within two years. The structure and use will
thereafter be a legally nonconforming structure and use.
(Ord. passed - -2007)
TRADITIONAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 163.020 PURPOSE.
   This designation strongly reflects the current pattern of residential use in
the city. The district primarily includes single-family detached units, but
also allows for single-family attached dwellings and multiple-family housing.
This core residential area also supports institutional and public uses.
Densities of four to six dwelling units per acre are common and anticipated to
continue into future development of these lands. In some areas, it may be
appropriate to develop multi-family housing at densities greater than six units
per acre. Some portions of this district may be appropriate for lot splits,
subdivision redevelopment or infill development. There are some areas of the
residential district where limited commercial uses such as small retail
(“corner stores”) or offices are appropriate with special use permits.
(Prior Code, § 515.11) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021)
§ 163.021 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Single-family residential;
   (B)   Two-family residential;
   (C)   Essential services; and
   (D)   State-licensed residential facilities, housing with services
establishments serving six or fewer persons, licensed day care facilities
serving 12 or fewer persons, and group family day care facilities licensed to
serve 14 or fewer children, all as defined and permitted by M.S. § 462.357,
subd. 7, as it may be amended from time to time, are considered a single-family
residential use.
(Prior Code, § 515.11) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 2011-01, passed 2-
16-2011; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-20-2021; Ord. 20250219-01, passed 2-19-2025)
§ 163.022 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   (A)   Private garages, parking spaces and carports for licensed and
operating passenger cars and trucks, not to exceed a gross vehicle weight of
12,000 pounds, as regulated by this chapter. For the purpose of this chapter,
the GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT is defined as the weight according to the
manufacturer’s specifications or the weight for which the vehicle is licensed,
whichever is less. Private garages are intended for use to store the private
passenger vehicles of the family or families resident upon the premises, and in
which no business service or industry is carried on.
      (1)   The space can be rented to non-residents of the property for
private passenger vehicles or non-commercial vehicles, trailers or equipment if
sufficient off-street parking in full compliance with this chapter is provided
elsewhere on the property.
      (2)   The garage may not be used for the storage of more than one
commercial vehicle not exceeding 12,000 pounds gross vehicle weight and 22 feet
in length and eight feet in height owned or operated by a resident of the
dwelling unit. Truck tractors, semi-trailers, semi-tractors or tractor-trailers
may not be stored in residential districts;
   (B)   Non-commercial greenhouses and conservatories;
   (C)   Swimming pools, tennis courts and other recreational facilities which
are operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the
principal use and their guests;
   (D)   Tool houses, sheds and similar buildings for storage of domestic
supplies and non-commercial recreational equipment;
   (E)   Boarding or renting of rooms to not more than one person;
   (F)   Garage sales. The infrequent temporary display and sale of general
household goods, used clothing, appliances and other personal property;
provided, the exchange or sale of merchandise is conducted within the principal
structure or an accessory structure. Items for sale may not include personal
property purchased for the purpose of resale. The number of garage sales on an
individual’s premises may not exceed four per year, and each sale is limited to
a three-day duration, with hours of operation between 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
All garage sales shall end at 10:00 p.m.;
   (G)   Rooftop solar; and
   (H)   Ground-mount solar.
(Prior Code, § 515.11) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 2011-01, passed 2-
16-2011; Ord. 2013-03, passed 10-16-2013; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-20-2021)
§ 163.023 INTERIM USES.
   The following uses may be permitted upon the issuance of an interim use
permit:
   (A)   Home occupation, Type 1;
   (B)   Home occupation, Type 2;
   (C)   Home occupation, Type 3;
   (D)   Home occupation, Type 4;
   (E)   Vacation rentals; and
   (F)   Small engine and related equipment repair; non-motor fuel repair
shops, including appliances, computers and the like as an accessory use
(secondary to the residential use).
(Prior Code, § 515.11) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 2011-01, passed 2-
16-2011; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-20-2021; Ord. 20250219-01, passed 2-19-2025)
§ 163.024 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted upon the issuance of a conditional use
permit:
   (A)   Parks, playgrounds and other recreational uses;
   (B)   Hospitals, nursing homes, assisted living facilities and associated
medical facilities which are accessory to and located in close proximity to the
facilities;
   (C)   Places of assembly;
   (D)   Educational and cultural facilities;
   (E)   Bed and breakfast services;
   (F)   Towers and antennas (see
Chapter 159 of this code of ordinances);
   (G)   Three- and four-family dwellings;
   (H)   State-licensed residential facilities serving from seven to 16 persons
or licensed day care facilities serving from 13 through 16 persons shall be
considered a permitted multi-family residential use as defined and permitted by
M.S. § 462.357, subd. 8, as it may be amended from time to time. A conditional
use permit may be required; provided that, no conditions shall be imposed which
are more restrictive than those imposed on other conditional uses of
residential properties, unless necessary to protect the health and safety of
the residents of the facility;
   (I)   Planned unit development (PUD);
   (J)   Non-motor fuel repair shops, including appliances, computers and the
like as a home occupation;
   (K)   Small retail “corner” stores (such as, small grocery, bakery, barber
shop, photography studio, animal grooming);
   (L)   Professional offices (such as, dental, clinic, chiropractors,
architects, artist’s studio); and
   (M)   Manufactured home park (see §§
163.205 through
163.211 of this code of ordinances).
   (N)   Sacred settlements of micro units on religious property.
      (1)   For the purposes of this section, RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION includes a
church, synagogue, mosque, or religious organization organized under M.S.
Chapter 315, as may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   All requirements and minimum standards as provided by Minnesota
Statutes as they relate to micro units and restrictions for faith communities
that choose to establish a sacred settlement of micro units must be followed.
      (3)   The Planning Commission may consider additional conditions to
impose during the conditional-permit-application process.
   (O)   Multi-family residential (four units of more).
(Prior Code, § 515.11) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 2011-01, passed 2-
16-2011; Ord. 2015-04, passed 8-19-2015; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-20-2021; Ord.
20231115-01, passed 11-15-2023; Ord. 20231220-02, passed 12-20-2023)
§ 163.025 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Minimum parcel size:
      (1)   Single-family dwellings: 7,000 square feet;
      (2)   Two-family dwellings: 9,000 square feet; and
      (3)   Three- and four-family dwellings: 11,000 square feet.
   (B)   Minimum lot width:
      (1)   Single-family dwellings: 50 feet;
      (2)   Two-family dwellings: 80 feet; and
      (3)   All other uses: 100 feet.
   (C)   Setbacks:
      (1)   Front yard setback: 30 feet or in line with adjacent neighboring
residential structures, whichever is less;
      (2)   Rear yard setback:
         (a)   If facing the property line: 20 feet; and
         (b)   If parallel to the alley: ten feet.
      (3)   Side yard setback: ten feet.
   (D)   Maximum height of structure: 40 feet.
   (E)   Maximum impervious surface coverage: 35%.
   (F)   Minimum residential living space for single-family and two-family
residences: 900 square feet per unit.
   (G)   Foundations: buildings must be on permanent foundations.
   (H)   (1)   An impervious surface driveway shall be provided from the curb
line to the property line of the lot upon which a dwelling is to be placed or
constructed.
      (2)   The driveway may not be less than 12 feet in width.
   (I)   Accessory buildings and structures:
      (1)   Are not allowed in the front yard;
      (2)   Must not exceed the height of the principal building;
      (3)   Detached utility sheds or sheds attached to a principal structure
by a wall are permitted. If detached, the structures may not be located closer
than ten feet from the principal structure;
      (4)   A concrete slab or other suitable foundation is required;
      (5)   May not be constructed prior to or in lieu of the principal
building;
      (6)   Side yard setback: five feet, or from a designated setback on a
corner lot; and
      (7)   Rear yard setback: five feet, or from a designated setback on a
corner lot.
   (J)   Where allowed, standards for cannabis businesses are:
      (1)   A license or endorsement from the State of Minnesota Office of
Cannabis Management is required.
      (2)   Compliance with state license requirements shall be maintained at
all times.
      (3)   A cannabis business shall be located:
         (a)   At least 500 feet from any day care or residential treatment
facility as measured from property line to property line;
         (b)   At least 500 feet from any attraction within a public park that
is regularly used by minors, including a playground or athletic field, measured
from the property line of the cannabis business to the attraction; and
         (c)   At least 1,000 feet from any K-12 school as measured from the
property line to the property line.
(Prior Code, § 515.11) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021; Ord. 20250219-01, passed 2-19-2025; Ord. 20250618-01, passed 6-18-
2025)
§ 163.026 OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   No more than one temporary storage container may be stored in a side or rear
yard; provided that, the side yard storage shall not be adjacent to a street
and all setbacks are met. The container may be located on the property for a
period not to exceed six months per year, while storage is required for
remodeling or other activities relating to the property.
(Prior Code, § 515.11) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021)
SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 163.040 PURPOSE.
    This district is characterized by a lack of available public infrastructure
(water, sewer and highways) and an established pattern of residential use.
Intended for future lots or parcels whose primary use is larger lot single-
family residential, with densities ranging from one unit per five acres to one
unit per ten acres. Secondary uses may include agricultural or hobby farms,
public or private open space, community schools, places of assembly or other
institutional uses, including those facilitating recreational events or
activities. This district serves as a transition between open/rural areas and
more intensive uses in closer proximity to major roadways.
(Prior Code, § 515.13) (Ord. 97-01B, passed 4-16-1997; Ord. 02-03, passed 10-
16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-20-2021; Ord. 20231115-03, passed 11-15-2023)
§ 163.041 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Single-family detached dwellings;
   (B)   Parks or outdoor recreational areas, paths and trails; and
   (C)   State-licensed residential facilities, housing with services
establishments serving six or fewer persons, licensed day care facilities
serving 12 or fewer persons, and group family day care facilities licensed to
serve 14 or fewer children, all as defined and permitted by M.S. § 462.357,
subd. 7, as it may be amended from time to time, are considered a single-family
residential use.
(Prior Code, § 515.13) (Ord. 97-01B, passed 4-16-1997; Ord. 02-03, passed 10-
16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-20-2021; Ord. 20250219-01, passed 2-19-2025)
§ 163.042 ACCESSORY USES.
   (A)   Private recreational facilities such as tennis courts or swimming
pools used by the resident owners and guests;
   (B)   Private garages and carports;
   (C)   Signs as regulated by Chapter 162 of this code of ordinances;
   (D)   Essential public service structures, such as, but not limited to,
sewer lift stations or water wells and storage tanks;
   (E)   Rooftop solar; and
   (F)   Ground-mount solar.
(Prior Code, § 515.13) (Ord. 97-01B, passed 4-16-1997; Ord. 02-03, passed 10-
16-2002; Ord. 2011-01, passed 2-16-2011; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-20-2021)
§ 163.043 INTERIM USES.
   The following uses may be permitted upon the issuance of an interim use
permit:
   (A)   Home occupation, Type 1;
   (B)   Home occupation, Type 2;
   (C)   Home occupation, Type 3; and
   (D)   Home occupation, Type 4.
(Prior Code, § 515.13) (Ord. 97-01B, passed 4-16-1997; Ord. 02-03, passed 10-
16-2002; Ord. 2011-01, passed 2-16-2011; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-20-2021; Ord.
20250219-01, passed 2-19-2025)
§ 163.044 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted upon the issuance of a conditional use
permit:
   (A)   Cemeteries;
   (B)   Public recreational, cultural or administrative facilities; such as,
but not limited to, golf courses, park buildings or libraries;
   (C)   Public schools or equivalent private and parochial schools;
   (D)   Places of assembly;
   (E)   Agricultural uses;
   (F)   Hobby farms;
   (G)   Planned unit developments (PUD);
   (H)    Towers for amateur radio operators and towers/antenna on places of
assembly, governmental buildings and schools (see
Chapter 159 of this code of ordinances);
   (I)   Manufactured home park (see §§
163.205 through
163.211 of this code of ordinances); and
   (J)   Solar garden.
   (K)   Sacred settlements of micro units on religious property.
      (1)   For the purposes of this section, RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION includes a
church, synagogue, mosque, or religious organization organized under M.S.
Chapter 315, as may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   All requirements and minimum standards as provided by Minnesota
Statutes as they relate to micro units and restrictions for faith communities
that choose to establish a sacred settlement of micro units must be followed.
      (3)   The Planning Commission may consider additional conditions to
impose during the conditional-use-permit-application process.
(Prior Code, § 515.13) (Ord. 97-01B, passed 4-16-1997; Ord. 02-03, passed 10-
16-2002; Ord. 2011-01, passed 2-16-2011; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-20-2021; Ord.
20231115-01, passed 11-15-2023; Ord. 20231115-03, passed 11-15-2023)
§ 163.045 YARDS ABUTTING PUBLIC STREET OR HIGHWAY RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   For purposes of this district, any yard that abuts any public street or
highway right-of-way must conform to the requirements for a front yard.
(Prior Code, § 515.13) (Ord. 97-01B, passed 4-16-1997; Ord. 02-03, passed 10-
16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-20-2021)
§ 163.046 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   The minimum lot size is five acres for residential sites without
public sewer. Non- residential sites except essential services, without a
public sewer require a minimum lot size of ten acres.
   (B)   (1)   Front yard setback is 40 feet.
      (2)   Rear yard setback is 30 feet.
      (3)   Side yard setback is 15 feet.
   (C)   Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
   (D)   Minimum lot depth: 240 feet.
   (E)   Maximum impervious surface coverage: 50%.
   (F)   Height regulations: no structure shall exceed 40 feet in height.
   (G)   Buildings must be on permanent foundations.
   (H)   (1)   An impervious surface driveway shall be provided from the curb
line to the property line of the lot upon which a dwelling is to be placed or
constructed.
      (2)   The driveway may not be less than 12 feet in width.
   (I)   Minimum residential living space: 900 square feet for single-family
use.
   (J)   Accessory buildings and structures:
      (1)   Are not allowed in the front yard;
      (2)   Must not exceed the height of the principal building;
      (3)   Detached utility sheds or sheds attached to a principal structure
by a wall are permitted. If detached, the structures may not be located closer
than ten feet from the principal structure;
      (4)   A concrete slab or other suitable foundation is required;
      (5)   May not be constructed prior to or in lieu of the principal
building;
      (6)   (a)   Side yard setback: five feet, or from a designated setback on
a corner lot; and
         (b)   Rear yard setback, or from a designated setback on a corner lot:
five feet.
   (K)   Sanitary sewage treatment systems (SSTS): all lots must have a minimum
of two soil treatment and dispersal areas that can support trenches, seepage
beds, mounds and at-grade systems as described in Minn. Rules parts 7080.2200
through 7080.2230 or site conditions described in part 7081.0270, subparts 3
through 7, at the time the plat or subdivision is approved. A cluster sanitary
sewage treatment system (SSTS) that has a common interest lot where a central
system is located shall meet this requirement by having the minimum of two soil
treatment and dispersal areas on the designated lot.
   (L)   Where allowed, standards for cannabis businesses are:
      (1)   A license or endorsement from the State of Minnesota Office of
Cannabis Management is required.
      (2)   Compliance with state license requirements shall be maintained at
all times.
      (3)   A cannabis business shall be located:
         (a)   At least 500 feet from any day care or residential treatment
facility as measured from property line to property line;
         (b)   At least 500 feet from any attraction within a public park that
is regularly used by minors, including a playground or athletic field, measured
from the property line of the cannabis business to the attraction; and
         (c)   At least 1,000 feet from any K-12 school as measured from the
property line to the property line.
(Prior Code, § 515.13) (Ord. 97-01B, passed 4-16-1997; Ord. 02-03, passed 10-
16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-20-2021; Ord. 20250219-01, passed 2-19-2025)
§ 163.047 OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Within the Suburban Residential District, the requirements hereof
apply with the following additional minimum requirements for parking related to
non-residential uses.
      (1)   Off-street parking and any related drives within a parking area may
not be located nearer to a street or highway right-of-way than 20 feet.
      (2)   The required minimum space between parking lots and street rights-
of-way or structures as regulated in §
163.005.
   (B)   No more than one temporary storage container may be stored in a side
or rear yard; provided that, the side yard storage shall not be adjacent to a
street and all setbacks are met. The container may be located on the property
for a period not to exceed six months per year, while storage is required for
remodeling or other activities relating to the property.
(Prior Code, § 515.13) (Ord. 97-01B, passed 4-16-1997; Ord. 02-03, passed 10-
16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-20-2021)
HISTORIC DOWNTOWN DISTRICT
§ 163.060 PURPOSE.
   This district is designed as a specialized district directed to serve
pedestrians in a compact central area of the city. This district allows high-
density shopping and business stressing the pedestrian and interaction of
people and businesses rather than being heavily oriented toward the use of the
automobile.
(Prior Code, § 515.15) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021)
§ 163.061 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Commercial businesses offering goods or services to the public,
including:
      (1)   Retail establishments such as groceries, bakery, department stores,
hardware stores, stores, clothing and furniture stores;
      (2)   Personal services such as laundry, barber, shoe repair and
photography studios;
      (3)   Eating establishments including restaurants, cafés, supper clubs;
      (4)   Professional services such as medical, dental, chiropractors,
architects and attorney offices;
      (5)   Non-motor fuel repair services such as jewelry, radio and
television repair shops;
      (6)   Banks, finance, insurance and real estate services; and
      (7)   Entertainment and amusement services such as theaters, bowling
alleys, art galleries and similar uses.
   (B)   Public and non-profit owned buildings such as post offices, government
buildings and similar uses;
   (C)   Private clubs;
   (D)   Home occupation, Type l;
   (E)   Home occupation, Type 2;
   (F)   Home occupation, Type 3;
   (G)   Essential services; and
   (H)   On- and off-sale liquor establishments.
(Prior Code, § 515.15) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021)
§ 163.062 ACCESSORY USES.
   (A)   (1)   Unheated buildings and structures for a use accessory to the
principal use, but such use or structure may not exceed 30% of the gross floor
space of the principal use and may not exceed the height of the principal
building.
      (2)   Accessory buildings shall be located to the rear of the principal
buildings, subject to the Building Code and the fire zone regulations, except
where prohibited by other provisions of this city code.
      (3)   Accessory buildings and structures may not be constructed prior to
or in lieu of the principal building;
   (B)   Off-street parking as regulated by this chapter, but not including
semi-trailer trucks;
   (C)   Off-street loading;
   (D)   Signs subject to regulations in Chapter 162 of this code of
ordinances; and
   (E)   Rooftop solar.
(Prior Code, § 515.15) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021)
§ 163.063 INTERIM USES.
   The following uses may be permitted upon the issuance of an interim use
permit: home occupation, Type 4.
(Prior Code, § 515.15) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021)
§ 163.064 CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   Apartments as an accessory use; provided, they are located above the
first floor, behind the storefront, in the basement, or other appropriate
configuration that does not detract from the appearance of the permitted use of
the property;
   (B)   Towers and antennas (see
Chapter 159 of this code of ordinances);
   (C)   Child care centers;
   (D)   Pawn shops;
   (E)   Places of assembly;
   (F)   Parks, playgrounds, public recreational, cultural or administrative
facilities, such as park buildings or libraries;
   (G)   Sacred settlements of micro units on religious property:
      (1)   For the purposes of this section, RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION includes a
church, synagogue, mosque, or religious organization organized under M.S.
Chapter 315, as may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   All requirements and minimum standards as provided by Minnesota
Statutes as they relate to micro units and restrictions for faith communities
that choose to establish a sacred settlement of micro units must be followed.
      (3)   The Planning Commission may consider additional conditions to
impose during the conditional-permit-application process.
   (H)   Cannabis retailer.
(Prior Code, § 515.15) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021; Ord. 20231115-01, passed 11-15-2023; Ord. 20240221-02, passed 2-21-
2024; Ord. 20250219-01, passed 2-19-2025)
§ 163.065 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Minimum lot size: no requirement.
   (B)   Front, side and rear yard requirements: a permitted or conditional use
including accessory uses in the Historic Downtown District must have a rear
yard of not less than ten feet when the use is abutting any platted alley, or
ten feet on any side facing a platted alley, which yard may be used only for
access to the use or for landscaping purposes.
   (C)   Where allowed, standards for cannabis businesses are:
      (1)   A license or endorsement from the State of Minnesota Office of
Cannabis Management is required.
      (2)   Compliance with state license requirements shall be maintained at
all times.
      (3)   A cannabis business shall be located:
         (a)   At least 500 feet from any day care or residential treatment
facility as measured from property line to property line;
         (b)   At least 500 feet from any attraction within a public park that
is regularly used by minors, including a playground or athletic field, measured
from the property line of the cannabis business to the attraction; and
         (c)   At least 1,000 feet from any K-12 school as measured from the
property line to the property line.
(Prior Code, § 515.15) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021; Ord. 20250219-01, passed 2-19-2025)
§ 163.066 OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   No more than one temporary storage container may be stored in a side or rear
yard; provided that, the side yard storage shall not be adjacent to a street
and all setbacks are met. The container may be located on the property for a
period not to exceed 30 days per year, while storage is required for remodeling
or other activities relating to the property.
(Prior Code, § 515.15) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021)
HIGHWAY MIXED USE DISTRICT
§ 163.080 PURPOSE.
   This district is established to accommodate the type of business oriented to
the traveling public and requires highway access. To minimize unmanageable
strip development, these districts allow the type of businesses that require
highway access and exposure.
(Prior Code, § 515.17) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 2007-01, passed 2-
7-2007; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-20-2021)
§ 163.081 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Farm implement dealers;
   (B)   Grocery stores and convenience stores;
   (C)   On- and off-sale liquor establishments;
   (D)   Drive-in restaurants and facilities;
   (E)   Eating establishments including restaurants, cafés, supper clubs;
   (F)   Auto sales and services;
   (G)   Auto body shops;
   (H)   Car wash facilities;
   (I)   Recreation equipment sales;
   (J)   Motels and hotels;
   (K)   Gas and/or service stations, convenience stores;
   (L)   Laundromats;
   (M)   Boat sales and repairs;
   (N)   Bait and sporting goods shops;
   (O)   Motorcycles sales and repair;
   (P)   Garden supplies and landscape nursery;
   (Q)   Lumber yards and hardware sales;
   (R)   Commercial recreation, including bowling alleys;
   (S)   Essential services;
   (T)   General retail and/or professional office space with a minimum square
footage of 1,500 square feet;
   (U)   Towers and antennas (see
Chapter 159 of this code of ordinances);
   (V)   Theaters;
   (W)   Offices for medical services such as medical, dental, chiropractic or
veterinary;
   (X)   Custom shops for making articles or products sold at retail on the
premises;
   (Y)   General storage facilities;
   (Z)   Service commercial facilities, which are multi-use in nature;
   (AA)   Home occupation, Type 1;
   (BB)   Home occupation, Type 2;
   (CC)   Home occupation, Type 3; and
   (DD)   Home occupation, Type 4.
(Prior Code, § 515.17) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 2007-01, passed 2-
7-2007; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-20-2021)
§ 163.082 INTERIM USES.
   The following uses may be permitted upon the issuance of an interim use
permit:
   (A)   Greenhouses and nurseries;
   (B)   Retail and wholesale sales;
   (C)   Light industrial uses;
   (D)   Wholesale uses; and
   (E)   Parking of semi-trailer trucks if directly related to the principal
use.
(Prior Code, § 515.17) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 2007-01, passed 2-
7-2007; Ord. 2011-01, passed 2-16-2011; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-20-2021)
§ 163.083 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted upon the issuance of a conditional use
permit:
   (A)   Multi-family residential apartments (four units or more);
   (B)   Commercial planned unit developments (PUD) (see §§
163.245 through
163.250 of this chapter);
   (C)   Adult establishments, as defined, permitted and regulated by
Chapter 115 of this code of ordinances;
   (D)   Public schools or equivalent private and parochial schools;
   (E)   Parks, playgrounds, public recreational, cultural or administrative
facilities, such as park buildings or libraries;
   (F)   Parking garages/ramps;
   (G)   All other similar commercial and retail uses that are not listed as
permitted or conditional uses;
   (H)   Apartments as an accessory use; provided, they are located above the
first floor, behind the storefront, in the basement, or other appropriate
configuration that does not detract from the appearance of the permitted use of
the property; and
   (I)   Cannabis retailer.
(Prior Code, § 515.17) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 2007-01, passed 2-
7-2007; Ord. 2011-01, passed 2-16-2011; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-20-2021; Ord.
20210616-01, passed 6-16-2021; Ord. 20240221-01, passed 2-21-2024; Ord.
20250219-01, passed 2-19-2025)
§ 163.084 ACCESSORY USES.
   (A)   Unheated buildings and structures for a use accessory to the principal
use, but the use or structure may not exceed 30% of the gross floor space of
the principal use and may not exceed the height of the principal building.
Accessory buildings shall be located to the rear of the principal buildings,
subject to the Building Code and the fire zone regulations, except where
prohibited by other provisions of city code. Accessory buildings and structures
may not be constructed prior to or in lieu of the principal building;
   (B)   Off-street parking as regulated by this chapter, but not including
semi-trailer trucks;
   (C)   Off-street loading;
   (D)   Signs subject to regulations in
Chapter 162 of this code of ordinances;
   (E)   Rooftop solar; and
   (F)   Ground-mount solar.
(Prior Code, § 515.17) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 2007-01, passed 2-
7-2007; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-20-2021)
§ 163.085 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Minimum parcel size. With the exception of a lot that is being
exclusively used for essential services, a lot in the Highway Mixed Use
District must have a width of not less than 100 feet, and must contain an area
of not less than 15,000 square feet.
   (B)   Other setback requirements. With the exception of structures on a lot
that is being exclusively used for essential services, structures must be a
minimum ten feet distance from any side yard, rear yard or alley.
   (C)   Lot access. With the exception of a lot that is being exclusively used
for essential services, access to a lot must be from an approved frontage or
secondary street. An impervious surface driveway shall be provided from the
curb line to the property line of the lot upon which a structure is to be
placed or constructed. The driveway may not be less than 12 feet in width.
   (D)   Minimum transitional yard requirements. With the exception of a lot
that is being exclusively used for essential services, for each front, side or
rear yard in any Highway Mixed Use District abutting, or abutting except for an
intervening alley, a residential district, there must be provided heavily
landscaped screening of 80%. Percentages shall be determined by amount of
structure that can be seen during leaf-on conditions.
   (E)   Maximum ground coverage.
      (1)   With the exception of lots being used exclusively for essential
services, the sum total of the ground area covered by all structures in any
Highway Mixed Use District including accessory structures, constituting a
permitted or conditional use shall not exceed 35% of the lot.
      (2)   Impervious coverage may be increased by 20% if the following is
provided:
         (a)   A storm water retention plan showing containment of the five-
year, 24-hour storm event on the parcel; or
         (b)   Elimination of direct run-off of storm water to adjacent water
bodies, including wetlands and adjacent parcels through the use of berms or
other permanent means; or
         (c)   Where municipal storm water is available.
   (F)   Where allowed, standards for cannabis businesses are:
      (1)   A license or endorsement from the State of Minnesota Office of
Cannabis Management is required.
      (2)   Compliance with state license requirements shall be maintained at
all times.
      (3)   A cannabis business shall be located:
         (a)   At least 500 feet from any day care or residential treatment
facility as measured from property line to property line;
         (b)   At least 500 feet from any attraction within a public park that
is regularly used by minors, including a playground or athletic field, measured
from the property line of the cannabis business to the attraction; and
         (c)   At least 1,000 feet from any K-12 school as measured from the
property line to the property line.
(Prior Code, § 515.17) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 2007-01, passed 2-
7-2007; Ord. 2011-04, passed 4-20-2011; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-20-2021; Ord.
20250219-01, passed 2-19-2025)
PROSPECTIVE INTERCHANGE DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
§ 163.100 PURPOSE.
   (A)   This district is established to manage development of the I-35/Highway
23 Freeway Interchange. This area is unique within the city, and demands
management specific to the problems and opportunities that are present.
   (B)   Uses within this district are intended to serve the traveling public,
the city and region entering this district by using all forms of transit on
roads and trails through this interchange.
(Prior Code, § 515.19) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021)
§ 163.101 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   On- and off-sale liquor establishments;
   (B)   Eating establishments, including restaurants, cafés, supper clubs;
   (C)   General retail space with a minimum square footage of 10,000 square
feet;
   (D)   Professional office space with a minimum square footage of 10,000
square feet; and
   (E)   Gas station and/or convenience stores.
(Prior Code, § 515.19) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021; Ord. 20250219-01, passed 2-19-2025)
§ 163.102 ACCESSORY USES.
   (A)   Parking lots;
   (B)   Unheated buildings and structures (including temporary storage
containers) for a use accessory to the principal use. Accessory buildings and
structures may not exceed the height of the principal building. Accessory
buildings shall be located to the rear of the principal buildings, subject to
the Building Code and the fire zone regulations except where prohibited by
other provisions of city code. Accessory buildings and structures may not be
constructed prior to or in lieu of the principal building;
   (C)   Off-street parking as regulated by this chapter (not including semi-
trailer trucks);
   (D)   Parking of semi-trailer trucks if directly related to the principal
use;
   (E)   Off-street loading;
   (F)   Signs subject to regulations in
Chapter 162 of this code of ordinances;
   (G)   Rooftop solar;
   (H)   Ground-mount solar; and
   (I)   Solar garden.
(Prior Code, § 515.19) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021)
§ 163.103 INTERIM USES.
   The following uses may be permitted upon the issuance of an interim use
permit:
   (A)   Seasonal produce stands;
   (B)   (1)   Entertainment/recreational facilities including go-kart tracks,
water parks, miniature golf courses, amusement parks and concert facilities.
      (2)   In addition to those conditions and submissions required by this
chapter for interim uses, applicants for this type of use are required to
submit the following information for approval by the city:
         (a)   An operations plan which addresses security, sanitation, trash
removal, noise, crowd control and traffic. The operations plan must include a
cost breakdown of all operations as well as an explanation of how these items
will be financed;
         (b)   Plans for any special events (must be submitted for approval at
least 30 days prior to the special event);
         (c)   Landscaping and screening plans;
         (d)   Mitigation plans for noise and parking; and
         (e)   A listing of specific other activities that would be allowed in
conjunction with the entertainment or recreational activity, including, but not
limited to, special rules for on-site RV and tent camping, fireworks and the
like.
   (C)   Home occupation, Type 1;
   (D)   Home occupation, Type 2;
   (E)   Home occupation, Type 3; and
   (F)   Home occupation, Type 4.
(Prior Code, § 515.19) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021; Ord. 20250219-01, passed 2-19-2025)
§ 163.104 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted upon the issuance of a conditional use
permit:
   (A)   Recreational vehicle and equipment sales;
   (B)   Motorcycle sales and repair;
   (C)   New and used car sales;
   (D)   Hotels and motels;
   (E)   Recreational vehicle parks (see §§
163.305 through
163.314 of this chapter);
   (F)   Cold storage facilities;
   (G)   Truck stops;
   (H)   Commercial planned unit development (see §§
163.245 through
163.250 of this chapter);
   (I)   Towers and antennas (see
Chapter 159 of this code of ordinances);
   (J)   Essential services;
   (K)   Parks, playgrounds, public recreational, cultural or administrative
facilities, such as park buildings or libraries;
   (L)   Cannabis retailer; and
   (M)   Cannabis wholesaler.
(Prior Code, § 515.19) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021; Ord. 20250219-01, passed 2-19-2025)
§ 163.105 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Minimum lot size. With the exception of a lot that is being
exclusively used for essential services, a lot in the Prospective Interchange
Development District must have a width of not less than 100 feet, and must
contain an area of not less than 15,000 square feet.
   (B)   Other setback requirements. With the exception of structures on a lot
that is being exclusively used for essential services, structures must be a
minimum ten feet distance from any side yard, rear yard or alley.
   (C)   Lot access. With the exception of a lot that is being exclusively used
for essential services, access to a lot must be from an approved frontage or
secondary street. An impervious surface driveway shall be provided from the
curb line to the property line of the lot upon which a structure is to be
placed or constructed. The driveway may not be less than 12 feet in width.
   (D)   Minimum transitional yard requirements. With the exception of a lot
that is being exclusively used for essential services for each front, side or
rear yard in any Prospective Interchange Development District abutting, or
abutting except for an intervening alley, a residential district, there must be
provided heavily landscaped screening of 80%. Percentages shall be determined
by amount of structure that can be seen during leaf-on conditions.
   (E)   Storm water/drainage. A storm water management plan must be presented
and approved in accordance with §§
158.25 through
158.35 of this code of ordinances.
   (F)   Where allowed, standards for cannabis businesses are:
      (1)   A license or endorsement from the State of Minnesota Office of
Cannabis Management is required.
      (2)   Compliance with state license requirements shall be maintained at
all times.
      (3)   A cannabis business shall be located:
         (a)   At least 500 feet from any day care or residential treatment
facility as measured from property line to property line;
         (b)   At least 500 feet from any attraction within a public park that
is regularly used by minors, including a playground or athletic field, measured
from the property line of the cannabis business to the attraction; and
         (c)   At least 1,000 feet from any K-12 school as measured from the
property line to the property line.
(Prior Code, § 515.19) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021; Ord. 20250219-01, passed 2-19-2025)
§ 163.106 OTHER STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Preliminary building and site development plan. Prior to issuance of
any building permit or other approvals for property in the Prospective
Interchange Development District, the applicant shall submit to the city: a
preliminary building and site development plan and a written impact analysis
that evaluates the following factors:
      (1)   The proposed use will not create an excessive burden on existing
parks, schools, streets and other public facilities that serve or are proposed
to serve the area;
      (2)   The proposed use will be sufficiently compatible or separated by
distance or screened from adjacent residentially zoned or used land so that
existing residences will not depreciate in value and development of vacant
residential land will not be deterred;
      (3)   The proposed structure and the site will have an overall appearance
that will not have an adverse effect upon adjacent residential properties;
      (4)   The proposed use will be consistent with the purposes of this
chapter and the purposes of the zoning district in which the applicant intends
to locate the proposed use;
      (5)   The proposed use will not conflict with the Comprehensive Plan;
      (6)   The proposed use will not cause traffic hazards or congestion;
      (7)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, and necessary
facilities for the proposed use are or will be provided; and
      (8)   The height, size and location of all buildings on the site meet the
requirements of the Building and Zoning Codes.
   (B)   Septic systems. Individual septic systems for each building are not
permitted.
   (C)   Signs. Subject to regulations in
Chapter 162 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 515.19) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021)
PROFESSIONAL/LIGHT INDUSTRIAL BUSINESS PARK
§ 163.120 PURPOSE.
   This district is intended to provide an area for light industrial and
commercial uses that require highway access and/or visibility located in a
strategic area that is compatible with the existing medical campus. This
district is intended for uses such as administrative, wholesaling,
manufacturing that are able to maintain a higher standard of appearance by
including open space and landscaping on their properties, and that have limited
external effects such as noise, odors, vibrations, glare, smoke, dust, fumes
and hazards that would reduce compatibility with the existing medical campus.
(Prior Code, § 515.21) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021)
§ 163.121 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Light industrial;
   (B)   Hospitals and hospital related medical services which are accessory to
and located in proximity to the hospital;
   (C)   Institutional residential facilities and long-term care facilities;
   (D)   Auto and truck washes;
   (E)   Cold storage plants and warehousing;
   (F)   Carpet cleaning, dry cleaning and dyeing, laundry employing any number
of persons; providing, the cleaning fluid has a base which is of non-explosive
material;
   (G)   Growing, handling, crating, sorting and shipping nursery stock;
   (H)   Laboratory, research, experimental and testing;
   (I)   Essential services;
   (J)   Storage, sale and distribution of lumber, coal, brick, stone,
contractors supply yard and other similar supplies, equipment and goods;
provided, the use is entirely enclosed within a substantial fence not less than
eight feet in height;
   (K)   Plumbing, heating, glazing, painting, paper-hanging, roofing,
ventilating and electrical contractors; blacksmith shop, carpentry, soldering
and welding establishments;
   (L)   Railway and motor freight depot or trucking terminal; provided that,
the truck entrance is at least 30 feet between curbs; and
   (M)   Vehicle sales and service, including recreational vehicles, boats and
motorcycles.
(Prior Code, § 515.21) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021)
§ 163.122 ACCESSORY USES.
   (A)   Parking lots;
   (B)   Unheated buildings and structures (including temporary storage
containers) for a use accessory to the principal use. Accessory buildings and
structures may not exceed the height of the principal building. Accessory
buildings shall be located to the rear of the principal buildings, subject to
the Building Code and the fire zone regulations, except where prohibited by
other provisions of city code. Accessory buildings and structures may not be
constructed prior to or in lieu of the principal building;
   (C)   Off-street parking as regulated by this chapter (not including semi-
trailer trucks);
   (D)   Parking of semi-trailer trucks if directly related to the principal
use;
   (E)   Off-street loading;
   (F)   Signs subject to regulations in Chapter 162 of this code of
ordinances;
   (G)   Rooftop solar; and
   (H)   Ground-mount solar.
(Prior Code, § 515.21) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021)
§ 163.123 CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   Indoor and outdoor storage of vehicles, materials or open sales;
   (B)   Restaurants, supper clubs or other dining establishments;
   (C)   Recycling centers;
   (D)   Public and non-profit owned buildings such as post offices, government
buildings and similar uses;
   (E)   Commercial planned unit development (see §§
163.245 through
163.250 of this chapter);
   (F)   Towers and antennas in accordance with
Chapter 159 of this code of ordinances;
   (G)   Solar energy facilities;
   (H)   Taxi/transit services, including loading or unloading facilities;
   (I)   Other manufacturing, production, ing, cleaning, storage, servicing and
repair of materials, goods or products determined by the Planning Commission
and confirmed by the City Council to be similar to the above conditional uses
and which conform to the purpose and performance standards of the district; and
   (J)   Cannabis indoor cultivation, manufacturing, processing, wholesaling
and testing facilities.
(Prior Code, § 515.21) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021; Ord. 20250219-01, passed 2-19-2025)
§ 163.124 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Minimum lot size. With the exception of a lot that is being
exclusively used for essential services, a lot in the Professional/Light
Industrial Business Park must have a width of not less than 100 feet, and must
contain an area of not less than 21,780 square feet (0.5 acre).
   (B)   Setbacks.
      (1)   Front yard requirement: with the exception of a lot that is being
exclusively used for essential services, a lot must have a front yard having a
depth of not less than 20 feet.
      (2)   Rear and side yard requirements: with the exception of structures
on a lot that is being exclusively used for essential services, the following
structure setbacks apply:
 
Interior side yard Minimum of 15 feet
Rear yard          Minimum of 20 feet
Street side yard   Minimum of 40 feet
 
      (3)   Setback from Residential Zoning District; buffer requirements. A
building must be set back a minimum of 50 feet from a zoning district boundary
line, which separates the Professional/Light Industrial Business Park from a
residential district. A vegetative buffer must be planted in this area using
native groundcover, shrubs, or trees and must be continuously maintained by the
Professional/Light Industrial Business Park property owner.
      (4)   Setback from roads/highways. A building may not be erected closer
than 40 feet to the right-of-way line of any state highway, major or secondary
thoroughfare or to any county highway or road in use by the public prior to the
creation of the Professional/Light Industrial Business Park that serves as the
boundary line of the district.
   (C)   Lot access. With the exception of a lot that is being exclusively used
for essential services, access to a lot must be from an approved frontage or
secondary street.
   (D)   Maximum ground coverage.
      (1)   With the exception of lots being used exclusively for essential
services, the sum total of the ground area covered by all structures in any
Professional/Light Industrial Business Park District including accessory
structures, constituting a permitted or conditional use shall not exceed 75% of
the lot.
      (2)   Impervious surface coverage may be increased if the following is
provided:
         (a)   A storm water retention plan showing containment of the five-
year, 24-hour storm event on the parcel;
         (b)   Elimination of direct run-off of storm water to adjacent water
bodies, including wetlands and adjacent parcels, through the use of berms or
other permanent means; or
         (c)   Where municipal storm water is available.
   (E)   Visual interest. Building designs are encouraged to provide visual
interest and variation in detailing.
   (F)   Signage. One free-standing sign identifying the commercial uses of
each tenant from the major access road will be permitted. Secondary signage
shall be pedestrian scale and oriented toward the parking lots on the site and
shall be subject to the requirements and restrictions set forth in Chapter 162
of this code of ordinances.
   (G)   Where allowed, standards for cannabis businesses are:
      (1)   A license or endorsement from the State of Minnesota Office of
Cannabis Management is required.
      (2)   Compliance with state license requirements shall be maintained at
all times.
      (3)   A cannabis business shall be located:
         (a)   At least 500 feet from any day care or residential treatment
facility as measured from property line to property line;
         (b)   At least 500 feet from any attraction within a public park that
is regularly used by minors, including a playground or athletic field, measured
from the property line of the cannabis business to the attraction; and
         (c)   At least 1,000 feet from any K-12 school as measured from the
property line to the property line.
(Prior Code, § 515.21) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021; Ord. 20250219-01, passed 2-19-2025)
§ 163.125 OTHER STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Landscaping requirements. Open areas of a site, lot, tract or parcel
must be graded to provide proper drainage, and except for areas used for
parking, drives or storage, must be landscaped with trees, shrubs, ornamental
landscape materials or planted ground cover. Plans for the landscaping and
screening must be submitted for approval to the city before any permit will be
issued.
   (B)   Vegetative buffers. Any new commercial development shall have
vegetative buffers of sufficient width (as determined by the Planning
Commission) so as to mitigate noise and air pollution emitted from the property
and minimize views of parking and service areas from adjacent residential and
other uses. Where possible, existing trees on the property shall be preserved
for this purpose. The vegetative buffers should consist predominantly of hardy
indigenous or native species.
   (C)   Glare, fumes, heat. Glare, fumes or heat may not be produced in any
building in this district that is noticeable at the property line of the
building in which it is produced.
   (D)   Exterior lighting. Lights used for exterior illumination must be
directed away from adjacent properties and oncoming traffic.
   (E)   Waste material.
      (1)   Waste material may not be washed into the public storm sewer system
without first having received a permit to do so from the City Council.
      (2)   If the permit is not granted, a method of disposal must be devised
which will not require additional land for continual operation, will not cause
a detrimental effect to the adjacent land, and the waste disposal plan must be
submitted to the Planning Commission and City Council for approval.
      (3)   Solid waste material, debris, refuse or garbage must be kept within
a completely enclosed building or properly contained in a closed container and
stored in racks designed for each purpose.
   (F)   Drainage. In the development, improvement or alteration of land, the
natural direction of the drainage on the site may not be changed unless the
City Council approves a storm water drainage plan. All run-off from the
property must be properly channeled into a storm drain, watercourse or ponding
area.
   (G)   Inspections and testing for compliance. In order to assure compliance
with the performance standards set forth above, the Planning Commission or City
Council may require the owner or operator of any permitted use to make the
investigations and tests as may be required to show adherence to the
performance standards.
   (H)   Additional requirements. The Planning Commission or the City Council
may require additional items from the applicant as they deem necessary in order
to assess compatibility of the proposed use with the goals of the Professional/
Light Industrial Business Park and with the other existing or proposed uses
within the district.
(Prior Code, § 515.21) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021)
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
§ 163.140 PURPOSE.
   This district is characterized by having good access to State Highway 23.
Lots or parcels in this district are guided to buildings and associated office,
administrative and truck service facilities for the following activities:
manufacturing, fabrication, assembly, processing, packaging, compounding or
storage of materials, goods and products.
(Prior Code, § 515.23) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021)
§ 163.141 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Auto and truck washes;
   (B)   Cold storage plants and warehousing;
   (C)   Carpet cleaning, dry cleaning and dyeing, laundry employing any number
of persons; providing, the cleaning fluid has a base which is of non-explosive
material;
   (D)   Electric appliance assembly;
   (E)   Growing, handling, crating, sorting and shipping nursery stock;
   (F)   Laboratory, research, experimental and testing;
   (G)   Essential services;
   (H)   Storage and sale of lumber, coal, brick, stone, contractors supply
yard; provided, the use is entirely enclosed within a substantial fence not
less than eight feet in height;
   (I)   Plumbing, heating, glazing, painting, paper-hanging, roofing,
ventilating and electrical contractors; blacksmith shop, carpentry, soldering
and welding establishments;
   (J)   The manufacturing, compounding, processing and packaging or treatment
of food products such as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, dairy products, drugs,
perfumes, pharmaceuticals and toiletries;
   (K)   The manufacturing, compounding, assembling treatment of articles or
merchandise from the following previously prepared materials: bone, cellophane,
canvas, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather,
paper, plastic, precious or semi-precious metals or stones, shell, textiles,
tobacco, wood (excluding planing mill), yarns and paint not requiring a boiling
process;
   (L)   Any other manufacturing or industrial enterprise, operation or
process, whether making, assembling, repairing, buffing, finishing, plating,
polishing, tempering, packing, shipping or storing providing that any resulting
cinders, dust, flashing, fumes, gas, noise, odor, refuse, matter, smoke, vapor
or vibration is confined effectively to the premises;
   (M)   Railway and motor freight depot or trucking terminal; provided that,
the truck entrance is appropriate to safely and adequately accommodate the
movement of trucks;
   (N)   Storage in bulk of, or warehouse for, such material as building
material, contractors’ equipment, furniture, food, fabrics, hardware and
similar goods when entirely contained in an enclosed roofed building;
   (O)   The sale or distribution, storage and distribution of supplies,
equipment and goods;
   (P)   Temporary storage containers; and
   (Q)   Other manufacturing, production, processing, cleaning, storage,
servicing and repair of materials, goods or products determined by the Planning
Commission and confirmed by the City Council to be similar to the above uses
and which conform to the purpose and performance standards of the district.
(Prior Code, § 515.23) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 2015-04, passed 8-
19-2015; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-20-2021)
§ 163.142 ACCESSORY USES.
   (A)   Buildings for the storage of yard care equipment;
   (B)   Bus or taxi loading or unloading facilities;
   (C)   Storage of merchandise solely intended to be retailed by a related and
established principal use;
   (D)   Parking lots;
   (E)   Unheated buildings and structures for a use accessory to the principal
use;
   (F)   Accessory buildings and structures may not exceed the height of the
principal building. Accessory buildings shall be located to the rear of the
principal buildings, subject to the Building Code and the fire zone
regulations, except where prohibited by other provisions of city code.
Accessory buildings and structures may not be constructed prior to or in lieu
of the principal building;
   (G)   Off-street parking as regulated by this chapter;
   (H)   Off-street loading;
   (I)   Signs subject to regulations in
Chapter 162 of this code of ordinances;
   (J)   Rooftop solar; and
   (K)   Ground-mount solar.
(Prior Code, § 515.23) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021)
§ 163.143 CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   Indoor and outdoor storage of vehicles, materials or open sales;
   (B)   Assembly plants;
   (C)   Recycling centers;
   (D)   Bottling works, including milk bottling or distribution station;
   (E)   Publicly-owned buildings, such as fire stations, maintenance garages
and storage facilities;
   (F)   Towers and antennas (see
Chapter 159 of this code of ordinances);
   (G)   Taxi/transit services;
   (H)   Day care centers; and
   (I)   Cannabis wholesaling.
(Prior Code, § 515.23) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 2015-04, passed 8-
19-2015; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-20-2021; Ord. 20220119-02, passed 1-19-2022;
Ord. 20250219-01, passed 2-19-2025)
§ 163.144 LOT AREA AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Minimum lot width. A lot should not be less than 150 feet in width.
   (B)   Setback requirements. Principal uses must comply with the following
setback requirements.
 
Front yard         Minimum of 40 feet
Interior side yard Minimum of 15 feet
Rear yard          Minimum of 40 feet
Street side yard   Minimum of 40 feet
 
   (C)   Buffer requirements. A building must be set back a minimum of 50 feet
from a zoning district boundary line, which separates an industrial district
from a residential district. The areas between buildings in the industrial
district and such streets and boundaries of any residential district will be
utilized as a buffer between the two zoning districts. A vegetative buffer must
be planted in this area using native groundcover, shrubs or trees and must be
continuously maintained by the industrial district property owner.
   (D)   Road setback. A building must be set back a minimum of 40 feet from
any state highway, major or secondary thoroughfare, county highway or any road
in use by the public prior to the creation of the industrial district.
   (E)   Lot access. An impervious surface driveway shall be provided from the
curb line to the property line of the lot upon which a structure is to be
placed or constructed. The driveway may not be less than 12 feet in width.
(Prior Code, § 515.23) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021)
§ 163.145 OTHER STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Landscaping requirements. Open areas of a site, lot, tract or parcel
must be graded to provide proper drainage, and except for areas used for
parking, drives or storage, must be landscaped with trees, shrubs, ornamental
landscape materials or planted ground cover. Plans for the landscaping and
screening must be submitted for approval to the city before any permit will be
issued. The plan must show the location, type, quality and size of all existing
and proposed trees and plantings in or proposed for the landscaping area. A
certificate of occupancy may not be issued until the landscaping is completed
in accordance with the approved plans; however, a temporary certificate of
occupancy may be issued so that financing is not held up. The owner must
maintain the landscaping in an attractive and well-kept condition. Vacant lots,
tracts or parcels must be properly maintained.
   (B)   Storage of materials. An accessory building may not be constructed for
the purposes of keeping articles, goods or materials otherwise in the open or
exposed to public view. When necessary to store or keep the materials in the
open, the lot or storage area must be fenced with a screening fence that is at
least six feet high. Storage is limited to the rear two-thirds of the property
measured by area.
   (C)   Glare, fumes, heat. Glare, fumes or heat may not be produced in any
building in this district that is noticeable at the property line.
   (D)   Exterior lighting. Lights used for exterior illumination must be
directed away from adjacent properties and oncoming traffic.
   (E)   Waste material. Solid waste materials, debris, refuse or garbage must
be kept within a completely enclosed building or in closed containers which are
stored in racks. Waste material may not be washed into the public storm sewer
system without first having received a permit to do so from the City Council.
If the permit is not granted, a waste disposal plan must be submitted to the
Planning Commission and the City Council for approval. The plan must not
require additional land for continual operation and should not cause a
detrimental effect to the adjacent properties.
   (F)   Drainage. In the development, improvement or alteration of land, the
natural direction of draining may not be changed unless the Council approves
plans for the development. Run-off must be properly channeled into a storm
drain, watercourse or ponding area, and city staff must approve a storm water
drainage plan.
   (G)   Inspections and testing for compliance. In order to assure compliance
with the performance standards set forth above, the Planning Commission may
require the owner or operator of any permitted use to make such investigations
and tests as may be required to show adherence to the performance standards.
   (H)   Junk and wrecking.
      (1)   In the Industrial District, junk and wrecking yards or any other
similar use must be screened and buffered from adjacent properties and public
rights-of-way by a solid wall, fence or vegetative screening of not less than
seven feet in height. The junk materials may not be visible from the abutting
properties or public right-of-way
      (2)   Walls, fences or vegetative screens of lesser height may be
permitted by the city council if there is a finding that the nature or extent
of the use being screened is such that a lesser degree of screen will
adequately promote and protect the use and enjoyment of abutting properties.
Required screening must be properly maintained so as not to become unsightly,
hazardous, or less opaque than when originally constructed.
      (3)   Existing junkyards must comply with screening requirements within
two years after the effective date of this section.
   (I)   Where allowed, standards for cannabis businesses are:
      (1)   A license or endorsement from the State of Minnesota Office of
Cannabis Management is required.
      (2)   Compliance with state license requirements shall be maintained at
all times.
      (3)   A cannabis business shall be located:
         (a)   At least 500 feet from any day care or residential treatment
facility as measured from property line to property line;
         (b)   At least 500 feet from any attraction within a public park that
is regularly used by minors, including a playground or athletic field, measured
from the property line of the cannabis business to the attraction; and
         (c)   At least 1,000 feet from any K-12 school as measured from the
property line to the property line.
(Prior Code, § 515.23) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. passed - -2008;
Ord. 20210120, passed 1-20-2021; Ord. 20250219-01, passed 2-19-2025)
§ 163.146 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The Planning Commission or the City Council may require additional items
from the applicant as they deem necessary in order to assess compatibility of
the proposed use with the goals of the Industrial District and with the other
existing or proposed uses within the Industrial District.
(Prior Code, § 515.23) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021)
PUBLIC RECREATION AND OPEN SPACE DISTRICT
§ 163.160 PURPOSE.
   The Public Recreational and Open Space zoning district is intended to
preserve, protect and enhance land set aside for public parks or natural areas
or other publicly-owned lands. The areas and facilities provide many benefits
to city residents and visitors. They provide recreational and cultural
opportunities; preserve natural and scenic areas; and offer refuge from the
built, urban environment. The Public Recreation and Open Space District is
intended to be applied exclusively to publicly-owned lands.
(Prior Code, § 515.25) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021)
§ 163.161 COMPATIBILITY.
   The Public Recreation and Open Space Zoning is compatible with every other
zoning classification and any property that meets the purpose and intent of
this zoning classification.
(Prior Code, § 515.25) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021)
§ 163.162 LOT AND DENSITY REQUIREMENTS.
   There is no minimum lot size associated with the Public Recreation and Open
Space Zoning classification. Setbacks established for the adjacent zoning
district shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 515.25) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021)
§ 163.163 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   The following performance standards apply to all development in this zone.
   (A)   Walking, hiking, biking. Recreational activity uses are allowed if not
completed on private property. Appurtenances to the allowed use shall also be
allowed if constructed greater than ten feet from a neighboring property line.
   (B)   Preserved natural areas. Preservation of open land for the
preservation of open space and for the enjoyment of the public shall be
permitted.
(Prior Code, § 515.25) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021)
§ 163.164 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   (A)   Rooftop solar; and
   (B)   Ground-mount solar.
(Prior Code, § 515.25) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021)
§ 163.165 CONDITIONAL USES.
   Parks, playgrounds, golf courses, public recreational, cultural or
administrative facilities, such as park buildings or libraries.
(Prior Code, § 515.25) (Ord. 02-03, passed 10-16-2002; Ord. 20210120, passed 1-
20-2021)
HELIPORT OVERLAY DISTRICT
§ 163.180 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The legislature of the state has, in M.S. § 360.063, as it may be amended
from time to time, delegated the responsibility to local government units to
adopt zoning regulations for airport hazard areas within their territorial
limits, which include heliports. The provisions of this subchapter regulate
only the real property located within the city’s territorial limits.
(Prior Code, § 515.33) (Ord. 20181107-02, passed 11-7-2018; Ord. 20210217-09,
passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.181 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   Airport hazards, as defined in M.S. § 360.013, subd. 40, as it may be
amended from time to time, endanger the lives and property of users of the Pine
Medical Center Heliport and property or occupants of land in its vicinity; and
also if of the obstructive type, have the effect of reducing the size of the
area available for the landing, takeoff and maneuvering of aircraft, thus
tending to destroy or impair the utility and safety of the heliport.
   (B)   The creation or establishment of an airport hazard is a public
nuisance and an injury to the region served by the Pine Medical Center
Heliport.
   (C)   For the protection of the public health, safety, order, convenience,
prosperity and general welfare, and for the promotion of the most appropriate
use of land, it is necessary to prevent the creation or establishment of
airport hazards.
   (D)   The prevention of these airport hazards should be accomplished, to the
extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police power without
compensation. The prevention of the creation or establishment of airport
hazards, and the elimination, removal, alteration, mitigation or marking and
lighting of existing airport hazards are public purposes for which political
subdivisions may raise and expend public funds.
   (E)   The Pine Medical Center Heliport is an essential facility that serves
an important public transportation role and provides a public good.
(Prior Code, § 515.33) (Ord. 20181107-02, passed 11-7-2018; Ord. 20210217-09,
passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.182 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize airport hazards by the provisions contained
herein.
(Prior Code, § 515.33) (Ord. 20181107-02, passed 11-7-2018; Ord. 20210217-09,
passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.183 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIRPORT HAZARD. The meaning prescribed in M.S. § 360.013, subd. 40, as may
be amended from time to time.
   APPROACH/DEPARTURE PATH. The flight track helicopters follow when landing at
or departing from a heliport. The APPROACH/DEPARTURE PATHS may be straight or
curved.
   FINAL APPROACH AND TAKEOFF AREA (FATO). The area surrounding the touchdown
and liftoff area (TLOF) over which the pilot completes the final phase of the
approach to a hover or a landing and from which the pilot initiates takeoff.
The FATO elevation is the lowest elevation of the edge of the TLOF.
   HEIGHT. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set
forth in this chapter and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea
level elevation unless otherwise specified.
   HELIPORT. The Pine Medical Center Heliport, located at 705 Lundorff Drive in
the city.
   HELIPORT ELEVATION. The established elevation of the lowest point on the
usable landing area, which elevation is established to be 1,086.50 feet above
mean sea level.
   LANDING POSITION. An area, normally located in the center of an elongated
TLOF, on which the helicopter lands.
   NON-CONFORMING USE. Any pre-existing structure, tree, natural growth or land
use which is inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or an amendment
hereto.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association,
joint stock association or body politic, and includes a trustee, receiver,
assignee, administrator, executor, guardian or other representative.
   SLOPE. An incline from the horizontal expressed in an arithmetic ratio of
horizontal magnitude to vertical magnitude. (See example below depicting a 3:
1 slope.)
   STRUCTURE. An object constructed or installed by humans, including, but
without limitations, buildings, towers, smokestacks, earth formations and
overhead transmission lines.
   TOUCHDOWN AND LIFTOFF AREA (TLOF). A load-bearing, generally paved area,
normally centered in the FATO, on which the helicopter lands and/or takes off.
   TRAVERSE WAYS. For the purpose of determining height limits as set forth in
this chapter, traverse ways shall be increased in height by 17 feet for
interstate highways; 15 feet for all other public roadways; ten feet or the
height of the highest mobile object that would normally traverse the road,
whichever is greater, for private roads; 23 feet for railroads; and for
waterways and all other traverse ways not previously mentioned, an amount equal
to the height of the highest mobile object that would normally traverse it.
   TREE. Any object of natural growth.
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The person charged with the enforcement of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 515.33) (Ord. 20181107-02, passed 11-7-2018; Ord. 20210217-09,
passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.184 AIR SPACE OBSTRUCTION ZONING.
   (A)   Air space zones. In order to carry out the purpose of this subchapter,
as set forth above, the following air space zones are hereby established and
defined as follows:
      (1)   Primary zone. All that land which lies directly under an imaginary
primary surface that coincides in size and shape with the designated FATO. The
elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of
the lowest point on the TLOF;
      (2)   Approach zone. 
         (a)   All that land which lies directly under an imaginary approach
surface. The approach surface may be defined by a single magnetic direction
from the center of the heliport or as an arc from the center of the heliport.
         (b)   The inner edge of the approach surface starts at the elevation
of the primary surface, at the end of the primary surface and extends a
distance equal to half of the FATO width on either side of the defining
direction or arc.
         (c)   The approach surface inclines upward at a slope of 8:1 and
expands uniformly to a width of 250 feet either side of the defining direction
or arc at a distance 4,000 feet from the primary surface.
         (d)   The approach surface may be curved and if curved the curve may
not start until 300 feet from the primary surface and the minimum turning
radius must be at least 886 feet; and
      (3)   Transitional zone. All that land which lies directly under an
imaginary surface extending upward and outward at right angles to the approach
zone direction or arc centerline and centerline extended at a slope of 2:1 from
the sides of the primary surfaces and from the sides of the approach surfaces
for 250 feet from the edge of the primary surface and 250 feet from the
defining direction or arc.
   (B)   Height restrictions. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, and
except as necessary and incidental to heliport operations, no structure or tree
shall be constructed, altered, maintained, or allowed to grow in any air space
zone created in division (A) above so as to project above any of the imaginary
air space surfaces described in division (A) above. Where an area is covered by
more than one height limitation, the more restrictive limitation shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 515.33) (Ord. 20181107-02, passed 11-7-2018; Ord. 20210217-09,
passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.185 LAND USE SAFETY ZONING.
   (A)   Safety zone boundaries. In order to carry out the purpose of this
subchapter, to restrict those uses which may be hazardous to the operational
safety of aircraft operating to and from the Pine Medical Center Heliport,
there are hereby created and established the following land use safety zones:
      (1)   Ground impact area. All land within an area that extends 280 feet
from the center of the heliport in all directions;
      (2)   Inner approach area. All land in that portion of the approach zone
and transitional zone, where they are utilized, between 280 feet from the
center of the heliport to 1,000 feet from the center of the heliport; and
      (3)   Outer area. All land within 4,100 feet of the center of the
heliport that is not included in the other two areas.
   (B)   Use restrictions.
      (1)   General. Subject at all times to the height restrictions set forth
in §
163.184(B) of this chapter, no use shall be made of any land in any of the
safety zones defined by this section which creates or causes interference with
the operations of radio or electronic facilities on the heliport or with radio
or electronic communications between the heliport and aircraft, make it
difficult for pilots to distinguish between heliport lights and other lights,
results in glare in the eyes of pilots using the heliport, impairs visibility
in the vicinity of the heliport, or otherwise endangers the landing, taking off
or maneuvering of aircraft.
      (2)   Ground impact area. Subject at all times to the height restrictions
set forth in §
163.184(B) of this chapter and to the general restrictions contained in
division (B)(1) above, areas designated as ground impact areas shall be able to
be cleared of vehicle and pedestrian traffic. No construction or planting may
occur within this zone without evaluation of the impact to the heliport
surfaces and helicopter operations.
      (3)   Inner approach area. Subject at all times to the height
restrictions set forth in §
163.184(B) of this chapter and to the general restrictions contained in
division (B)(1) above, no construction or planting may occur in areas
designated as inner approach areas without evaluation of the impact to the
heliport surfaces and helicopter operations.
      (4)   Outer area. Subject at all times to the height restrictions set
forth in §
163.184(B) of this chapter and to the general restrictions contained in
division (B)(1) above, no construction or planting may occur in areas
designated as outer areas without evaluation of the impact to the heliport
surfaces and helicopter operations.
(Prior Code, § 515.33) (Ord. 20181107-02, passed 11-7-2018; Ord. 20210217-09,
passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.186 HELIPORT MAP.
   The several zones established by this chapter are shown on the Pine Medical
Center Heliport Zoning Map, attached hereto and made part hereof, which map,
together with such amendments thereto as may from time to time be made, and all
notations, references, elevations, data, zone boundaries and other information
thereon, shall be and the same is hereby adopted as part of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 515.33) (Ord. 20181107-02, passed 11-7-2018; Ord. 20210217-09,
passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.187 NON-CONFORMING USES.
   The regulations prescribed by this subchapter shall not be construed to
require the removal, lowering or other changes or alteration of any structure
or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of the
ordinance establishing this subchapter, or otherwise interfere with the
continuance of any non- conforming use. Nothing herein contained shall require
any change in the construction, alteration or intended use of any structure,
the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date
of the ordinance establishing this subchapter, and is diligently prosecuted and
completed within two years thereof.
(Prior Code, § 515.33) (Ord. 20181107-02, passed 11-7-2018; Ord. 20210217-09,
passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.188 PERMITS.
   (A)   Future uses. No material change shall be made in the use of land and
no structure shall be erected, altered or otherwise established in any zone
created by this chapter without obtaining a permit from the Zoning
Administrator. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for
which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to
conform to the regulations of this subchapter. If the determination is in the
affirmative, the permit shall be granted.
   (B)   Exception. A permit shall not be required under division (A) above for
a tree or structure of less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground in
the outer area, except when the tree or structure, because of terrain, land
contour or topographic features, would extend the height or land use limit
prescribed for the respective zone. Nothing contained in this exception shall
be construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, alteration
or growth of any structure or tree in excess of any of the height limitations
or land use limitations established by this subchapter.
   (C)   Existing uses. No existing use or structure shall be replaced,
substantially altered or repaired, or rebuilt within any zone established by
this subchapter without a permit authorizing the replacement, change or repair.
No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an
airport hazard or permit a non-conforming use, structure or tree to become a
greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of the
ordinance establishing this subchapter or any amendments thereto, or than it is
when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all
applications for such a permit shall be granted.
   (D)   Non-conforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the Zoning
Administrator determines that a non-conforming structure or tree has been
abandoned or is more than 80% destroyed, no permit shall be granted that would
allow the structure or tree to exceed the limitations imposed by this
subchapter. Whether application is made for a permit under this section or not,
the Zoning Administrator may order the owner of the abandoned or partially
destroyed non-conforming structure, at the owner’s sole expense, to lower,
remove, reconstruct or equip the same in the manner necessary to conform to the
provisions of this chapter. In the event the owner of the non-conforming
structure shall neglect or refuse to comply with the order for ten days after
receipt of written notice of the order, the Zoning Administrator may, by
appropriate legal action, proceed to have the abandoned or partially destroyed
non-conforming structure lowered, removed, reconstructed or equipped and assess
the cost and expense thereof against the land on which the structure is or was
located. Unless such an assessment is paid within 90 days from the service of
notice thereof on the owner of the land, the sum shall bear interest at the
rate of 8% per annum from the date the cost and expense is incurred until paid,
and shall be collected in the same manner as are general taxes.
(Prior Code, § 515.33) (Ord. 20181107-02, passed 11-7-2018; Ord. 20210217-09,
passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.189 VARIANCE.
   Requests for variances from the literal provisions of this chapter shall be
handled in accordance with the city’s variance procedure, as contained in §
163.326, as may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 515.33) (Ord. 20181107-02, passed 11-7-2018; Ord. 20210217-09,
passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.190 HAZARDOUS MARKING AND LIGHTING.
   (A)   Non-conforming uses. The owner of any non-conforming structure or tree
is hereby required to permit the installation, operation and maintenance
thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the Zoning
Administrator, to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the
heliport the presence of the airport hazards. The markers and lights shall be
installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the owner of the Pine
Medical Center Heliport.
   (B)   Permits and variances. Any permit or variance deemed advisable to
effectuate the purpose of this subchapter and be reasonable in the
circumstances, and otherwise granted by the Zoning Administrator or the city,
shall require the owner of the structure or tree in question, at the owner’s
sole expense, to install, operate and maintain thereon the markers and lights
as may be necessary to indicate to pilots the presence of an airport hazard.
(Prior Code, § 515.33) (Ord. 20181107-02, passed 11-7-2018; Ord. 20210217-09,
passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.191 APPEALS.
   (A)   Board of Adjustment and Appeals. Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer
affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator made in the administration
of this subchapter may appeal to the city’s Board of Adjustment and Appeals.
   (B)   Timing. All appeals hereunder must be commenced within 30 days of the
Zoning Administrator’s decision, by filing with the Zoning Administrator a
notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning Administrator shall
forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustment all the papers constituting the
record upon which the action appealed from was taken. In addition, any person
aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected by any decisions of the Zoning
Administrator made in his or her administration of this chapter, who desires to
appeal the decision shall submit an application for a variance, by certified
mail, to the members of the Board of Adjustment.
   (C)   Proceedings stayed. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator
certifies to the Board, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that
by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in the Zoning
Administrator’s opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such
case, proceedings shall not be stayed, except by order of the Board on notice
to the Zoning Administrator and on due cause shown.
   (D)   Hearing. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals,
give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the
same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in
person, by agent or by attorney.
   (E)   Decision. The Board shall, in writing and in conformity with the
provisions of this subchapter, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may
make the order, requirement, decision or determination, as may be appropriate
under the circumstances and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the
Zoning Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 515.33) (Ord. 20181107-02, passed 11-7-2018; Ord. 20210217-09,
passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.192 CONFLICTS.
   Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations
prescribed in this subchapter and any other zoning regulations applicable to
the same area, whether the conflict is with respect to the height of structures
or trees, the use of land or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or
regulation shall govern and prevail.
(Prior Code, § 515.33) (Ord. 20181107-02, passed 11-7-2018; Ord. 20210217-09,
passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.193 AIR SPACE ZONES.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c4982d58f6c8f0b169be5b94d2c02e8c4d2cfd59/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1915.png]
 
(Prior Code, § 515.33) (Ord. 20181107-02, passed 11-7-2018; Ord. 20210217-09,
passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.194 SAFETY ZONE BOUNDARIES.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c4982d58f6c8f0b169be5b94d2c02e8c4d2cfd59/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1917.png]
 
(Prior Code, § 515.33) (Ord. 20181107-02, passed - -2018; Ord. 20210217-09,
passed 2-17-2021)
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OVERLAY DISTRICT
§ 163.205 DESCRIPTION.
   The MHP Manufactured Home Park Overlay District is primarily characterized
by an environment of manufactured home dwelling units. Manufactured home parks
are allowed as a conditional use in the Traditional Residential and Suburban
Residential Districts.
(Ord. 20210217-03, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.206 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the MHP Overlay District is to provide for manufactured home
uses in an appropriate, safe, sanitary and attractive environment. This
district establishes regulations for the development of sites for manufactured
home parks.
(Ord. 20210217-03, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.207 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No manufactured home for residential purposes shall be permitted
within any manufactured home park unless the manufactured home park is or has
been approved by the state’s Department of Administration, in accordance with
M.S. §§ 327.14 through 327.36, as they may be amended from time to time, and
Minn. Rules Chapter 1350.
   (B)   Manufactured homes shall not be used for residential purposes in the
city if they:
      (1)   Do not conform to the requirements of the Manufactured Home
Building Code established by M.S. § 327.31, as may be amended from time to
time, of the state;
      (2)   Have an exterior in disrepair;
      (3)   Are structurally unsound and do not protect the inhabitants against
all elements; and
      (4)   Are in an unsanitary condition or do not have adequate sewage
facilities as required by the city in accordance with regulations.
   (C)   No tents shall be used for other than recreational purposes in a
manufactured home park.
   (D)   Access to manufactured home parks shall be as approved by the city.
   (E)   (1)   The area beneath a manufactured home shall be enclosed; except
that, the enclosure must have access for inspection.
      (2)   Materials used for enclosure shall be of a non-flammable nature.
(Ord. 20210217-03, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.208 INDIVIDUAL SITE PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet (0.11 acre);
   (B)   Minimum lot width: 50 feet;
   (C)   Minimum front yard: 20 feet;
   (D)   Minimum side yard: ten feet;
   (E)   Minimum rear yard: ten feet;
   (F)   Maximum building height: one story;
   (G)   Frontage: each manufactured home site shall have frontage on an
approved roadway;
   (H)   Site marking: the corner of each manufactured home site shall be
marked;
   (I)   Site numbering: each site shall be numbered.
   (J)   Utilities.
      (1)   All manufactured homes shall be connected to a public water and
sanitary sewer system.
      (2)   All utility connections shall be as approved by the city.
      (3)   All utilities shall be underground; there shall be no overhead
wires or supporting poles except those essential for street or other lighting
purposes.
      (4)   The method of garbage, waste and trash disposal shall be approved
by the city.
      (5)   The park owner shall pay any required sewer and water connection
fees to the city.
   (K)   On-site parking: each site shall have off-street parking space for two
automobiles. These parking spaces shall be hard surfaced;
   (L)   Streets.
      (1)   Surface. Streets shall be hard surfaced as approved by the city;
      (2)   Width. The minimum street width shall be 30 feet;
      (3)   On-street parking. Parallel on both sides of the street; and
      (4)   Lighting. A street lighting plan must be approved by the city.
   (M)   Access drives: all access drives off roads to all parking spaces and
home sites shall be hard surfaced;
   (N)   Recreation: all manufactured home parks shall have at least 10% of the
land area developed for recreational use (tennis courts, children’s play
equipment, swimming pool, golf green and the like) developed and maintained at
the owner/operator’s expense;
   (O)   Lighting: artificial light shall be maintained during all hours of
darkness in all buildings containing public toilets, laundry equipment and
other facilities when open for use;
   (P)   Drainage: all manufactured home parks shall be provided with adequate
drainage facilities as approved by the city;
   (Q)   Storage buildings: the maximum size of accessory storage buildings in
the MHP Overlay District shall not exceed 120 square feet of a seven-foot
sidewall or ten feet top of peak. All buildings shall be securely anchored and
built with materials that will visually match their corresponding manufactured
home; and
   (R)   Anchoring and support systems: the provisions made for anchoring
systems shall be based on the regulations outlined by the state’s Department of
Administration, Building Code Division.
(Ord. 20210217-03, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.209 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Manufactured/mobile homes;
   (B)   Home occupation, Type 1;
   (C)   Home occupation, Type 2; and
   (D)   Essential services.
(Ord. 20210217-03, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.210 ACCESSORY USES.
   (A)   Private garages, parking spaces and carports for licensed and
operating passenger cars and trucks, not to exceed a gross vehicle weight of
12,000 pounds, as regulated by this subchapter. For the purpose of this
subchapter, the GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT is defined as the weight according to the
manufacturer’s specifications or the weight for which the vehicle is licensed,
whichever is less. Private garages are intended for use to store the private
passenger vehicles of the family or families resident upon the premises, and in
which no business service or industry is carried on. The space can be rented to
non-residents of the property for private passenger vehicles or non-commercial
vehicles, trailers or equipment if sufficient off-street parking in full
compliance with city code is provided elsewhere on the property. The garage may
not be used for the storage of more than one commercial vehicle not exceeding
12,000 pounds gross vehicle weight and 22 feet in length and eight feet in
height owned or operated by a resident of the dwelling unit. Truck tractors,
semi-trailers, semi-tractors or tractor-trailers may not be stored in MHP
Overlay Districts;
   (B)   Recreational and service-oriented facilities which are operated for
the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their
guests;
   (C)   Tool houses, sheds and similar buildings for storage of domestic
supplies and non-commercial recreational equipment; and
   (D)   Garage sales. The infrequent temporary display and sale of general
household goods, used clothing, appliances and other personal property;
provided, the exchange or sale of merchandise is conducted within the principal
structure or an accessory structure. Items for sale may not include personal
property purchased for the purpose of resale. The number of garage sales on an
individual’s site may not exceed four per year, and each sale is limited to a
three-day duration, with hours of operation between 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
All garage sales must end by 10:00 p.m.
(Ord. 20210217-03, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.211 BUFFER YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   There must be a 50-foot area contained on the MHP site separating the MHP
use from an adjoining use. This area will be utilized as a buffer between the
two uses. A vegetative buffer must be planted in this area using native
groundcover, shrubs or trees and must be continuously maintained by the MHP
owner/operator.
(Ord. 20210217-03, passed 2-17-2021)
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (R-PUD)
§ 163.225 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of the R-PUD classification is to encourage a more
creative approach to the use of land. Departures from this chapter may be
granted by the City Council in a planned unit development. A planned unit
development is allowable in some districts as a conditional use.
   (B)   Permission to develop specific parcels of land under the provisions
which follow shall be binding on all construction.
   (C)   Any significant change in the development plan after approval by the
City Council shall be resubmitted for consideration.
   (D)   To encourage innovations which produce efficient, high quality
development in harmony with surrounding areas, the following regulations are
set forth.
(Ord. 20210217-05, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.226 REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The development shall be planned so that it is consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan.
   (B)   The tract of land shall be under unified control at the time of
application and scheduled to be developed as one unit. In addition, the
development plan must include provisions for the preservation of natural
amenities.
   (C)   The planned unit development proposal must be in harmony with existing
development in the area surrounding the project site.
   (D)   The proposed planned unit development must be comprised of at least
one acre of contiguous land.
   (E)   There must be a minimum of 20% of the gross land area for private or
public open air recreational use protected by covenants running with the land
or by conveyances or dedicated as the Planning Commission may specify. The open
space areas shall not include land devoted to streets, parking or private
yards.
   (F)   There must be a plan for tornado/storm shelter area(s).
   (G)   Spacing between main buildings and dedicated streets shall be at least
equivalent to the spacing requirements of buildings similarly developed under
the terms of this subchapter on separate parcels.
   (H)   Subdivision review under the subdivision regulations shall be carried
out simultaneously with the review of the planned unit development under this
subchapter.
(Ord. 20210217-05, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.227 PERMITTED, ACCESSORY, INTERIM AND CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   Permitted, accessory, interim and conditional uses allowed within the
zoning district where the proposed planned unit development is to be located
(i.e., residential districts).
   (B)   R-PUD may include any combination of dwelling units in single-family,
two-family, townhouses and condominiums.
(Ord. 2011-01, passes - -; Ord. 20210217-05, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.228 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Pre-application conference. Before submitting an application for a R-
PUD, an applicant may confer with the planning staff in order to obtain
information and guidance before the applicant incurs expenses in the
preparation of plans, surveys and other data.
   (B)   Outline development plan. An applicant shall first submit to the city
for approval a development concept plan of the R-PUD. The concept plan shall
include the following information:
      (1)   A map (which may be in schematic form) containing the following
information:
         (a)   The existing topographic character of the site;
         (b)   A composite of all natural amenities of the site including any
steep slopes, drainage ways, marshes, ponds and lakes;
         (c)   The size of site and proposed use of the land to be developed
and an identification of surrounding land uses;
         (d)   The allocation of density to the several parts of the
development;
         (e)   The approximate location of any right-of-way; and
         (f)   The location of the proposed open space including parks,
playgrounds and private natural preserves.
      (2)   A statement of the ownership of all land involved in the R-PUD
together with a summary of the previous work experience of the developer;
      (3)   An explanation of the general character of the R-PUD;
      (4)   A general indication of the expected time schedule of development;
      (5)   A statement describing the ultimate ownership and maintenance of
all parts of the R-PUD including streets, structures and open space;
      (6)   A statement describing how all necessary governmental services will
be provided to the development; and
      (7)   (a)   A certified check or money order in an amount set forth in §
36.02 of this code of ordinances as the application fee.
         (b)   Additional costs incurred by the city to process the application
will be billed to the owner/developer by the city.
   (C)   Outline development plan review process.
      (1)   The Planning Commission should review the outline development plan
and forward it to the City Council with a written staff report recommending
that the plan be disapproved, approved or approved with modifications, and
giving reasons for these recommendations.
      (2)   Upon receipt of the Planning Commission’s recommendations, a public
hearing shall be held by the City Council on the plan. The City Council may
continue the hearing or refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for
further study. Upon conclusion of the public hearing the City Council shall
approve, disapprove or approve the plan with modifications and send its
decision to the applicant.
      (3)   Refusal by the applicant of any modification may constitute denial
of the plans by the City Council. Failure by the applicant to notify the City
Council of the applicant’s acceptance or refusal of the proposed modification
to the outline development plan will constitute acceptance of the
modifications. No building permits will be issued for the R-PUD until final
plans for the development have been approved by the City Council under the
procedures provided in the following provisions.
   (D)   Preliminary development plan approval.
      (1)   Following the approval of an outline development plan by the City
Council, the applicant may file a preliminary development plan with the city.
The Planning Commission shall review the preliminary development plan after it
has given public notice to each of the following persons:
         (a)   Any person who is on record as having appeared at the public
hearing on the outline development plan;
         (b)   Any other person who has indicated to the city in writing that
he, she or they wish to be notified; and
         (c)   All property owners within 350 feet of the property designated
to be developed.
      (2)   In the event the preliminary development plan is not in substantial
compliance with the outline development plan, the city must notify the
applicant. The city’s notice must set forth the ways in which the preliminary
development plan is not in substantial compliance.
      (3)   If the applicant does not respond to the notice from the city and
does not alter the preliminary development plan, the plan may be denied by the
City Council.
      (4)   (a)   If the applicant is not in agreement with the city’s notice,
applicant may file a written request that the Planning Commission hold a public
hearing on the preliminary development plan.
         (b)   After holding the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall
make a recommendation to the City Council for approval, denial or approval with
modifications. The City Council shall then review the preliminary development
plan and act on the Planning Commission’s recommendation.
   (E)   Final development plan approval.
      (1)   Within six weeks following approval of the preliminary development
plan by the City Council, the applicant shall file with the city a final
development plan containing in final form all of the information required in
the preliminary development plan. In its discretion and for good cause, the
Council may extend for six months the period for the filing of the final
development plan upon the request of the applicant.
      (2)   The City Council shall review the final development plan in order
to make certain that it is in substantial compliance with the preliminary
development plan. If the final development plan is in substantial compliance
with the preliminary development plan, the City Council may approve it.
Following this approval, the applicant must record the final development plan
in the manner provided for recording subdivision plats. If the final
development plan is found by the City Council to not be in substantial
compliance, the applicant must repeat the procedures outlined for the
preliminary development plan.
   (F)   Findings. The findings of the City Council necessary for approval of
both the preliminary and final development plans shall be based on the
following:
      (1)   The plan does not conflict with the Comprehensive Plan;
      (2)   The plan is designed to form a desirable and unified development
within the developer’s own boundaries;
      (3)   The proposed uses will not be detrimental to present and future
land use in the surrounding area;
      (4)   Any exceptions to the requirements of the zoning and subdivision
codes are justified by the design of the development; and
      (5)   The planned unit development will not create an excessive burden on
parks, schools, streets and other public facilities and utilities, which serve
or are proposed to serve the planned unit development.
(Ord. 20210217-05, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.229 AMENDMENT AND CONTROL.
   (A)   (1)   The City Council on the final development plan shall certify
approval of the R-PUD.
      (2)   Thereafter, the use of land and the construction, modification or
alteration of any buildings in the R-PUD shall be governed by the approved
final development plan.
      (3)   Amendments may be authorized only under the procedures provided
below.
   (B)   Amendments to an approved R-PUD may be made when they are shown to be
required by changes in conditions that have occurred since the final plan was
approved or by changes in the development policies of the city.
      (1)   Minor extensions, alterations or modifications of existing
structures may be authorized by the Zoning Administrator if they are consistent
with the intent and purpose of the final plan and do not increase the size of
any building or structure by 10% or more than originally proposed in the
preliminary development plan.
      (2)   All other changes in the use and rearrangement of lots, blocks and
open space or the replacement of any building substantially destroyed must be
authorized only by the City Council pursuant to the procedures outlined for
amendment of this chapter.
(Ord. 20210217-05, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.230 CONFLICT.
   The land use, minimum lot area, yard, height and accessory uses determined
by the planned unit development requirements shall prevail over conflicting
requirements listed elsewhere within this chapter or in the city’s subdivision
regulations, with the exception of the Kettle River Wild and Scenic River and
Floodplain Overlay District and the General Shoreland Overlay District.
(Ord. 20210217-05, passed 2-17-2021; Ord. 20210217-07, passed 2-17-2021)
COMMERCIAL PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (C-PUD)
§ 163.245 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of the C-PUD classification is to encourage a more
creative approach to the use of land. Departures from this chapter may be
granted by the City Council in Planned Unit Development Overlay Districts.
   (B)   A C-PUD is allowable in some districts as a conditional use.
Permission to develop specific parcels of land under the provisions which
follow shall be binding on all construction.
   (C)   Any significant change in the development plan after approval by the
City Council shall be resubmitted for consideration.
   (D)   To encourage innovations which produce efficient, high quality
development in harmony with surrounding areas, the following regulations are
set forth.
(Ord. 20210217-07, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.246 PERMITTED, ACCESSORY, INTERIM AND CONDITIONAL USES.
   Permitted, accessory, interim and conditional uses in the C-PUD District
shall consist of all permitted, accessory, interim and conditional uses that
are allowed within the zoning district where the proposed planned unit
development is to be located.
(Ord. 20210217-07, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.247 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   The development shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
   (B)   All of the properties in the C-PUD shall be under the same ownership
at the time of application. All properties within the C-PUD must be scheduled
to be developed under the same ownership.
   (C)   The development plan must include provisions for the preservation of
natural amenities.
   (D)   The C-PUD proposal must be in harmony with existing developments in
the area surrounding the project site.
   (E)   The C-PUD must be comprised of at least ten acres of contiguous land.
   (F)   There must be a minimum of 20% of the gross land area within the C-PUD
that is preserved for private or public open air recreational use. The open
space calculation shall not include land used for streets, parking or private
yards. The Planning Commission may specify which areas should be preserved or
that are integral. The areas to be preserved must be protected by covenants
running with the land or by conveyances or dedication.
   (G)   Spacing between main buildings and dedicated streets shall be at least
equivalent to the spacing requirements of buildings similarly developed under
the terms of this subchapter on separate parcels.
   (H)   Subdivision review under the subdivision regulations shall be carried
out simultaneously with the review of the C-PUD under this subchapter.
(Ord. 20210217-07, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.248 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Pre-application conference. Before submitting an application for a C-
PUD, an applicant must confer with the city planning staff in order to obtain
information and guidance before the applicant incurs expenses in the
preparation of plans, surveys and other data.
   (B)   Outline development plan. An applicant shall first submit to the city
for approval a development concept plan of the C-PUD. The concept plan shall
include the following information:
      (1)   A map (which may be in schematic form) containing the following
information:
         (a)   The existing topographic character of the site;
         (b)   A composite of all natural amenities of the site including any
steep slopes, drainage ways, marshes, ponds and lakes;
         (c)   The size of site and proposed use of the land to be developed
and an identification of surrounding land uses;
         (d)   The allocation of density to the several parts of the
development;
         (e)   The approximate location of any right-of-way; and
         (f)   The location of the proposed open space including parks,
playgrounds and private natural preserves.
      (2)   A statement of the ownership of all land involved in the C-PUD
together with a summary of the previous work experience of the developer;
      (3)   An explanation of the general character of the C-PUD;
      (4)   A general indication of the expected time schedule of development;
      (5)   A statement describing the ultimate ownership and maintenance of
all parts of the C-PUD including streets, structures and open space;
      (6)   A statement describing how all necessary utilities and governmental
services will be provided to the development; and
      (7)   A certified check or money order in an amount set forth by §
36.02 of this code of ordinances for the application fee. Additional costs
incurred by the city to process the application will be billed to the owner/
developer by the city.
   (C)   Outline development plan review process.
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall review the outline development plan
and forward it to the City Council with a written staff report recommending
that the plan be disapproved, approved or approved with modifications, and
giving reasons for these recommendations.
      (2)   Upon receipt of the Planning Commission’s recommendations, a public
hearing shall be held by the City Council on the plan. The City Council may
continue the hearing or refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for
further study. Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council shall
approve, disapprove or approve the plan with modifications and send a copy of
its decision to the applicant.
      (3)   Refusal by the applicant of any modification may constitute denial
of the plans by the City Council. Failure by the applicant to notify the City
Council of applicant’s acceptance or refusal of the proposed modification to
the outline development plan may constitute acceptance of the modifications. No
building permits will be issued for the C-PUD until the final plans for the
development have been approved by the City Council under the procedures set
forth in the following provisions.
   (D)   Preliminary development plan approval.
      (1)   Following the approval of an outline development plan by the City
Council, the applicant may file a preliminary development plan with the city.
The Planning Commission will review the preliminary development plan after it
has given public notice to the following persons:
         (a)   Any person who is on record as having appeared at the public
hearing on the outline development plan;
         (b)   Any other person who has indicated to the city in writing that
they wish to be notified; and
         (c)   All property owners within 350 feet of the property designated
to be developed.
      (2)   In the event the preliminary development plan is not in substantial
compliance with the outline development plan, the city must notify the
applicant. The city’s notice must set forth the ways in which the preliminary
development plan is not in substantial compliance.
      (3)   If the applicant does not respond to the notice from the city and
does not alter the preliminary development plan, the plan may be denied by the
City Council.
      (4)   If the applicant is not in agreement with the city’s notice, the
applicant may file a written request that the Planning Commission hold a public
hearing on the preliminary development plan. After holding the public hearing,
the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the City Council for
approval, denial or approval with modifications. The City Council shall then
review the preliminary development plan and act on the Planning Commission’s
recommendation.
   (E)   Final development plan approval.
      (1)   Within six weeks following approval of the preliminary development
plan by the City Council, the applicant shall file with the city a final
development plan containing in final form all of the information required in
the preliminary development plan. In its discretion and for good cause, the
City Council may extend for six months the period for the filing of the final
development plan upon the request of the applicant.
      (2)   The City Council shall review the final development plan in order
to make certain that it is in substantial compliance with the preliminary
development plan. If the final development plan is in substantial compliance
with the preliminary development plan, the City Council may approve it.
Following approval, the applicant must record the final development plan in the
manner provided for recording subdivision plats. If the final development plan
is found by the City Council to not be in substantial compliance, the applicant
must repeat the procedures outlined for the preliminary development plan.
   (F)   Findings. The findings of the City Council necessary for approval of
both the preliminary and final development plan shall be based on the
following:
      (1)   The plan does not conflict with the Comprehensive Plan;
      (2)   The plan is designed to form a desirable and unified development
within the development’s own boundaries;
      (3)   The proposed uses will not be detrimental to present and future
land use in the surrounding area;
      (4)   Any exceptions to the requirements of the zoning and subdivision
codes are justified by the design of the development; and
      (5)   The planned unit development will not create an excessive burden on
parks, schools, streets and other public facilities and utilities, which serve
or are proposed to serve the planned unit development.
(Ord. 20210217-07, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.249 AMENDMENT AND CONTROL.
   (A)   The City Council on the final development plan shall certify approval
of the C-PUD. Thereafter, the use of land and the construction, modification or
alteration of any buildings in the planned unit development shall be governed
by the approved final development plan. Amendments may be authorized only under
the procedures provided below.
   (B)   Amendments to an approved planned unit development may be made when
they are shown to be required by changes in conditions that have occurred since
the final development plan was approved or by changes in the development
policies of the city.
      (1)   The city’s Zoning Administrator may authorize minor changes in the
location, siting and height of buildings and structures if caused by unforeseen
circumstances. The changes must be consistent with the intent and purpose of
the final development plan and must not increase the size of any building or
structure by 10% or more than originally proposed in the preliminary
development plan.
      (2)   All other changes in the use and rearrangement of lots, blocks and
open space or the replacement of any building substantially destroyed must be
authorized by the City Council pursuant to the procedures outlined for
amendment of this chapter.
(Ord. 20210217-07, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.250 CONFLICT.
   The land use, minimum lot area, yard, height and accessory uses determined
by these C-PUD requirements shall prevail over conflicting requirements listed
elsewhere within this zoning code or in the subdivision regulations, with the
exception of the Kettle River Wild and Scenic River Overlay District and the
General Shoreland Overlay District regulations.
(Ord. 20210217-07, passed 2-17-2021)
KETTLE RIVER WILD AND SCENIC RIVER OVERLAY DISTRICT (KR)
§ 163.265 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this overlay district is to provide for the protection and
preservation of the Kettle River within the city as required by M.S. §§
103F.301 through 103F.345, as it may be amended from time to time, and
applicable state rules and to provide for the protection and preservation of
portions of adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and
discharge a regional flood and are subject to inundations by regional floods.
(Ord. 20210818-01, passed 8-18-2021)
§ 163.266 INTENT.
   (A)   It is the intent of this overlay district to be applied to those areas
which, if left unrestricted, could result in loss of life and property, health
and safety hazards, disruptions of commerce, utilities and governmental
services, extraordinary public expenditures for floodplain protection and
relief and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   This overlay district is created and applied in compliance with
requirements of M.S. §§ 103F.301 through 103F.345, as they may be amended from
time to time.
(Ord. 20210818-01, passed 8-18-2021)
§ 163.267 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   This subchapter does not imply that areas outside the KR Overlay
District boundaries or land uses allowed within the district will be free from
flooding and flood damage.
   (B)   This subchapter does not create liability on the part of the city or
any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages which result from
reliance on this subchapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
(Ord. 20210818-01, passed 8-18-2021)
§ 163.268 DISTRICT APPLICATION.
   The KR Overlay District is applied to and superimposed upon all other zoning
districts as existing or amended by text and map of this subchapter. The
regulations and requirements imposed by this district are in addition to those
established by the zoning districts of this subchapter. Underlying zoning in
these sections is a Public Recreation/Open Space District. (See §§
163.160 through
163.165 of this chapter.) Where provisions of any statue or regulation impose
greater restrictions than those required in this district, such statue or
regulation will control. Where definition of any of the terms of this district
is in dispute, the definitions of Minn. Rules parts 6120.2500 and 6105.0040
will control.
(Ord. 20210818-01, passed 8-18-2021)
§ 163.269 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICT.
   (A)   The boundaries of this district have been established in accordance
with Minn. Rules parts 6105.0600 and 6105.0760. Where interpretation is needed
as to the exact location of the boundaries of this district, the Board of
Adjustment and Appeal will make the necessary interpretations. When boundaries
are in dispute, the burden of proof lies with the applicant.
   (B)   Those boundaries must be amended upon the completion of, in accordance
with data completed, and prepared by the Department of Natural Resources (DNR)
or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), as the case may
be. The floodway and flood fringe boundaries and all applicable regulations
will then be established.
(Ord. 20210818-01, passed 8-18-2021)
§ 163.270 VARIANCES.
   Variances in the KR District may be granted based upon the following
findings.
   (A)   Conditions.
      (1)   The strict enforcement of the land use controls will result in
unnecessary hardship. HARDSHIP, as used, means the property in question cannot
be put to a reasonable use under the conditions allowed by the zoning
regulations. Economic considerations alone do not constitute a hardship if any
reasonable use for the property exists under the terms of this subchapter.
      (2)   Granting of a variance is not contrary to the purpose and intent of
this subchapter and is consistent with the Kettle River Management Plan and the
Municipal Comprehensive Plan.
      (3)   There are exceptional circumstances unique to the property, which
were not created by the landowner.
      (4)   Granting of a variance will not allow any use, which is neither
permitted, or a conditional use in the land use district in which the property
is located.
      (5)   Granting of the variance will not alter the essential character of
the locality as established by the management plan.
   (B)   Exceptions. Where a setback pattern from the ordinary high water mark
has already been established on both sides of the proposed building site the
setback of the proposed structure may be allowed to conform to that pattern.
(Ord. 20210818-01, passed 8-18-2021)
§ 163.271 NOTIFICATION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   (1)   The Zoning Administrator must send copies of all notices of
public hearings and meetings concerning this district relating to zoning
amendments, conditional uses, variances or changes in the zoning map to the
appropriate DNR office at least 30 days prior to the hearings or meetings.
      (2)   In addition, copies of final decisions concerning plats, variances,
ordinance amendments (including rezonings) and conditional uses must be sent to
the appropriate DNR office within ten days of the final decision.
      (3)   The action by the city is effective only when either:
         (a)   The final decision of the city has previously received
certification of approval from the DNR;
         (b)   The city receives certification after its final decision;
         (c)   Thirty days have elapsed from the day the DNR received notice of
the final decision and the city has not received from the DNR the certification
of approval, nor the notice of non-approval; or
         (d)   The DNR certifies approval of the request.
   (B)   In the event the action is not approved by the DNR, the city may,
within 30 days of the notice of non-approval, file with the DNR a request for a
public hearing pursuant to Minn. Rules part 6105.0230 for reconsideration.
(Ord. 20210818-01, passed 8-18-2021)
§ 163.272 USES.
   Permitted uses, conditional uses and accessory uses of the underlying zoning
district apply within the KR Overlay District. Uses permitted in the KR Overlay
District are in Minn. Rules part 6105.0100; except that, public roads and
utility lines are conditional uses in accordance with Minn. Rules part
6105.0170 and 6105.0190.
(Ord. 20210818-01, passed 8-18-2021)
§ 163.273 DISTRICT PROVISIONS.
   The following provisions apply within the KR Wild and Scenic River Overlay
District where they are more restrictive than those of the underlying district.
   (A)   The following chart sets forth the minimum dimensional requirements of
the KR District.
 Unsewered Areas Sewered Areas
                                                 Unsewered Areas Sewered Areas
Building setback from other roads and public     35 ft.          35 ft.
street rights-of-way
Building setback from federal, state or county   50 ft.          50 ft.
trunk highway rights-of-way
Building setback from ordinary high water mark   200 ft.         150 ft.
Building setback from top of bluff               30 ft.          30 ft.
Impervious surface setback from ordinary high    50 ft.          50 ft.
water mark**
Lot size                                         80,000 sq. ft.  40,000 sq. ft.
Lot width at building and water line             200 ft.         125 ft.
Maximum structure height                         35 ft.          35 ft.
Maximum total area of all impervious surfaces on 30%             30%
each lot*
On-site sewage treatment systems from ordinary   150 ft.         N/A
high-water mark
NOTES TO TABLE:
*Includes all structures, surfaced roads, parking lots, and other surfaced
areas.
**Applies to all surfaced roads or parking lots.
 
   (B)   Lots of record on the effective date of this subchapter which do not
meet the applicable size or width requirements are allowed as building sites;
provided that, all the sanitary and dimensional standards are complied with, as
practicable, and the lot was in separate ownership on the effective date of
this subchapter.
   (C)   It is unlawful to install, alter, repair or extend an individual sewer
disposal system or well without first obtaining a permit from the Zoning
Administrator.
      (1)   A permit may not be issued unless the following conditions are
satisfied.
      (2)   Public collection and treatment facilities must be used where
available and feasible.
      (3)   Minimum standards of other local ordinances, Minn. Rules parts
6120.3400 and 7080-7083 and all application standards of the state’s Department
of Health relating to wells and sewer systems are complied with.
      (4)   Private water supply systems must conform to state’s Department of
Health standards for water quality.
   (D)   Individual sanitary sewer systems that do not meet the performance
standards (does not apply to those that are substandard in setback) of this
subchapter must be brought into conformity or discontinued within five years of
the effective date of this subchapter.
   (E)   Between the ordinary high water mark and the applicable building
setback line, clear cutting of trees over four inches in diameter shall be
prohibited. Vegetative cutting in the KR Overlay District must comply with the
conditions of Minn. Rules part 6105.0150.
   (F)   Grading and filling in of the natural topography requires a grading
and filling permit from the zoning officer prior to initiation of any such
work. The permit may be issued if the conditions of Minn. Rules part 6105.0160
are satisfied.
   (G)   Land may not be subdivided that is determined by the city or the
Commissioner of Natural Resources to be unsuitable by reason of flooding,
inadequate drainage, soil and rock formations with severe limitations for
development, severe erosion potential, unfavorable topography, inadequate water
supply or sewage treatment capabilities or any other feature likely to be
harmful to the health, safety or welfare of the future residents of the
proposed subdivision or the community.
   (H)   Soil percolation rate tests and soil borings are required on each
proposed lot in any proposed subdivision within the KR Overlay District to
establish the suitability of the land for development. The testing is required
before any final plat may be approved, but may be waived by the Zoning
Administrator when adequate data is already available.
   (I)   A structure must not be placed in the floodway. Structures proposed to
be located in the floodplain must meet all requirements of Minn. Rules parts
6120.5000 through 6120.6200 (floodplain management).
   (J)   A structure may not be placed on any slope greater than 12% unless the
structure can be screened from view of the water with natural vegetation,
adequate sewage facilities can be installed, and the building permit
application can adequately prove to the Zoning Administrator that erosion will
be controlled or prevented.
(Ord. 20210818-01, passed 8-18-2021) Penalty, see §
163.999
GENERAL SHORELAND DISTRICT
§ 163.285 PURPOSE.
   To provide for the protection of public health, safety and the general
welfare of the residents of the city by preventing pollution and the
uncontrolled development of shorelands of public waters required by M.S. §§
103F.201 through 103F.221 and 462.351 through 462.365, as they may be amended
from time to time, and Minn. Rules parts 6120.2500 through 6120.3900.
(Ord. 20210818-03, passed 8-18-2021)
§ 163.286 DISTRICT APPLICATION.
   This overlay district applies to the shorelands of public waters within or
partly within the city excluding the Kettle River, which is covered under
District KR, the Kettle River Wild and Scenic River Overlay District, of this
chapter. SHORELANDS is defined as all land located within 1,000 feet of the
ordinary high water mark of a lake, pond or flowage and all land within 300
feet of a river or stream, or the landward extent of a floodplain of the river
or stream, whichever is greater. The General Shoreland Overlay District is
superimposed on all zoning districts contained in this chapter as existing or
as amended and on the zoning map. The regulations and requirements imposed by
the GS District are in addition to those established for districts which
jointly apply. Where definitions of any term used in this district is in
dispute, the definitions contained in Minn. Rules part 6120.2500 control.
(Ord. 20210818-03, passed 8-18-2021)
§ 163.287 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   The boundaries of the GS District are established within 300 feet from
the ordinary high water mark of Skunk Creek and Wolf Creek classified for
general development. The practical limits of shorelands may be less than the
statutory limits whenever the waters involved are bounded by topographical
divides which extend landward from the waters for lesser distances and which
are approved by the Commissioner of Natural Resources.
   (B)   Where boundaries of the district are in question, the Board of
Adjustment and Appeals will make the necessary interpretation. If a boundary is
disputed, the burden of proof is on the applicant.
(Ord. 20210818-03, passed 8-18-2021)
§ 163.288 USES.
   Permitted uses, conditional uses and accessory uses in any underlying
district apply within the General Shoreland Overlay District.
(Ord. 20210818-03, passed 8-18-2021)
§ 163.289 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   The following provisions apply within the General Shoreland Overlay District
as minimum requirements. Where the requirements of the underlying zoning
district are more restrictive, the more restrictive standards apply.
   (A)   The following chart sets forth the minimum dimensional requirements of
the General Shoreland Overlay District.
 Unsewered Areas Sewered Areas
                                                 Unsewered Areas Sewered Areas
Building setback from other roads and public     30 ft.          30 ft.
street rights-of-way
Building setback from federal, state or county   50 ft.          50 ft.
trunk highway rights-of-way
Building setback from ordinary high water mark   100 ft.         50 ft.
Impervious surface setback from ordinary high    50 ft.          50 ft.
water mark**
Lot size                                         20,000 sq. ft.  15,000 sq. ft.
Lot width at building and water line             100 ft.         75 ft.
Maximum structure height                         25 ft.          25 ft.
Maximum total area of all impervious surfaces on 25%             25%
each lot*
On-site sewage treatment systems from ordinary   100 ft.         50 ft.
high water mark
NOTES TO TABLE:
*Includes all structures, surfaced roads, parking lots and other surfaced
areas.
**Applies to all surfaced roads or parking lots.
 
   (B)   Lots of record on the effective date of this subchapter which do not
meet the applicable size or width requirements are allowed as building sites;
provided that, all the sanitary and dimensional standards are complied with, as
practicable, and the lot was in separate ownership on the effective date of
this subchapter.
   (C)   It is unlawful to install, alter, repair or extend an individual
sewage disposal system or well without first obtaining a permit from the Zoning
Administrator. A permit may not be issued unless the following conditions are
satisfied:
      (1)   Public collection and treatment facilities must be used where
available and feasible;
      (2)   Minimum standards of other local ordinances, Minn. Rules part
6120.3400 and Chapters 7080 though 7083 and all application standards of the
state’s Department of Health relating to wells and sewer systems are complied
with; and
      (3)   Private water supply systems must conform to State Department of
Health standards for water quality.
   (D)   Individual sanitary sewer systems that do not meet the performance
standards (does not apply to those that are substandard in setback) of this
subchapter must be brought into conformity or discontinued within five years of
the effective date of this subchapter.
   (E)   Between the ordinary high water mark and the applicable building
setback line, clear cutting of trees over four inches in diameter shall be
prohibited. Vegetative cutting in the GS Overlay District must comply with the
conditions of Minn. Rules part 6105.0150.
   (F)   Grading and filling in of the natural topography requires a grading
and filling permit from the zoning officer prior to initiation of any such
work. The permit may be issued if the conditions of Minn. Rules part 6105.0160
are satisfied.
   (G)   Land may not be subdivided that is determined by the city or the
Commissioner of Natural Resources to be unsuitable by reason of flooding,
inadequate drainage, soil and rock formations with severe limitations for
development, severe erosion potential, unfavorable topography, inadequate water
supply or sewage treatment capabilities or any other feature likely to be
harmful to the health, safety or welfare of the future residents of the
proposed subdivision or the community.
   (H)   Soil percolation rate tests and soil borings are required on each
proposed lot in any proposed subdivision within the GS Overlay District to
establish the suitability of the land for development. The testing is required
before any final plat may be approved, but may be waived by the Zoning
Administrator when adequate data is already available.
   (I)   A structure must not be placed in the floodway. Structures proposed to
be located in the floodplain must meet all requirements of Minn. Rules parts
6120.5000 through 6120.6200 (floodplain management).
   (J)   A structure may not be placed on any slope greater than 12% unless the
structure can be screened from view of the water with natural vegetation,
adequate sewage facilities can be installed and the building permit application
can adequately prove to the Zoning Administrator that erosion will be
controlled or prevented.
(Ord. 20210818-03, passed 8-18-2021)
§ 163.290 NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator must send copies of all notices of public
hearings and meetings concerning this district relating to zoning amendments,
conditional uses or variances or changes in the zoning map to the appropriate
DNR office at least 30 days prior to the hearings or meetings. In addition,
copies of final decisions concerning plats, variances, ordinance amendments
(including re-zonings) and conditional uses must be sent to the appropriate DNR
office within ten days of the final decision.
   (B)   The action by the city is effective only when either:
      (1)   The final decision of the city has previously received
certification of approval from the DNR;
      (2)   The city receives certification after its final decision;
      (3)   Thirty days have elapsed from the day the DNR received notice of
the final decision and the city has not received from the DNR the certification
of approval nor the notice of non-approval; or
      (4)   The DNR certifies approval of the request.
   (C)   In the event the action is not approved by the DNR, the city may,
within 30 days of the notice of non-approval, file with the DNR a request for a
public hearing pursuant to Minn. Rules part 6105.0230 for reconsideration.
(Ord. 20210818-03, passed 8-18-2021)
§ 163.291 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Variances may be granted in extraordinary cases, but only after the
variance procedures of this subchapter are followed and only when the proposed
use is determined to be in the public interest. A variance will not be granted
if it is determined to or has a tendency to:
      (1)   Result in the placement of an artificial obstruction which will
restrict the passage of storm and flood water in such a manner as to increase
the height of flooding, except obstructions approved by the DNR in conjunction
with sound floodplain management;
      (2)   Result in incompatible land uses or which would be detrimental to
the protection of surface and ground water supplies;
      (3)   Be not in keeping with land use plans and planning objectives for
the city or that will increase or cause danger to life or property; and
      (4)   Be inconsistent with objectives of encouraging land uses compatible
with the preservation of the natural land forms, vegetation and the shorelands
in the city.
   (B)   For properties with existing sewage treatment systems, a certificate
of compliance, consistent with Minn. Rules part 7082.0700, subpart 3, is
required for variance approval. A sewage treatment system shall be considered
compliant if the only deficiency is the system’s improper setback from the
ordinary high water mark.
(Ord. 20210818-03, passed 8-18-2021)
§ 163.292 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   This subchapter does not imply that areas outside the GS Overlay District
boundaries or land uses allowed within the district will be free from flooding
and flood damage. This subchapter does not create liability on the part of the
city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages which result from
reliance on this subchapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
(Ord. 20210818-03, passed 8-18-2021)
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK OVERLAY DISTRICT (RV)
§ 163.305 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of the RV Overlay District is to provide a residential
district for short-term or transient recreational vehicles.
   (B)   A recreational vehicle park is allowed as a conditional use in the
Prospective Interchange Development District.
(Ord. 20210217-01, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.306 DEFINITION.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES are vehicles for recreational use that can be driven,
towed or hauled and are designed to be temporary living space for camping and
travel use. Short-term or transient RVs include travel trailers, camping
trailers, tents, truck campers, and self-propelled motor homes. Recreational
vehicles are distinguished from mobile homes, which are not permitted.
(Ord. 20210217-01, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.307 PERMITTED USES.
   Transient (less than four months) living space for camping and travel
accommodations (no age limit) in the short-term/transient section.
(Ord. 20210217-01, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.308 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory uses are allowed in a central, common area designed
for use by the short-term or transient section:
   (A)   Storage buildings for maintenance equipment and items stored by
tenants;
   (B)   Community buildings for use by RV park tenants and visitors;
   (C)   Offices and/or living quarters for the administration of the RV park;
   (D)   Laundry facilities for use by RV park tenants;
   (E)   Parks, playgrounds and other recreational facilities; and
   (F)   A secured storage area for large items such as boats, trailers and the
like owned by tenants.
(Ord. 20210217-01, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.309 CONDITIONAL USES.
   Other uses and services designed primarily for the use of tenants in the RV
District are conditional uses, including primitive and tent camping.
(Ord. 20210217-01, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.310 REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES FOR INITIAL DEVELOPMENT OR EXPANSION.
   All informational elements as required in this subsection must be submitted
to the city in accordance with the normal time schedule outlined for zoning
district amendments, whether or not the proposal requires a rezoning. Prior to
the development of an RV park, either the owner, the developer, or both, must
submit a site plan of the proposed RV park to the Planning Commission for
review and the City Council for approval of the project or development.
Proposals for RV park expansions on properly zoned land must conform to the
city site plan review procedures.
(Ord. 20210217-01, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.311 DESIGN AND OPERATIONAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   All land area must be adequately drained, landscaped to control dust
and to create a pleasant environment for tenants, and clean and free from
refuse, garbage, rubbish, debris or outdoor storage.
   (B)   Clothes lines may be located in city-approved areas established and
maintained exclusively for that purpose, as identified on the RV park site
plan.
(Ord. 20210217-01, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.312 SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Legal description and size in acres of the proposed RV park;
   (B)   Location and size of all sites and pads, storage areas, recreation
areas, laundry drying areas, roadways, parking sites and all setback dimensions
(parking spaces, exact sites and the like);
   (C)   Detailed landscaping plans and specifications;
   (D)   Location and width of sidewalks and interior walkways;
   (E)   Plans for sanitary sewage disposal, surface drainage, water systems,
electrical services and gas service;
   (F)   Location and size of all streets abutting the RV park and all
driveways from such streets to the RV park;
   (G)   Road construction plans and specifications;
   (H)   Location and plans for any and all permanent structures;
   (I)   Such other information as required or implied by these RV park
standards or requested by public officials;
   (J)   Name and address of developer(s);
   (K)   Description of the method of disposing of garbage and refuse;
   (L)   Detailed description of maintenance procedures and grounds
supervision;
   (M)   Description of fire and safety standards and procedures; and
   (N)   Description of the guidelines, rules and covenants proposed by the RV
park operator regulating the building type and construction of building
alterations, accessory buildings, decks and similar type construction.
(Ord. 20210217-01, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.313 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   The minimum area required for an RV park district is five acres.
   (B)   Each lot must have frontage on an approved private roadway and the
front corner of each site must be marked and numbered.
   (C)   Minimum individual RV unit or pad setbacks:
      (1)   Front yard: 30 feet to the public street or utilities;
      (2)   Side yard, interior: 15 feet;
      (3)   Side yard, corner: 20 feet to the street; and
      (4)   Rear yard: ten feet.
   (D)   Building requirements: a structure will not exceed one story or 25
feet, whichever is less.
   (E)   Parking:
      (1)   Minimum of one off-street parking space on each site; and
      (2)   Each RV park shall maintain off-street parking lots for guests or
occupants.
   (F)   Utilities.
      (1)   Potable water must be available.
      (2)   All utilities must be underground; there may be no overhead wires
or supporting poles except those essential for street or other lighting
purposes.
      (3)   Garbage, waste and trash containers must be provided by the RV park
owner/operator.
   (G)   Private internal roads and streets.
      (1)   All internal roads or streets providing access to individual RV
lots must be constructed and maintained by the RV park owner/operator.
      (2)   Roads must be surfaced as approved by the city.
      (3)   All streets shall be developed with a roadbed of not less than 18
feet in width.
   (H)   Recreation.
      (1)   All RV parks must have a least 10% of the land area developed for
recreational use (tennis courts, children’s play equipment, swimming pool, golf
green and the like).
      (2)   Such areas are to be developed and maintained at the owner/
operator’s expense.
   (I)   Landscaping.
      (1)   Each site must be property landscaped with trees, hedges, grass,
fences, windbreaks and the like in accordance with landscaping plans approved
by the city.
      (2)   A compact hedge, fence or landscape screening must be installed
around each RV Park.
   (J)   Lighting.
      (1)   Artificial light must be maintained during all hours of darkness in
all buildings containing public toilets, laundry equipment and the like.
      (2)   The RV park grounds must be lighted as approved by the city from
sunset to sunrise.
   (K)   Storage. Enclosed storage lockers, when provided, must be located in a
central area convenient to all tenants. Any such storage yards must be
maintained in an orderly manner to be convenient and accessible to tenants.
(Ord. 20210217-01, passed 2-17-2021)
§ 163.314 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   The operator of the RV park must keep a record of all park tenants
located within the RV park. The register must contain the following
information:
      (1)   The name and address of each RV occupant and owner;
      (2)   The make, model and year of each RV and vehicles;
      (3)   The state, territory or county issuing the license; and
      (4)   The date of arrival and departure.
   (B)   The park operator must keep the register available for inspection at
all times by authorized city, state and county officials, public health
officials and other public offices whose duty necessitates acquisition of the
information contained in the register. The register shall not be destroyed
until after a period of three years following the date of departure of the
registrant from the park.
(Ord. 20210217-01, passed 2-17-2021)
ENFORCEMENT; COMPLIANCE WITH GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 163.325 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Zoning Administrator.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator administers the provisions of this
section. The Zoning Administrator must:
         (a)   Maintain permanent and current records of this section,
including amendments thereto;
         (b)   Receive and file all applications;
         (c)   Forward copies of applications to other appropriate offices and
agencies for their recommendations and reports;
         (d)   Forward all applications, with recommendations, to the Planning
Commission for action;
         (e)   Receive and file all final plans and check their compliance with
the preliminary plan;
         (f)   Forward all final plans, with recommendations to the City
Council for final action; and
         (g)   Make all other determinations required by the regulations
herein.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator must review all applications and
preliminary plans as to planning considerations and compliance with the
comprehensive plan and make recommendations thereon to the city’s Planning
Commission. The Zoning Administrator is the City Administrator or the
Administrator’s designee.
   (B)   Board of Adjustment and Appeals. The City Council is the Board of
Adjustment and Appeals and has the powers and duties provided by law for the
Board.
   (C)   Planning Commission.
      (1)   There is established as continued a Planning Commission. The
Planning Commission consists of five members appointed by the City Council.
Members must be residents of the city. The Planning Commission is the planning
agency of the city as provided in M.S. § 462.354, as it may be amended from
time to time.
      (2)   The City Council must appoint one of its members to serve on the
Planning Commission.
      (3)   The Planning Commission must elect a chairman from among its
members and appoint a secretary. The Administrator or the Administrator’s
designee may serve as the Secretary. The Secretary must keep minutes of all
meetings.
      (4)   The Planning Commission advises the City Council on conditional use
permits, interim use permits, right-of-way vacations, rezonings, planned unit
development, plat reviews, comprehensive plan amendments, variances, changes to
this section or any other matter deemed necessary by the City Council for the
effective administration of this section, as well as reviewing and commenting
on all proposed public acquisitions or disposal of real property within the
city and on all proposed public capital improvements within the city.
      (5)   Each member of the Planning Commission may vote on all questions.
      (6)   Members of the Planning Commission serve for terms of three years.
   (D)   Enforcement.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator must enforce this section.
      (2)   If the Zoning Administrator finds that a provision of this section
is being violated, the Zoning Administrator must notify, in writing, the person
responsible for the violations, indicating the nature of the violation, and
ordering action necessary to correct it. The Zoning Administrator may order
discontinuance of any illegal work being done, and may take any other action
authorized by this section to insure compliance with or to prevent violations
of this section.
      (3)   A building permit may not be issued for the construction or repair
of a building or structure located on a lot or plat sold in violation of the
regulations of this section or in violation if the regulations of this section
or in non-compliance with the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 2008-11, passed - -2008; Ord. 20241016-01, passed 10-16-2024)
§ 163.326 ZONING COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   General rule. Buildings or structures erected, constructed, altered or
moved must conform to the regulations specified for the district in which they
are located. The use of a building or structure or parcel of land may not
change unless it conforms to all of the regulations specified for the district
in which it is located.
   (B)   Use and occupancy permit. No premises or building shall be used or
occupied in any of the business, commercial or industrial zoning districts in
the city unless and until a use and occupancy permit has been issued by the
Zoning Administrator for the particular occupant(s), use(s) and activities to
be carried on at such premises.
      (1)   No change in any use or occupant shall be made at any such premises
or building unless and until a new use and occupancy permit has been issued by
the Zoning Administrator permitting such change. Applications for a use and
occupancy permit shall list the names and addresses of all of the owners and
occupants of the building or premises and shall describe each and all of the
businesses and activities proposed for such premises.
      (2)   Use and occupancy permits issued by the Zoning Administrator shall
describe the business or activity for which the premises may be used or
occupied and the names of the owner(s) and occupant(s). Such permit shall be
posted in a conspicuous place at the premises.
   (C)   Compliance. Persons seeking to either erect, construct, structurally
alter or reconstruct any building or structure must apply for a building
permit. Persons seeking to change the use of a structure or parcel of land must
first discuss plans with the Zoning Administrator to determine if a building
permit is required for the activity.
   (D)   Procedure. The following procedure is followed to determine if
proposed buildings or structures or alterations to buildings and structures
comply with the regulations of this section.
      (1)   Building permit applications are available at the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer’s office, from the Zoning Administrator, or from
the Building Official.
      (2)   Applicants must fill out the form, sign it and pay the fee before a
determination of compliance is made.
      (3)   The completed application is forwarded to the Zoning Administrator
who checks the application and activity for compliance with this section.
         (a)   If the completed application meets the regulations of this
section, the Zoning Administrator may sign the compliance form and forward a
copy to the applicant and the Planning Commission.
         (b)   If the completed application does not comply with this section
the Zoning Administrator must notify the applicant of the reasons for non-
compliance.
         (c)   If the proposed activity, use or construction requires a
variance or conditional use permit, the Zoning Administrator must notify the
applicant in writing and explain variance and conditional use permit
procedures.
      (4)   Determinations by the Zoning Administrator under this section must
be forwarded to the Planning Commission.
   (E)   Conditional use permits.
      (1)   In granting a conditional use permit, the City Council must
consider the advice and recommendations of the Planning Commission and the
effect of the proposed use on the comprehensive plan and upon the health,
safety and general welfare of occupants of surrounding lands. Among other
things, the City Council must make the following findings, where applicable:
         (a)   The use will not create an excessive burden on existing parks,
schools, streets and other public facilities that serve or are proposed to
serve the area;
         (b)   The use will be sufficiently compatible or separated by distance
or screened from adjacent residentially zoned or used land so that existing
homes will not depreciate in value and there will be no deterrence to
development of vacant land;
         (c)   The structure and site will have an appearance that will not
have an adverse effect upon adjacent residential properties;
         (d)   The use, in the opinion of the City Council, is reasonably
related to the overall needs of the city and to the existing land use;
         (e)   The use is consistent with the purposes of the zoning ordinance
and the purposes of the zoning district in which the applicant intends to
locate the proposed use;
         (f)   The use in not in conflict with the comprehensive plan;
         (g)   The use will not cause traffic hazards or congestion; and
         (h)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and necessary
facilities have been or will be provided.
      (2)   The City Council may impose, in addition to the standards and
requirements expressly specified by this section, additional conditions which
the City Council considers necessary to protect the best interest of the
surrounding area or the community as a whole. These conditions may include, but
are not limited to the following:
         (a)   Increasing the required lot size or yard dimension;
         (b)   Limiting the height, size or location of buildings;
         (c)   Controlling the location and number of vehicle access points;
         (d)   Increasing the street width;
         (e)   Increasing the number of required off-street parking spaces;
         (f)   Limiting the number, size, location or lighting of signs;
         (g)   Requiring diking, fencing, screening, landscaping or other
facilities to protect adjacent or nearby property;
         (h)   Designating sites for open space; and
         (i)   Establishing a time limit for action under the permit.
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator must maintain a record of all conditional
use permits issued including information on the use, location, and conditions
imposed by the City Council, time limits, and such other information as may be
appropriate.
      (4)   The procedure for obtaining a conditional use permit is as follows:
         (a)   The property owner or the owner’s agent meets with the Zoning
Administrator to explain the proposal, learn the procedures, and obtain an
application form;
         (b)   The applicant files the completed application form together with
the required exhibits and fee as required by §
36.02 of this code of ordinances with the Zoning Administrator. Required
exhibits may include, but are not limited to, a preliminary building and site
plan, evidence of ownership or purchase contract or enforceable option on the
property involved and a boundary survey of the property;
         (c)   The Zoning Administrator transmits the application to the
Planning Commission and notifies property owners within 350 feet of the outer
boundaries of the property in question; however, failure of property owner to
receive such notification does not invalidate the proceedings;
         (d)   The Zoning Administrator sets the date for a public hearing and
publishes notice of the hearing at least once in the official newspaper, not
less than ten days and not more than 30 days prior to the hearing;
         (e)   The Planning Commission holds the public hearing and studies the
application to determine possible adverse effects of the proposed conditional
use and to determine what additional requirements may be necessary to reduce
such adverse effects and recommend one of three actions to the City Council
after holding the public hearing, approval, denial or conditional approval;
         (f)   The City Council takes appropriate action on the request for a
conditional use permit after receiving the recommendation by the Planning
Commission. If the City Council grants the conditional use permit, the City
Council may impose conditions it considers necessary to protect the public
health, safety and welfare;
         (g)   A conditional use permit is void without further action by the
Planning Commission or the City Council if work thereon does not commence
within one year of the date granting such conditional use;
         (h)   In the event that the applicant violates any of the conditions
set forth in the permit, the Zoning Administrator notifies the City Council. If
the City Council finds a violation has occurred the applicant must be notified
in writing of the possible violation. Before corrective action is taken, the
City Council must hold a public hearing on the status of the permit. After the
public hearing is held, the City Council may recommend either that no action be
taken or order the applicant to take collective action to bring the permit into
compliance; and
         (i)   An application for the same conditional use permit may not be
considered by the Planning Commission within a one year period following denial
of an application for that permit.
   (F)   Interim use permits.
      (1)   The purpose of this section is to allow the establishment or
continuation of interim uses under specific and regulated conditions. Interim
uses may be allowed by interim use permit if the following conditions are met;
         (a)   The use conforms to the city’s zoning regulations;
         (b)   The date or event that will terminate the use can be identified
with certainly;
         (c)   Permission of the use will not impose additional costs on the
public if it is necessary for the public to take the property in the future;
and
         (d)   The user agrees to any conditions that the City Council deems
appropriate for permission of the use.
      (2)   The land owner or user shall submit an application for an interim
use permit to the city. The application shall be accompanied by the following
information and documentation:
         (a)   A legal description of the property;
         (b)   The name and address of the owner and user, if different;
         (c)   A survey showing property boundaries, existing improvements,
including buildings, parking areas, storage areas, utilities, drainage tiles
and wells, topography of the site and area within 1,200 feet of the properly
boundaries with contours at two-foot intervals, significant trees and existing
vegetation, easements of record, including the dimensions thereof, and
wetlands;
         (d)   A site plan of proposed improvements, showing all buildings,
parking areas, storage areas, driveways, access points, berms, easements and
adjacent public or private streets;
         (e)   Floor plans and building elevations, including list of building
materials, showing a sketch or computer-generated image of proposed buildings
as viewed from surrounding uses;
         (f)   A site plan of existing uses on property in non-residential
zones adjacent to the site and on property in residential zones within 720 feet
of the site, measured at the closest point, showing buildings, entrances and
other significant features and illustrating sight lines to the proposed use;
         (g)   A proposed grading plan with contours at two-foot intervals;
         (h)   A soils map;
         (i)   A tree preservation plan;
         (j)   A landscaping plan, including a listing of the species and sizes
of vegetation;
         (k)   A drainage and storm water plan;
         (l)   A utility plan;
         (m)   A sign plan;
         (n)   A lighting plan;
         (o)   A table of all proposed uses by type and square footage,
including estimated water and sanitary sewer usage;
         (p)   A statement of the date or event terminating the use; and
         (q)   The application fee, as required by §
36.02 of this code of ordinances.
      (3)   Upon receipt of an application for an interim use permit, the City
Administrator shall review the material submitted and determine whether the
application is complete. If the application is not complete, the City
Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing and shall specify the
additional documentation or information that the applicant will be required to
submit before the application will be considered complete. When the application
is complete, the City Administrator shall refer the matter to the Planning
Commission for review and public hearing.
      (4)   (a)   The Planning Commission shall review the interim use permit
application on the basis of the information and documentation submitted by the
applicant and any other information available to it. The Planning Commission
shall hold a public hearing on the proposed interim use permit. Notice of the
time, place and purpose of the hearing shall be published in the city’s
official newspaper at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Notice
must also be mailed at least ten days prior to the hearing to each owner of
property situated wholly or partly within 350 feet of the property to which the
interim use permit relates.
         (b)   The Planning Commission shall review the proposed interim use to
determine whether it is consistent with the requirements of the city planning
and land use regulations. Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission
shall recommend that the interim use be approved with conditions or denied. The
Planning Commission shall forward its recommendation to the City Council along
with a list of suggested conditions if it recommends approval of the permit.
      (5)   (a)   The City Council shall consider the recommendation of the
Planning Commission after receipt of its report and may consider any additional
information or conduct such additional review, if any, as it determines would
serve the public interest. The City Council shall approve with conditions or
deny the interim use permit The City Council shall condition its approval in
any manner it deems reasonably necessary in order to promote public health,
safety or welfare and to achieve compliance with the city code. The City
Council may require the applicant to enter into an agreement including such
provisions as it deems reasonably required to ensure compliance with the city
code and the terms and conditions of the city’s approval.
         (b)   An application to amend an approved site plan shall be reviewed
under this section in the same manner as an initial application for an interim
use permit.
      (6)   An interim use shall terminate upon the date or the occurrence of
the event established in the permit or upon such other condition specified by
the city. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, an interim use may
be terminated by a change in zoning regulations applicable to the use or land
upon which it is located.
   (G)   Variances.
      (1)   A variance from the literal provisions of this code may be granted
by the council: in instances where it is determined that, by reason of
circumstances unique to the individual property not created by the landowner,
the strict enforcement would cause practical difficulties, and where it is
demonstrated that granting the variance is in harmony with the general purpose
and intent of the code and consistent with the comprehensive plan. Practical
difficulties include, but are not limited to, inadequate access to direct
sunlight for solar energy systems.
         (a)   PRACTICAL DIFFICULTIES, as used in connection with the granting
of a variance, means:
            1.   The property owner proposes to use the property in a
reasonable manner not permitted by the code;
            2.   Unique circumstances apply to the property which do not apply
generally to other properties in the same zone or vicinity and result from lot
size or shape, topography or other circumstances over which the owner of the
property has had no control. That the unique circumstances do not result from
the actions of the landowner; and
            3.   The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood.
         (b)   Economic conditions alone do not constitute practical
difficulties.
         (c)   No variance may be granted that would allow any use that is
prohibited in the zoning district in which the subject property is located.
         (d)   The City Council may impose such conditions upon the premises
benefitted by the variance as may be necessary to comply with the standards
established by this code or to reduce or minimize the effect of such variance
upon others the neighborhood, and to better carry out the intent of the
variance. The condition must be directly related to and must bear a rough
proportionality to the impact created by the variance. A variance may not
permit a lower degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood protection
elevation for the particular area nor permit standards lower than those
required by federal, state or local law.
      (2)   The procedure for obtaining a variance is as follows.
         (a)   The property owner or the owner’s agent must meet with the
Zoning Administrator to explain the proposal, be informed of the application
procedures, and obtain an application form.
         (b)   The applicant must file the completed application form together
with the required exhibits with the Zoning Administrator and must pay an
application fee as required by §
36.02 of this code of ordinances. Required exhibits may include, but are not
limited to, a preliminary building and site plan, evidence of ownership or
purchase contract or enforceable option on the property involved and a boundary
survey of the property.
         (c)   The Zoning Administrator transmits the application to the
Planning Commission and notifies property owners within 30 feet of the outer
boundaries of the property in question; however, failure of property owner to
receive such notification does not invalidate the proceedings.
         (d)   The Zoning Administrator sets the date for a public hearing and
publishes notice of the hearing at least once in the official newspaper, not
less than ten days and not more than 30 days prior to the hearing.
         (e)   The Planning Commission will review the application and make its
recommendation on the variance application to the City Council. The City
Council must take one of three actions: approval; denial; or approval with
conditions. The City Council shall make written findings of fact on the
application and shall state therein the reasons for such decision. A copy of
the findings shall be mailed to the applicant.
         (f)   An application by a property owner for a variance may not be
submitted to the city within a six-month period following a denial of such a
request, except the Zoning Administrator may permit a new application if, in
the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, new evidence or change in
circumstances warrant it.
   (H)   Ordinance amendments.
      (1)   An amendment to this section may not be adopted until a public
hearing has been held thereon by the Planning Commission. A notice of the time,
place and purpose of the hearing must be published in the official newspaper at
least ten days prior to the day of the hearing. When an amendment involves
changes in district boundaries, affecting an area of five acres or less, a
similar notice must be mailed at least ten days before the day of the hearing
to each owner of affected property and property situated wholly or partially
within 350 feet of the property to which amendment relates. For the purpose of
giving mailed notice, the person responsible for mailing the notice may use any
appropriate records to determine names and addresses of owners. A copy of the
notice and a list of owners and addresses to which the notice is sent must be
attested to by the responsible person and be made a part of the record of the
proceedings. The failure to give mailed notice to individual property owners or
defects in the notice do not invalidate the proceedings, providing a bona fide
attempt to comply with this section has been made by the responsible person.
      (2)   An amendment to this section may be initiated by the City Council,
the City Planning Commission or by petition of affected property owners.
      (3)   An amendment not initiated by the Planning Commission must be
referred to the Planning Commission for review and recommendations, and may not
be acted on by the City Council until the City Council has received the
recommendations of the Planning Commission on the proposed amendment or until
60 days have elapsed from the date of reference of the amendment without a
report by the Planning Commission.
      (4)   Any amendment or changes in zoning district boundaries of parcels
of land lying wholly or partially in the General Shoreland District or Kettle
River Wild and Scenic River and Floodplain Districts requires notification of
the appropriate DNR office of such meetings or hearings at least ten days prior
to such meetings and hearings.
      (5) Copies of final decisions involving amendments to this section or
changes of district boundaries lying wholly or partially in the General
Shoreland District or Kettle River Wild and Scenic River and Floodplain
Districts must be sent to the appropriate DNR office within ten days of the
final decision. The amendment does not become effective until approval is
received from the DNR.
   (I)   Review and recommendation.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator must review all applications under this
section.
      (2)   The Planning Commission must review proposed ordinance amendments,
conditional use permits, interim use permits and variance applications.
      (3)   The City Council hears appeals of determinations by the Zoning
Administrator and variance, interim use permit and conditional use permit
applications.
      (4)   Preliminary plats must be reviewed by the Planning Commission to
determine conformity to this section and all other ordinances in force which
affect zoning. Copies of such preliminary plats will be transmitted by the
Zoning Administrator to the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, other
officials, and agencies as the Planning Commission deems necessary for its
recommendations concerning matters within its jurisdiction.
      (5)   Recommendations on plats must be transmitted to the Planning
Commission at least three days prior to its regularly scheduled meeting.
      (6)   Applications pertaining to land lying in the General Shoreland
District or Kettle River Wild and Scenic River and Floodplain Districts must be
reviewed by the DNR.
(Ord. 2008-11, passed - -2008; Ord. 2010-01, passed 2-16-2010; Ord. 2011-09,
passed 8-17-2011) Penalty, see §
163.999
§ 163.327 GENERAL CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Relationship to county, state and federal ordinances. The provisions
of this section are the minimal requirements. This section is to be applied in
conjunction with all other applicable governmental statutes, ordinances, codes
and regulations. More restrictive federal, state or county regulations or
standards prevail over the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Conformity of structures with ordinance. A structure or part thereof
may not be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered
and land may not change in use, unless in conformity with this section.
   (C)   Dwellings and lot area requirements. In each zoning district, each
building must be on a lot of the area specified in this section.
   (D)   Heights of structures that exceed limits. In zoning districts where
the following structures are permitted, heights may exceed limits set forth
elsewhere, but only after approval of the Planning Commission:
      (1)   Flag poles;
      (2)   Chimneys or smokestacks;
      (3)   Lookout towers;
      (4)   Windmills and wind generators;
      (5)   Water towers;
      (6)    Place of assembly spires, belfries or domes;
      (7)   Elevator lags;
      (8)   Cooling towers;
      (9)   Electric transmission lines;
      (10)   Agricultural buildings; and
      (11)   Monuments.
   (E)   Refuse.
      (1)   In all districts, waste material, debris, refuse, or garbage must
be kept in a closed container or building properly designed for such purposes,
with the exception of crop residue. The owner of vacant land is responsible for
keeping the land free of refuse. Uses must comply with this provision within
six months following the effective date of this section.
      (2)   (a)   Passenger or recreational vehicles, trucks, or boats in an
inoperative state may not be parked in residential districts for a period
exceeding seven days. INOPERATIVE means incapable of movement under its own
power and in need of repairs.
         (b)   Other passenger vehicles must be currently licensed. In
residential districts, one inoperable car may be stored in the rear yard if
covered by opaque material.
         (c)   Exterior storage material not included as a permitted use,
accessory use or conditional use, or otherwise permitted by provisions of this
section, is considered refuse.
      (3)   Lots must be maintained in a reasonable manner with the grass cut
on a regular basis and noxious weeds controlled.
   (F)   Relocating structures.
      (1)   A building permit is required for permanent relocations of
structures. Construction sheds and other temporary accessory structures to be
located on a lot for less than six months, do not require a permit. Accessory
structures may not be used for human habitation.
      (2)   For relocation of structures requiring a permit, the applicant must
submit photographs showing all sides of the structure to be moved and proposed
site plan of the lot on which the structure is to be located. A map is required
indicating location of surrounding lots and structures. The structure to be
relocated must be compatible with structures and uses on surrounding lots.
   (G)   Satellite dishes. Satellite dishes are permitted in all districts. A
building permit is required. District set-backs must be met in placement of
dishes. Dishes may not exceed 35 feet in height.
   (H)   Bulk storage.
      (1)   Uses associated with the bulk storage of oil, gasoline, liquid
fertilizer, chemicals and similar liquids require a conditional use permit in
order that the City Council may have assurance that fire, explosion or water or
soil contamination hazards are no present that would be detrimental to the
public health, safety and general welfare. Existing, aboveground, liquid
storage tanks having a capacity in excess of 10,000 gallons must secure a
conditional use permit within 12 months following the effective date of this
section.
      (2)   Diking around tanks is required. Diking must be suitably sealed and
hold a leakage capacity equal to 115% of the tank capacity. An existing storage
tank that, in the opinion of the City Council, constitutes a hazard to the
public safety must discontinue operations within one year following the
effective date of this section.
   (I)   Dwelling units; certificates of.
      (1)   A basement, garage, tent, trailer, recreational vehicle or
accessory building may not be used as a permanent dwelling.
      (2)   The basement portion of the finished home or apartment may be used
for normal eating and sleeping purposes provided it is properly damp-proofed,
has suitable fire protection and exits, and is otherwise approved by the
Building Official.
      (3)   A building or structure erected or moved, or that portion of an
existing structure or building erected or moved may not be occupied or used in
whole or in part until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the
Building Official that the building or structure complies with all of the
provisions within this action.
      (4)   The certificate of occupancy must be applied for at the same time
as the application for a building permit, conditional, use permit or variance
and must be issued within ten days after the Building Official the building or
structure satisfactory and gives final inspection.
   (J)   Recreational vehicles. The parking or storing of recreational vehicles
outside of an enclosed building or structure in the Traditional Residential,
Suburban Residential, and Residential Planned Unit Development (RU-PUD)
districts is prohibited, except as hereafter provided.
      (1)   No more than two recreational vehicles may be stored or parked
outside upon a lot.
      (2)   (a)   Recreational vehicles not greater than 12 feet in height may
be parked or stored on:
            1.   The part of a front yard of a lot occupied by a driveway,
provided that no part of the recreational vehicle may be closer than 15 feet
from the traveled portion of a street;
            2.   The part of a side yard or rear yard of a lot not situated
within ten feet of a lot line; or
            3.   The part of a side yard within 10 feet of a lot line which is
occupied by a driveway, is not within 15 feet of the traveled portion of a
street, and is not within any drainage and utility easement. The recreational
vehicle must be screened from the neighboring property and any public street by
either a fence or live plantings. If a fence is used, it must screen the
maximum amount of the vehicle possible while meeting other requirements of the
City Code, such as maximum height. If live plantings are used, they must screen
a minimum of 50% of the length and 50% of the height of the recreational
vehicle at the time of planting. Plants must screen the entire length and
height of the recreational vehicle at full maturity. Screening requirements may
be waived by the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer with the written consent of
the owner(s) of the property adjacent to the location of the recreational
vehicle. When a waiver is requested for storage on a side yard that is adjacent
to a public street, city staff shall determine if screening is required.
         (b)   In addition to the general 12-foot height permitted, minor
portions of accessory equipment not exceeding square feet in vertical cross-
section as viewed from the adjacent lot line is permitted.
      (3)   Recreational vehicles parked or stored outside for a period in
excess of 14 days must be owned by a person residing on the lot.
      (4)   All recreational vehicles parked or stored, outside must be in a
safe, operable condition and exhibit current license or registration plates or
tags if the vehicle is one for which a license or registration plate or tag is
required by law for its operation.
      (5)   No recreational vehicle shall be used for living, sleeping, or
housekeeping purposes when parked or stored in the Traditional Residential,
Suburban Residential, and Residential Planned Unit Development District (M-PUD)
District.
      (6)   A recreational vehicle must not be parked or stored over or upon a
bikeway, pathway or sidewalk.
      (7)   No recreational vehicle shall be parked on a public street longer
than 72 consecutive hours without being moved. The total number of days a
recreational vehicle may be parked on a public street shall not exceed six days
per month.
      (8)   Recreational vehicles being stored on property in accordance with
this subdivision may only be connected to electricity or water for no more than
seven consecutive days and only for purposes of maintaining the vehicle or
preparing it for travel.
(Ord. passed - -2002; Ord. 2008-11, passed - -2008; Ord. 2013-03, passed 10-16-
2013; Ord. 2015-04, passed 8-29-2015; Ord. 20231115-03, passed 11-15-2023)
§ 163.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed
for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this chapter, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more
than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
      (3)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time,
in either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
      (4) The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
      (5)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if any
person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this code,
the City Council or any city official designated by it may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
   (B)   Every person who shall construct, establish, substantially change,
alter or repair any existing structure or use, or permit the growth of any tree
without having complied with the provision of §§
163.180 through
163.194 of this chapter or who, having been granted a permit or variance under
the provisions of §§
163.180 through
163.194 of this chapter, shall construct, establish, substantially change or
substantially alter or repair any existing growth or structure or permit the
growth of any tree, except as permitted by the permit or variance, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000
or imprisonment for not more than 90 days or by both. Each day a violation
continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 515.33) (Ord. 20181107-02, passed - -2018; Ord. 20210217-09,
passed 2-17-2021)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
[Reserved]
ARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Minnesota Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES
M.S. Cites Code Section
M.S. Cites                   Code Section
12.25                        33.01;
                             33.04
12.37                        32.06
13                           34.05
13D                          30.01
14.57 through 14.69          115.13
15.73, subd. 2               155.03
16B.70                       151.05
18.77, subd. 8               91.038
18.83                        91.036
18G.07                       91.002
60A.351                      117.03
65A.50                       36.01
65A.50, subd. 3              36.01
65A.50, subd. 8              36.01
84.81 through 84.915         70.02
84.92 through 84.928         70.02
84.771 through 84.781        70.02
84.787 through 84.795        70.02
84.797 through 84.8045       70.02
88.16 through 88.22          91.070
89.001                       91.002
89.01                        91.002
89.51 through 89.64          91.002
89.51 through 89.66          156.20;
                             156.23
103.298                      52.48
103B                         158.31
103F                         160.01
103F.201 through 103F.221    163.285
103F.301 through 103F.345    163.265;
                             163.266
103G                         160.26;
                             160.56
115.01, subd. 8              53.01
115.061                      112.08
115.07                       53.01
115A.03, subd. 7             51.02
115A.03, subd. 21            51.02
115A.03, subd. 25(c)         112.02
115A.03, subd. 38            51.02
116.06, subd. 11             51.02;
                             112.02
116.06, subd. 22             51.02
145A.05                      131.02
151.40                       132.01
152                          132.01
152.0263, subd. 5            132.30,
                             132.32
157.15, subd. 9              116.02
160.22                       90.002
161.45                       155.03;
                             155.55
168.13                       91.020
                             91.105;
168B                         91.106;
                             91.112
168B.04                      91.107
168B.06                      91.110
168B.011                     91.107
168B.035                     70.33;
                             91.107
169                          70.01
169.011                      70.01
169.345                      70.35
190.05, subd. 5b             154.010
190.05, subd. 5c             154.010
216B.02                      155.03
216B.02, subd. 4             155.03
216B.02, subd. 6             155.03
216B.36                      155.55
216D                         155.20
216D.01 through 216D.09      155.50;
                             155.57
222.37                       155.55
237.16                       155.01
237.79                       155.01
237.81                       155.01
                             155.01;
237.162                      155.03;
                             155.32;
                             155.55
237.162, subd. 3             155.03
237.162, subd. 4             155.03
                             155.01;
237.163                      155.03;
                             155.32;
                             155.55
237.163, subd. 2(b)          155.02
237.163, subd. 4(c)          155.32
237.163, subd. 6(b)(4)       155.23
238                          155.03
238.02, subd. 3              155.03
238.084                      155.55
238.086                      155.01
243.166                      134.03
243.167                      134.03
244.052                      134.02
260.195                      131.99
278                          115.13
287.01                       118.09
297G.20                      110.04
299F.035                     34.02
301B.01                      155.55
306                          93.03;
                             93.17
308A                         155.03
                             163.024,
315                          163.044,
                             163.064
326.242                      52.48
326B                         151.01
326B.082, subd. 16           151.99
326B.121, subd. 1            151.05
326B.121, subd. 2(d)         151.02
326B.133, subd. 1            151.02
326B.148                     151.05;
                             151.03
327.14 through 327.36        163.207
327.31                       163.207
327.31 to 327.35             163.007
333                          115.08
340.404, subd. 5             110.31
                             110.04;
340A                         110.26;
                             110.35
340A.101                     110.31
340A.101, subd. 7            10.05
340A.285                     110.31
340A.310                     110.01
340A.404(b)                  110.31
340A.404A, subd. 5           110.01
340A.408, subd. 5            110.27
340A.409                     110.23
340A.409, subd. 1 through 3a 110.32
340A.410, subd. 5            114.01
340A.411                     110.01
340A.412, subd. 14           110.01
340A.414                     110.04
340A.414, subd. 9            110.04
340A.4011, subd. 1           110.31
340A.503                     110.01;
                             110.02
340A.503, subd. 6            131.06
342.09, subd. 1(2)           132.32
342.09, subd. 1(7)(iii)      132.32
343.20 to 343.40             90.16
347.50 to 347.565            90.12;
                             90.16
347.51                       90.12;
                             90.99
347.52                       90.12;
                             90.99
347.52(a)                    90.12
347.52(c)                    90.12
347.54                       90.05
347.515                      90.12;
                             90.99
347.542, subd. 1 or 2        90.99
347.56                       90.05
349                          114.06
349.11 to 349.213            114.01
360.013, subd. 40            163.181;
                             163.183
360.063                      163.180
364.03, subd. 3              115.06
364.06                       34.06
364.09                       34.06
                             10.38;
366.011                      34.35;
                             94.30
                             10.38;
366.012                      34.35;
                             94.30
412.231                      131.02
415.01                       34.35;
                             94.30
415.01, subd. 2              10.38
429                          156.27
429.061                      91.002;
                             91.024
                             91.002;
                             91.024;
                             91.043;
                             91.044;
429.101                      154.044;
                             154.059;
                             156.27;
                             159.26;
                             162.28
435.191 through 435.195      154.010
462.358                      161.05
463.15 through 463.26        91.001
                             52.39;
444.075                      53.54;
                             158.01
444.075, subd. 3             158.12
453                          155.03
453A                         155.03
462                          160.01
462.351 to 462.364           31.26
462.351 to 462.365           150.01
462.351 through 462.365      163.285
462.354                      31.26;
                             31.28
462.354, subd. 2             31.27
462.357                      31.27;
                             163.001
462.357, subd. 7             163.021;
                             163.041
462.357, subd. 8             163.024
462.358                      161.02
462.358, subd. 4b            161.04
462.359                      31.27
463.17                       91.023
463.15 to 463.261            91.001;
                             150.99
471.195                      34.20
471.707                      35.04
471.895                      30.09
505                          161.01;
                             161.08
514.67                       91.001
515                          161.01
518B.01                      115.12;
                             115.13
609                          91.086;
                             130.02
609.02                       133.06
609.021, subd. 6             133.06
609.51                       130.02
609.52                       130.02
609.66                       130.02;
                             133.06
609.68                       130.02
609.72                       130.02
609.75                       130.02
609.79                       115.12;
                             115.13
609.221                      130.02
609.222                      130.02
609.223                      130.02
609.224                      130.02
609.226, subd. 1             90.12
609.293                      115.12
609.293 through 609.352      115.13
609.342                      134.02
609.343                      134.02
609.344                      134.02
609.345                      134.02
609.352                      115.12;
                             134.02
609.365                      134.02
609.505                      130.02
609.535                      130.02
609.545                      130.02
609.576                      130.02
609.605                      130.02
609.705                      130.02
609.715                      130.02
609.746 through 609.749      115.13
609.755                      130.02
609.746                      115.12
609.749                      115.12
609.2231                     130.02
617.23                       134.02
617.202                      115.04
617.242                      115.01
617.246                      134.02
617.247                      134.02
617.293                      115.04;
                             134.02
617.295                      115.04
626.862                      10.20
                             10.99;
                             51.99;
                             52.99;
                             90.99;
                             91.999;
                             95.99;
                             96.99;
                             112.99;
                             113.99;
                             115.99;
                             118.99;
631.48                       130.99;
                             131.99;
                             133.99;
                             134.99;
                             135.99;
                             150.99,
                             151.99;
                             152.99;
                             156.99;
                             158.99;
                             160.99;
                             162.99;
                             163.999
                             
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code 2022 Code
Prior Code 2022 Code
105.01     10.05
110.09     10.18
115.01     10.41
115.03     10.41
115.05     10.99
115.07     10.99
115.09     10.99
117.01     10.35
117.03     10.36
117.05     10.37
117.07     10.38
117.09     10.39
117.11     10.40
117.13     10.41
120.01     34.01
120.03     34.02
120.05     34.03
120.07     34.04
120.09     34.05
120.11     34.06
121.01     34.35
121.03     34.36
200.01     30.01
200.03     30.02
200.05     30.03
200.07     30.04
200.09     30.05
200.11     30.06
200.13     30.07
205.01     30.08
210.01     32.01
210.03     32.02
210.05     32.03
210.07     32.04
305.01     31.01
305.03     31.02
305.05     31.03
305.07     31.04
305.09     31.05
305.11     31.06
305.13     31.07
305.15     31.08
305.17     31.09
305.19     31.10
305.21     31.25
305.27     31.26
305.29     31.27
306.01     31.28
306.03     31.28
306.05     31.28
306.07     31.28
306.09     31.28
306.11     31.28
310.01     34.20
310.03     34.21
310.05     34.22
310.07     34.23
310.09     34.24
           151.01—
400.02     151.04;
           151.99
400.03     151.05
400.05     151.06
400.07     151.07
400.09     151.99
400.11     151.08
400.13     151.20;
           151.21
400.15     154.090—
           154.096
405.01     117.01
405.03     11702
405.05     117.03
405.07     117.04
405.09     117.05
405.11     117.06
405.13     117.07
405.15     117.08
415.01     160.01—
           162.03
415.03     162.04
415.05     162.05
415.07     162.06
415.09     162.07
415.11     162.08
           162.20—
415.13     162.29;
           162.99
415.15     162.09
420.01     157.01
420.03     157.02
420.05     157.03
420.07     157.04
420.09     157.05
420.11     157.06
420.12     157.07
420.13     157.08
420.15     157.09
420.17     157.10
425.01     152.01
425.03     152.02
425.05     152.03
425.07     152.04
425.09     152.99
430.01     158.25
430.03     158.26
430.05     158.27
430.07     158.28
430.09     158.29
430.11     158.30
430.13     158.31
430.15     158.32
430.17     158.33
430.19     158.34
430.21     158.35;
           158.99
435.01     150.15
435.03     150.16
435.05     150.17
435.07     150.18
435.09     150.19
435.11     150.99
440.01     118.01
440.03     118.02
440.05     118.03
440.07     118.04
440.09     118.05
440.11     118.06
440.13     118.07
440.15     118.08
440.17     118.09
440.19     118.10
440.21     118.11
440.23     118.11
440.25     118.12
440.27     118.12
440.29     118.13
440.31     118.99
445.01     36.01
445.03     36.01
445.05     36.01
500.01     150.01
500.03     150.01
500.05     150.01
510.01     154.020
510.03     154.021
510.05     154.022
510.07     154.023
510.09     154.024
510.11     154.025
510.13     154.026
515        161.01
515.01     163.001;
           163.002
515.03     163.003
515.05     163.004
515.11     163.020—
           163.026
515.13     163.040—
           163.047
515.15     163.060—
           163.066
515.17     163.080—
           163.085
515.19     163.100—
           163.106
515.21     163.120—
           163.125
515.23     163.140—
           163.146
515.25     163.160—
           163.165
           163.180—
515.33     163.194;
           163.999
517.01     159.01;
           159.02
517.03     159.03
517.05     159.15
517.07     159.16
517.09     159.17
517.11     159.18
517.13     159.19
517.15     159.20
517.17     159.21
517.19     159.22
517.21     159.23
517.23     159.24
517.25     159.25
517.27     159.26
517.29     159.27
517.31     159.28
517.33     159.29
517.35     159.30
517.37     159.30
517.39     159.30
520.01     93.01
520.03     93.02
520.05     93.03
520.07     93.04
520.09     93.05
520.11     93.06
520.13     93.07
520.15     93.08
520.17     93.08
520.19     93.09
520.21     93.10
520.23     93.10
520.25     93.10
520.27     93.11
520.29     93.12
520.31     93.12
520.33     93.13
520.35     93.14
520.37     93.15
520.39     93.16
520.41     93.17
520.43     93.18
530.01     160.01—
           160.03
530.03     160.04—
           160.12
530.05     160.25
530.07     160.26
530.09     160.27
530.11     160.28
530.13     160.40
530.15     160.41
530.17     160.42
530.19     160.55—
           160.58
530.21     160.59
530.23     160.99
530.25     160.60
625.01     153.01
625.03     153.02
625.05     153.03
625.07     153.04
625.09     153.05
635.01     51.01
635.03     51.02
635.05     51.03
635.07     51.04
635.09     51.05
635.11     51.06
635.13     51.07
635.15     51.99
640.01     91.044
640.03     91.044
640.05     91.044
640.07     91.044
640.09     91.044
640.11     91.999
645.01     135.01
645.03     135.02
645.05     135.03
645.07     135.04
645.09     135.02
645.11     135.05
645.13     135.06
645.15     135.07
645.17     135.08
645.19     135.09;
           135.99
710.01     53.01
710.03     53.02
710.05     53.03
710.09     53.20—
           53.34
710.11     53.45—
           53.53
710.13     53.04
710.15     53.05
710.17     53.06
715.01     52.01
715.03     52.02
715.05     52.03
715.07     52.04
715.09     52.05
715.11     52.06
715.13     52.07
715.15     52.08
715.17     52.09
715.19     52.10
715.21     52.11
715.23     52.12
715.25     52.13
715.27     52.14
715.29     52.15;
           52.99
715.31     52.16
715.33     52.17
715.35     52.18
715.37     52.19
715.39     52.20
715.41     52.21
715.43     52.22
715.45     52.23
715.47     52.35
715.49     52.36
715.51     52.37
715.53     52.38
715.55     52.39
715.57     52.40
715.59     52.41
715.61     52.42
715.63     52.43
715.65     52.44
715.67     52.45
715.69     52.46
715.71     52.43
715.73     52.47
720.01     158.01
720.03     158.02
720.05     158.03
720.07     158.04
720.09     158.05
720.11     158.06
720.13     158.07
720.15     158.08
720.17     158.09
720.19     158.10
720.21     158.11
720.23     158.12
725.01     50.01
725.03     50.02
725.05     50.03
725.07     50.04
725.09     50.05
800.01     154.001
800.03     154.002
800.05     154.003
800.07     154.003
800.09     154.004
800.11     154.005
800.13     154.006
800.15     154.007
800.17     154.008
800.19     154.009
805.01     154.070
805.03     154.071
805.05     154.072
805.07     154.073
805.09     154.074
805.11     154.075
810.01     154.055
810.03     154.055
810.05     154.056
810.06     154.057
810.07     154.058
810.09     154.059
815.01     92.01
815.03     92.02
815.05     92.03
815.07     92.04
815.09     92.05
815.11     92.03
815.13     92.06;
           92.07
820.01     111.01
820.03     111.02
820.05     111.03
820.07     111.04
820.09     111.05
820.11     111.06
820.13     111.07
820.15     111.08
825.01     154.040—
           154.042
825.03     154.043
825.05     154.044
830.01     156.01
830.03     156.02
830.05     156.03
830.07     156.04
830.09     156.05
830.11     156.06
830.13     156.07
830.15     156.08
830.17     156.09
830.19     156.99
835.01     155.01
835.03     155.02
835.05     155.03
835.07     155.04
835.09     155.04
835.11     155.20
835.13     155.21
835.15     155.22
835.17     155.23
835.19     155.24
835.21     155.25
835.22     155.26
835.23     155.27
835.25     155.28
835.27     155.29
835.29     155.30
835.31     155.50—
           155.53
835.33     155.31
835.35     155.32
835.37     155.32
835.39     155.33
835.41     155.34
835.43     155.35
835.45     155.54
835.47     155.55
835.49     155.56
835.51     155.57
835.53     155.58
835.55     155.59
835.57     155.60
835.59     155.61
835.61     155.05
835.63     155.06
835.65     155.07
905.01     94.01
905.03     94.02
905.05     94.03
905.07     94.04
905.09     94.05
905.11     94.06
905.13     94.07
905.15     94.08
905.17     94.09
905.19     94.10
905.21     94.11
905.23     94.12
905.25     94.13
905.27     94.14
905.29     94.15
906.01     94.30
906.03     94.31
906.05     94.32
906.07     94.33
906.09     94.34
906.11     94.35
906.13     94.36
907.01     91.085
907.03     91.086
907.05     91.087
907.07     91.088
907.09     91.089
907.11     91.090
907.13     91.091
907.15     91.092
911.01     90.01
911.01     90.05
911.03     90.02
911.05     90.03
911.07     90.04
911.11     90.06
911.13     90.07
911.14     90.08
911.15     90.09
911.17     90.10
911.19     90.11
911.25     90.13
911.27     90.14
911.29     90.15
911.31     90.15
911.33     90.15
911.35     90.99
911.37     90.16
915.01     150.02
915.03     150.02
915.05     150.02
915.07     150.02
920.01     131.01
920.03     131.02
920.05     131.03
920.07     131.04
920.09     131.05
920.11     131.06
920.13     131.07
920.15     131.99
920.17     131.08
925.01     132.15
925.03     132.16
925.05     132.17
925.07     132.17
925.09     132.17
925.11     132.17
925.13     132.18
930.01     132.01
930.03     132.02
945.01     133.01
945.03     133.02
945.05     133.03
945.07     133.04
945.09     133.05
945.11     133.06
946.01     133.20
946.03     133.21
946.05     133.22
946.07     133.23
946.09     133.24
946.11     133.25
946.13     133.99
950.01     153.20
950.03     153.21
950.05     153.22
955.01     95.01
955.03     95.02
955.05     95.03
955.07     95.04
955.09     95.05
955.11     95.06
955.13     95.07
955.15     95.08
955.17     95.99
960.01     96.01
960.03     96.02
960.05     96.03
960.07     96.03
960.09     96.04
960.11     96.05
960.13     96.06
960.15     96.07
960.17     96.08
960.19     96.09
960.21     96.10
960.23     96.11
960.23     96.99
965.01     134.01
965.03     134.02
965.05     134.03
965.07     134.04
1000.01    35.01
1000.03    35.02
1000.05    35.03
1000.07    35.04
1005.01    35.15
1005.03    35.16
1005.05    35.17
1005.07    35.18
1005.09    35.19
1005.11    35.20
1005.13    35.21
1005.15    35.22
1005.17    35.23
1005.19    35.24
1005.21    35.25
1005.23    35.26
1005.25    35.27
1010.01    35.40
1010.03    35.41
1015.01    35.55
1015.03    35.56
1015.05    35.57
1015.07    35.58
1015.09    35.59
1015.11    35.60
1015.13    35.60
1100.01    112.01
1100.03    112.02
1100.05    112.03
1100.07    112.04
1100.09    112.05
1100.11    112.06
1100.13    112.07
1100.15    112.08
1100.17    112.09
1100.19    112.10
           112.11;
1100.21    112.12;
           112.99
1150.01    113.01
1150.03    113.02
1150.05    113.03
1150.05    113.99
1150.07    113.04
1160.01    114.01
1160.03    114.02
1160.05    114.03
1160.07    114.04
1160.09    114.05
1160.11    114.06
1160.15    114.06
1160.17    114.07
1165.07    115.07
1165.09    115.05;
           115.11
1165.11    115.14
1170.01    116.01
1170.02    116.02
1170.03    116.03
1170.04    116.04
1170.05    116.05
1170.06    116.06
1200.01    110.01
1200.03    110.20
1200.05    110.21
1200.07    110.22
1200.09    110.23
1200.11    110.24
1200.13    110.25
1200.15    110.26
1200.17    110.27
1200.19    110.28
1200.21    110.29
1200.23    110.30
1200.25    110.31
1200.27    110.32
1200.29    110.33
1200.31    110.34
1200.33    110.35
1200.35    110.36
1200.37    110.37
1200.39    110.02
1200.41    110.03
1205.01    110.04
1220.01    110.05
1220.03    110.05
1220.05    110.05
1225.01    110.06
1225.03    110.06
1225.05    110.06
1300.01    70.01
1300.03    70.01
1305.01    70.15
1305.03    70.16
1305.05    70.17
1305.07    70.18
1310.01    70.30
1310.03    70.31
1310.05    70.31
1310.06    70.32
1310.07    70.33
1310.09    70.34
1310.11    70.35
           70.36;
1310.13    Ch. 71, Schd. I;
           Ch. 71, Schd. II
1316.01    91.105
1316.03    91.106
1316.05    91.107
1316.07    91.108
1316.09    91.109
1316.11    91.110
1316.13    91.111
1316.15    91.112
1316.17    92.113
1330.01    70.02
1330.02    70.02
1330.03    70.02
2000.01    130.01
2000.01    130.99
2000.03    130.02
2000.05    130.03
2005.01    130.15
2005.03    130.16
2005.05    130.17
2005.07    130.18
2005.09    130.19
2005.11    130.20
2005.13    130.21
2005.15    130.21
2005.17    130.22
2020.01    156.20
2020.03    156.21
2020.05    156.22
2020.07    156.23
2020.09    156.24
2020.11    156.25
2020.13    156.26
2020.15    156.27
2020.17    156.22
2020.19    156.28
2020.21    156.29
           
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.    Date Passed Code Section
172         3-16-1994   157.01—
                        157.10
182         11-15-1995  154.090—
                        154.096
96-1        3-6-1996    151.05
97-02       1-22-1997   Ch. 71, Schd. I; Ch. 72, Schd. II
97-01B      4-16-1997   163.041—
                        163.047
97-08       10-15-1997  31.28
97-09       11-5-1997   31.26
98-07       9-16-1998   157.08
99-02       3-17-1999   151.05
99-03       4-21-1999   150.01
                        115.05;
99-04       7-21-1999   115.07;
                        115.11;
                        115.14
                        159.01—
00-01       3-19-2000   159.03;
                        159.15—
                        159.31
00-06       12-6-2000   91.105—
                        91.109
00-05       12-6-2000   70.32
                        90.01—
                        90.11;
00-04       12-1-2000   90.13—
                        90.16;
                        90.99
02-01       4-3-2002    90.16
02-01       4-3-2002    90.99
2002-01     4-3-2002    90.05
02-04       10-16-2002  31.25
-           - -2002     163.327
                        163.001—
                        163.004;
                        163.020—
                        163.026;
                        163.041—
                        163.047;
                        163.060—
                        163.066;
02-03       10-16-2002  163.080—
                        163.085;
                        163.100—
                        163.106;
                        163.120—
                        163.125;
                        163.140—
                        163.146;
                        163.160—
                        163.165
02-05       12-18-2002  133.06
03-01       5-7-2003    151.01—
                        151.04
04-1        3-3-2004    157.01—
                        157.10
                        155.01—
                        155.07;
2004-04     9-15-2004   155.20—
                        155.35;
                        155.50—
                        155.61
2004-07     10-6-2004   158.01—
                        158.12
2004-06     10-20-2004  90.06
2005-01     3-2-2005    94.30—
                        94.36
2005-02     4-20-2005   70.31
2006-02     6-7-2006    52.15
2006-04     8-16-2006   50.01—
                        50.05
06-06       12-29-2006  91.085—
                        91.092
-           - -2007     163.008;
                        163.009
                        161.02—
2007-01     2-7-2007    161.13;
                        163.080—
                        163.085
                        162.01—
                        162.09;
2007-08     5-16-2007   162.20—
                        162.29;
                        162.99
2007-12     6-20-2007   163.002;
                        163.003
                        96.01—
2007-10     7-2-2007    96.11;
                        96.99
2007-14     11-21-2007  110.06
2007-11     11-21-2007  94.14;
                        94.15
                        163.145;
2008-11     - -2008     163.325—
                        163.327
2008-03     4-2-2008    90.06
                        94.31;
2008-04     4-16-2008   94.32;
                        94.34
                        157.01—
                        157.10;
2008-05     5-21-2008   158.25—
                        158.35;
                        158.99
2008-08     7-16-2008   91.105—
                        91.109
2008-07     7-2-2008    157.04
                        158.01;
                        158.03—
2008-12     8-6-2008    158.05;
                        158.07—
                        158.12
                        150.15—
2008-10     8-6-2008    150.19;
                        150.99
2008-09     8-6-2008    52.42;
                        53.05
2008-01     9-17-2008   154.057
                        90.01—
                        90.03;
                        90.05;
2008-16     11-5-2008   90.07;
                        90.09;
                        90.10;
                        90.16;
                        90.99
2008-15     11-5-2008   31.28
                        113.01—
2008-14     11-5-2008   113.04;
                        113.99
2009-01     4-1-2009    90.03;
                        90.05
2009-03     5-20-2009   151.01
                        53.22;
                        53.23;
                        53.27;
2009-04     10-7-2009   53.29—
                        53.34;
                        53.45—
                        53.53
2010-01     2-17-2010   163.004;
                        163.326
                        90.01;
2010-05     9-15-2010   90.02;
                        90.05;
                        90.11
                        70.32;
2011-03     2-16-2011   70.33; 70.3691.105—
                        91.112
                        163.021—
                        163.024;
                        163.042—
2011-01     2-16-2011   163.044;
                        163.082;
                        163.083;
                        163.227
2011-06     4-20-2011   162.04;
                        162.05
2011-04     4-20-2011   163.004;
                        163.085
2011-07     6-15-2011   70.31;
                        92.03; 131.05
                        150.15—
11-08       7-20-2011   150.19;
                        150.99
                        161.12—
2011-09     8-17-2011   161.14;
                        162.26;
                        163.326
                        160.01—
                        160.12;
                        160.25—
                        160.28;
2012-05     3-7-2012    160.40—
                        160.42;
                        160.55—
                        160.60;
                        160.99
2012-07     8-15-2012   162.06
2013-01     5-15-2013   34.01—
                        34.06
2013-02     7-3-2013    34.35;
                        34.36
                        163.004;
2013-03     10-16-2013  163.022;
                        163.327
                        96.01—
2014-01     2-15-2014   96.11;
                        96.99
2014-02     3-5-2014    110.04—
                        110.06
                        51.01—
2014-05     4-2-2014    51.07;
                        51.99
                        150.17—
                        150.19;
2014-11     5-21-2014   152.01—
                        152.04;
                        152.99
                        150.15—
2014-09     5-7-2014    150.19;
                        150.99
                        112.01—
2014-07     5-21-2014   112.12;
                        112.99
2014-13     7-16-2014   110.23
2014-13     7-16-2014   110.29
2015-01     1-21-2015   162.05
2015-02     2-4-2015    92.01;
                        92.07
                        163.004;
                        163.024;
2015-04     8-19-2015   163.141;
                        163.143;
                        163.327
                        118.01—
2015-07     9-2-2015    118.13;
                        118.99
2016-01     2-17-2016   134.02
16-05       10-19-2016  162.05;
                        162.06
16-04       10-19-2016  30.08
2017-01     1-4-2017    30.01
17-02       5-3-2017    152.01
17-05       6-21-2017   34.21
17-04       6-7-2017    70.31
17-03       6-7-2017    110.03
                        156.06—
17-06       7-5-2017    156.09;
                        156.99
20170920-01 9-20-2017   31.25
                        155.01—
                        155.07;
20171101-01 11-1-2017   155.20—
                        155.35;
                        155.50—
                        155.61
                        159.01—
20181003-01 - -2018     159.03;
                        159.15—
                        159.31
                        163.180—
20181107-02 - -2018     163.194;
                        163.999
20180117-08 1-17-2018   90.04
20180117-07 1-17-2018   90.01
20180117-05 1-17-2018   90.08
20180117-02 1-17-2018   90.02
20181107-03 11-7-2018   133.06
20190102-01 1-2-2019    32.04
20190220-01 2-20-2019   30.01
20190619-01 6-19-2019   116.01—
                        116.06
                        96.01—
20190717-01 7-17-2019   96.11;
                        96.99
20191016-01 10-16-2019  31.26
20191120-01 11-20-2019  36.01
20191218-01 12-18-2019  70.31;
                        70.33
                        118.02;
20200219-03 2-19-2020   118.06;
                        118.09—
                        118.11
20200219-02 2-27-2020   Ch. 71, Schd. III
20200219-01 2-19-2020   70.02;
                        Ch. 71, Schd. III
20200415-01 4-15-2020   10.35—
                        10.41
                        163.001—
                        163.004;
                        163.020—
                        163.026;
                        163.040—
                        163.047;
                        163.060—
                        163.066;
20210120    1-20-2021   163.080—
                        163.085;
                        163.100—
                        163.106;
                        163.120—
                        163.125;
                        163.140—
                        163.146;
                        163.160—
                        163.165
                        163.180—
20210217-09 2-17-2021   163.194;
                        163.999
                        163.230;
20210217-07 2-17-2021   163.245—
                        163.250
20210217-05 2-17-2021   163.225—
                        163.230
20210217-03 2-17-2021   163.205—
                        163.211
20210217-01 2-17-2021   163.305—
                        163.314
20210317-03 3-17-2021   163.007
                        161.03;
20210317-01 3-17-2021   161.05—
                        161.13
20210421-03 4-21-2021   163.006
                        160.01—
                        162.08;
20210421-01 4-21-2021   162.20—
                        162.29;
                        162.99
20210616-01 6-16-2021   163.083
20210721-03 7-21-2021   Ch. 71, Schd. I; Ch. 72, Schd. II
20210721-01 7-21-2021   163.005
20210721-03 7-21-2021   70.32
20210818-03 8-18-2021   163.285—
                        163.292
20210818-01 8-18-2021   163.265—
                        163.273
20220119-02 1-19-2022   163.143
20220216-01 2-24-2022   36.02
20220720-02 7-20-2022   34.35;
                        34.36
20220720-01 7-20-2022   34.35;
                        34.36
20221228-01 12-28-2022  36.02
20231018-01 10-18-2023  132.30—
                        132.33
                        163.024;
20231115-01 11-15-2023  163.044;
                        163.064
20231115-02 11-15-2023  163.004
                        91.018;
                        135.02;
                        158.05;
20231115-03 11-15-2023  159.15;
                        163.004;
                        163.040;
                        163.044;
                        163.327
20231220-02 12-20-2023  163.024
20240117-02 1-17-2024   36.02
20240221-01 2-21-2024   163.083
20240221-02 2-21-2024   163.064
20240417-01 4-17-2024   36.02;
                        90.17
20240612-01 6-12-2024   154.010
20241016-01 10-16-2024  163.325
20241218-01 12-18-2024  36.02
                        163.021;
                        163.023;
                        163.025;
                        163.041;
                        163.043;
                        163.044;
                        163.046;
                        163.064;
20250219-01 2-19-2025   163.065;
                        163.083;
                        163.085;
                        163.101;
                        163.103—
                        163.105;
                        163.123;
                        163.124;
                        163.143;
                        163.145
20250618-01 6-18-2025   163.025
                       
 
 
