ST. ANTHONY, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-4 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance 2025-06, passed 10-28-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Rules of interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Official time
   
10.11   Reasonable time
   
10.12   Ordinances repealed
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights, and liabilities
   
10.18   Copies of code
   
10.19   Adoption of statutes and rules and supplements by reference
   
10.20   Enforcement
   
10.98   Supplemental administrative penalties
 
   
10.99   General penalty and enforcement
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city, as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“St. Anthony City Code,” for which designation “code of ordinances,” “codified
ordinances,” or “code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter, and section
headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to the
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “Traffic Code.” Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§
10.01.” Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of
state law.
   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances
of this city shall be by the following rules, unless that construction is
plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of
the same ordinance.
      (1)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” whenever the context requires.
      (2)   Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions, or ordinance
requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as
the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the
act by an authorized agent or deputy.
      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
      (4)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CITY. The area within the corporate boundaries of the City of St. Anthony
Village, Minnesota, as presently established or as amended by ordinance,
annexation, or other legal actions at a future time. The term CITY when used in
this code may also be used to refer to the City Council and its authorized
representatives.
      CODE, THIS CODE, or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This city code as modified
by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections.
      COUNTY. The counties of Hennepin and Ramsey, in which the city is
located.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in those cases, the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED. All terms shall mean a pledge
taken by the person and administered by an individual authorized by state law.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of this city unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      RESERVED. When in reference to a code section, chapter, or title, such
part of the code is intentionally being held available for future use.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Minnesota.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have subchapters.
      UNPERMITTED. Not permitted, disallowed, banned.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended, or its application to
any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section, reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.10 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city
business.
§ 10.11 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
§ 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this
indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.17 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS, AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties
incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The
liabilities, proceedings, and rights are continued; punishments, penalties, or
forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted.
In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-
way, contracts entered into, or franchises granted, the acceptance,
establishment, or vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate
officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been
enacted.
§ 10.18 COPIES OF CODE.
   The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk
for public inspection. The Clerk shall provide a copy for sale for a reasonable
charge.
§ 10.19 ADOPTIONS OF STATUTES AND RULES AND SUPPLEMENTS BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this code,
all future amendments to any state or federal rules and statutes adopted by
reference in this code or referenced in this code are hereby adopted by
reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this code
was adopted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the code to the
contrary.
   (B)   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this code,
all future supplements are hereby adopted as if they had been in existence at
the time this code was enacted, unless there is clear intention expressed in
the code to the contrary.
§ 10.20 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any licensed peace officer of the city’s Police Department, or the
County Sheriff, or any Deputy Sheriff, shall have the authority to enforce any
provision of this code.
   (B)   As permitted by M.S. § 626.862, as it may be amended from time to
time, the City Clerk shall have the authority to administer and enforce this
code. In addition, under that statutory authority, certain individuals
designated within the code, or by the Clerk or City Council, shall have the
authority to administer and enforce the provisions specified. All and any
person or persons designated may issue a citation in lieu of arrest or
continued detention to enforce any provision of the code.
   (C)   The City Clerk and any city official or employee designated by this
code who has the responsibility to perform a duty under this code may, with the
permission of a licensee of a business or owner of any property or resident of
a dwelling, or other person in control of any premises, inspect or otherwise
enter any property to enforce compliance with this code.
   (D)   If the licensee, owner, resident, or other person in control of a
premises objects to the inspection of or entrance to the property, the City
Clerk, peace officer, or any employee or official charged with the duty of
enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon a showing that probable cause
exists for the issuance of a valid search warrant from a court of competent
jurisdiction, petition and obtain a search warrant before conducting the
inspection or otherwise entering the property. This warrant shall be only to
determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to protect the health,
safety, and welfare of the people are being complied with and to enforce these
provisions only, and no criminal charges shall be made as a result of the
warrant. No warrant shall be issued unless there be probable cause to issue the
warrant. Probable cause occurs if the search is reasonable. Probable cause does
not depend on specific knowledge of the condition of a particular property.
   (E)   Every licensee, owner, resident, or other person in control of
property within the city shall permit at reasonable times inspections of or
entrance to the property by the City Clerk or any other authorized city officer
or employee only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the people are being complied with
and to enforce these provisions. Unreasonable refusal to permit the inspection
of or entrance to the property shall be grounds for termination of any and all
permits, licenses, or city service to the property. Mailed notice shall be
given to the licensee, owner, resident, or other person in control of the
property, stating the grounds for the termination, and the licensee, owner,
resident, or other person in control of the property shall be given an
opportunity to appear before the City Clerk to object to the termination before
it occurs, subject to appeal of the Clerk’s decision to the City Council at a
regularly scheduled or special meeting.
   (F)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of
the city to enter private property in urgent emergency situations where there
is an imminent danger in order to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare.
§ 10.98 SUPPLEMENTAL ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.
   (A)   In addition to those administrative penalties established in this code
and the enforcement powers granted in §
10.20, supplemental administrative penalties are hereby established. They may
not proscribe administrative penalties for traffic offenses designated by M.S.
§ 169.999, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   These administrative penalty procedures in this section are intended
to provide the public and the city with an informal, cost effective, and
expeditious alternative to traditional criminal charges for violations of
certain provisions of this code. The procedures are intended to be voluntary on
the part of those who have been charged with those offenses.
   (C)   Administrative penalties for violations of various provisions of the
code, other than those penalties established in the code or in statutes that
are adopted by reference, are hereby established. In order to be effective, an
administrative penalty for a particular violation must be established before
the violation occurred.
   (D)   In the discretion of, and upon the finding of probable cause to
believe that a violation has occurred, the peace officer, City Clerk, or other
person giving notice of an alleged violation of a provision of this code, in a
written notice of an alleged violation, sent by first class mail to the person
who is alleged to have violated the code, the person giving notice may request
the payment of a voluntary administrative penalty for the violation directly to
the City Treasurer within 14 days of the notice of the violation. A sample
notice is contained in the appendix to this chapter. In the sole discretion of
the person giving the notice of the alleged violation, the time for payment may
be extended an additional 14 days, whether or not requested by the person to
whom the notice has been given. In addition to the administrative penalty, the
person giving notice may request in the notice to the alleged violator to adopt
a compliance plan to correct the situation resulting in the alleged violation
and may provide that if the alleged violator corrects the situation resulting
in the alleged violation within the time specified in the notice, that the
payment of the administrative penalty will be waived.
   (E)   At any time before the payment of the administrative penalty is due,
the person who has been given notice of an alleged violation may request to
appear before the City Council to contest the request for payment of the
penalty. After a hearing before the Council, the Council may determine to
reduce, withdraw, or renew the request for payment. Because the payment of the
administrative penalty is voluntary, there shall be no appeal from the decision
of the Council.
   (F)   At any time after the date the payment of the administrative penalty
is due, if the administrative penalty remains unpaid or the situation creating
the alleged violation remains uncorrected, the city, through its Attorney, may
bring an action to enforce in accordance with state law and this code.
Likewise, the city, in its discretion, may bring charges for a violation in the
first instance, rather than requesting the payment of an administrative
penalty, even if a penalty for the particular violation has been established.
If the administrative penalty is paid, or if any requested correction of the
situation resulting in the violation is completed, no charges shall be
initiated by the city for the alleged violation.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Penalty not specified. Any person, firm, or corporation who violates
any provision of this code for which another penalty is not specifically
provided, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which
may be imposed for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including
Minnesota Statutes or Rules specifically adopted by reference, shall be a
sentence of not more than 90 days in jail or a fine of not more than $1,000, or
both.
   (B)   Petty misdemeanor. Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any
provision of this code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by
reference, which is designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed
for any petty offense which is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a
fine of not more than $300.
   (C)   Cost of prosecution. Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended
from time to time, in either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor,
the costs of prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
   (D)   Officer/employee of the city not in violation. The failure of any
officer or employee of the city to perform any official duty imposed by this
code shall not subject the officer or employee to the penalty imposed for a
violation.
   (E)   Additional proceedings. In addition to any penalties provided for in
this section or in §
10.98, if any person, firm, or corporation fails to comply with any provision
of this code, the Council, or any city official designated by it, may institute
appropriate proceedings with a hearing before City Council, at law or at
equity, to restrain, correct, or abate the violation.
   (F) Issuance of citation for violation.
      (1)   Upon probable cause to believe that a violation has been committed
and that the violator has committed the violation or is legally responsible for
the commission of the violation or for allowing the condition constituting the
violation to exist, an issuer is authorized to issue a citation, complying with
the standards set forth below, to the violator.
      (2)   In the case of a violation which constitutes a property violation,
the citation may, in addition, include a directive to eliminate the condition
giving rise to the property violation.
      (3)   If reasonably practical, the issuer shall deliver the citation to
the violator in person. If the violator is not present at the time that the
citation is issued, cannot be reasonably contacted for the purpose of delivery
of the citation, or refused to accept delivery of the citation, the issuer may
deliver the citation to the violator by depositing it in the U.S. mail
addressed to the violator at an address of public record for the violator,
which may include but need not be limited to an address taken from area
telephone directories, from records of the city assessor, from records of city-
owned utilities or from other public sources. Delivery by such alternative
means shall be deemed to be valid delivery and shall be deemed to be effective
three days after the deposit of the citation in the U.S. mail.
   (G)   Permits. When any person initiates any work which requires a city
permit of any type, but who has not procured the applicable permit prior to
initiating said work, the city may impose a fee and penalty that is an amount
equal to two times the fee required by the city’s fee schedule. No permit shall
be finally approved, nor certificate of occupancy issued, if applicable, until
the levied fees and penalty, if imposed, have been fully paid. This penalty
shall be in addition to any other remedies available to the city.
(Ord. 2023-01, passed 7-11-2023)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
31.   CITY COUNCIL AND OFFICIALS
      
32.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS
      
33.   FEES, RATES, AND CHARGES
CHAPTER 30: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Billing and Collection
   
30.01   Duties of City Manager
   
30.02   Notice
   
30.03   Other collection devices still available
Elections
   
30.15   Biennial elections and terms
   
30.16   Registration of qualified voters
   
30.17   Absentee Ballot Board
Unclaimed Property
   
30.30   Custody of property
   
30.31   Disposal of property
   
30.32   Claims by owner
   
30.33   Payment to General Fund
   
30.34   Summary disposal
Public Hearings
   
30.45   Generally
   
30.46   Notice
   
30.47   Hearing
   
30.48   Record
BILLING AND COLLECTION
§ 30.01 DUTIES OF CITY MANAGER.
   The City Manager or designee will compute, give notice of, and collect all
charges and bills owing to the city.
(Prior Code, § 30.01)
§ 30.02 NOTICE.
   The City Manager or designee will give notice of the due date of any charge
or bill owing to the city by depositing in the U.S. mail with postage prepaid a
notice directed and addressed to the last known address of the person
inhabiting or owning the property against which the charge is made, at least 15
days prior to the due date.
(Prior Code, § 30.02)
§ 30.03 OTHER COLLECTION DEVICES STILL AVAILABLE.
   No provision of this subchapter will be construed to deny the city the right
to terminate any service rendered by it or revoke any license issued by it when
any charge or bill for the service or license becomes delinquent.
(Prior Code, § 30.03)
ELECTIONS
§ 30.15 BIENNIAL ELECTIONS AND TERMS.
   The city will hold regular city elections biennially on the first Tuesday
after the first Monday in November of every odd-numbered year. Two City
Councilmembers will be elected for four-year terms at each biennial election.
The Mayor will also be elected for a four-year term beginning with the election
in 1987.
(Prior Code, § 30.15)
§ 30.16 REGISTRATION OF QUALIFIED VOTERS.
   The system for the permanent registration of voters provided for by M.S.
Chapter 201, as it may be amended from time to time, is incorporated by
reference. No voter will be permitted to vote in any election held in the city
unless the person is a resident and is registered as provided by state law.
(Prior Code, § 30.16)
§ 30.17 ABSENTEE BALLOT BOARD.
   An Absentee Ballot Board must be established for all elections and shall
incorporate M.S. § 203B.121, as it may be amended from time to time, in its
entirety.
(Prior Code, § 30.17) (Ord. 2012-05, passed 6-12-2012)
UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
§ 30.30 CUSTODY OF PROPERTY.
   The City Manager or designee may provide for the storage of private property
other than motor vehicles impounded under this section or which come into the
possession of the city in the course of city operations. The City Manager or
designee will cause a record to be kept of the property indicating the date and
the manner in which the city’s possession was acquired. The property will be
stored at the City Hall, except that money will be deposited by the City
Manager or designee in a special account for found money.
(Prior Code, § 30.30)
§ 30.31 DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY.
   All property retained in the city’s possession for a period of six months or
longer may be sold to the highest bidder at public auction following one week
of published notice. The notice will state the time and place of sale and a
general description of the property to be sold.
(Prior Code, § 30.31)
§ 30.32 CLAIMS BY OWNER.
   During the six-month period that the property is in the possession of the
city, the City Manager or designee may deliver the property to the owner upon
receipt of satisfactory proof of ownership. When another person asserts a claim
of ownership to the property, delivery may be made only after ten days’ notice
by mail to the person who has asserted the claim of ownership. If the party
claiming the property is unable to furnish satisfactory proof of ownership, the
City Manager or designee may refuse to deliver possession of the property until
ordered to do so by a court.
(Prior Code, § 30.32)
§ 30.33 PAYMENT TO GENERAL FUND.
   All monies in the possession of the city under this subchapter, together
with the proceeds realized from any public sale of private property, will be
placed in the city’s General Fund. The former owner may receive payment of the
amount realized from the sale of the property upon application with attached
proof of ownership made within 90 days of the date of sale.
(Prior Code, § 30.33)
§ 30.34 SUMMARY DISPOSAL.
   The City Manager or designee may without notice and in the manner as the
City Manager or designee deems necessary in the public interest, dispose
summarily of any property coming into the City Manager’s or designee’s
possession which the City Manager or designee determines to be dangerous or
perishable. The City Manager or designee will maintain a record of the
pertinent facts with respect to the receipt and disposal of any such property.
(Prior Code, § 30.34)
PUBLIC HEARINGS
§ 30.45 GENERALLY.
   Unless otherwise provided in this code or by state law, every public hearing
required by law, ordinance, or resolution to be held on any legislative or
administrative matter will be conducted according to this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 30.45)
§ 30.46 NOTICE.
   Every hearing will be preceded by at least ten days’ notice by publication
and by mailed notice to all persons entitled to mailed notice by law. Notices
of a hearing to consider a rezoning, PUD approval, conditional use permit,
permit for relocation of a building or variance will be mailed at least ten
days before the hearing to the owner of the affected property and to the owners
of all properties within 350 feet of the affected property. The notice will
state the time, place, and purpose of the hearing. Failure to give notice of
defects in the notice procedure will not invalidate the proceedings if a good
faith effort has been made to comply with this section.
(Prior Code, § 30.46)
§ 30.47 HEARING.
   At the hearing, each party in interest will be afforded a reasonable
opportunity to be heard and to present the evidence as is relevant to the
proceeding. The City Council may adopt rules governing the conduct of hearings,
including time limitations for presentation of evidence, records to be made,
and any other matter which the City Council deems appropriate.
(Prior Code, § 30.47)
§ 30.48 RECORD.
   After a decision on a matter, the City Council will have a written summary
of its findings and decisions prepared and will enter the summary in the
official City Council minutes.
(Prior Code, § 30.48)
CHAPTER 31: CITY COUNCIL AND OFFICIALS
Section
   
31.01   Meetings
   
31.02   Presiding officer
   
31.03   Minutes
   
31.04   Order of business
   
31.05   Quorum and voting
   
31.06   Ordinances, resolutions, and petitions
   
31.07   Committees
   
31.08   City Attorney
   
31.09   Expenses of the City Council
   
31.10   Information to residents
   
31.11   Suspension or amendment of rules
   
31.12   Mayor and City Councilmember salaries
§ 31.01 MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the City Council will be held on
the second and fourth Tuesday of each calendar month at 7:00 p.m. Any regular
meeting falling upon a holiday will be held at 7:00 p.m. on a day to be
determined by the City Council. All regular meetings and adjourned regular
meetings will be held in the City Council Chambers in the City Hall unless the
City Council determines that a regular meeting should be held elsewhere, in
which case notice of the time and place of the meeting will be posted on the
door entrances to the City Hall and, if time permits, published in the official
newspaper.
   (B)   Special meetings. The Mayor or any two members of the City Council may
call a special meeting of the City Council by notifying the City Clerk of the
time, place, and purpose of the meeting. Unless a special meeting date and time
is set by the City Council at a City Council meeting, the Clerk shall give each
City Councilmember at least three days’ notice of the meeting. The notice will
specify the time, place, and purpose of the meeting and will identify the
person or persons who called the meeting. The notice will be delivered to the
City Councilmember personally or to the City Councilmember’s home by mail. When
written notice of a special meeting is not given in accordance with this
division (B), a meeting attended by all the members of the City Council or
where any member unable to attend gives written notice to the City Council that
he or she waives written notice of the special meeting, will be a valid special
meeting for the transaction of any business that comes before the meeting. Only
business specified in the notice of the special meeting will be transacted and
voted on at the special meetings, unless the meeting is attended by all members
of the City Council and the additional items brought forth are approved for
discussion by a majority of the City Council.
   (C)   Public meetings. All City Council meetings, including special and
adjourned meetings and meetings of City Council committees, will be open to the
public, except as otherwise provided by law.
   (D)   First meeting of the year. At the first City Council meeting in
January of each year or as soon after as reasonably possible, the City Council
will:
      (1)   Designate the repository or depositories for city funds;
      (2)   Designate the legal newspaper for the city; and
      (3)   Designate an acting Mayor (Mayor Pro Tem) from the City
Councilmembers, who will perform the duties of the Mayor during the Mayor’s
disability or absence from the city or, in case of a vacancy in the office of
Mayor, until a successor has been appointed and qualified.
(Prior Code, § 31.01) (Ord. 07-003, passed 9-11-2007)
§ 31.02 PRESIDING OFFICER.
   (A)   Mayor. The Mayor will preside at all meetings of the City Council. In
the absence of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem will preside. In the absence of
both, a presiding officer will be chosen from the members present.
   (B)   Order during meetings. The presiding officer will preserve order,
enforce the City Council’s rules of procedure, and determine, with open
discussion of the City Council in the event of an appeal by any City
Councilmember, all questions of procedure and order.
(Prior Code, § 31.02)
§ 31.03 MINUTES.
   (A)   Content. Minutes of all City Council meetings will be prepared and
kept by the Clerk or other person designated by the presiding officer.
Ordinances, resolutions, and claims need not be recorded in full in the minutes
if they appear in other permanent records of the Clerk and can be accurately
identified from the description given in the minutes.
   (B)   Recording and approval. The minutes of each meeting will be reduced to
typewritten form and will be signed by the Clerk. Copies of the minutes with
the agenda for the next meeting will be delivered to each City Councilmember as
soon as reasonably practicable after the meeting. At the next regular City
Council meeting following the delivery, approval of the minutes will be
considered by the City Council, with any proposed additions or corrections. If
there is no objection to a proposed addition or correction, it may be made
without a vote of the City Council. If there is an objection, the City Council
will vote upon the addition or correction. The minutes will be approved by vote
of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 31.03)
§ 31.04 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   Preparation of agenda. An agenda of business of each regular City
Council meeting will be prepared and filed in the office of the Clerk no later
than 12:00 p.m. on the Monday before the meeting. Information or other items
must be given to the Clerk no later than 12:00 p.m. on the Friday before the
meeting to be included in the agenda. Copies of the agenda will be delivered to
each City Councilmember and to the City Attorney as far in advance of the
meeting as time for preparation permits. No item of business will be considered
unless it appears on the agenda for the meeting, or is approved for addition to
the agenda by a majority vote of the City Council.
   (B)   Order of agenda. Generally, the order of business will be in
accordance with the agenda, but it may, with approval of the City Council, be
varied at the discretion of the presiding officer. However, all public hearings
will be held at the time specified in the notice of hearing.
(Prior Code, § 31.04)
§ 31.05 QUORUM AND VOTING.
   (A)   Quorum. The presence of three City Councilmembers constitutes a
quorum. A majority vote of all members of the City Council is necessary for
approval of any ordinance unless a larger number is required by statute. Except
as otherwise provided by statute or ordinance, a majority vote of a quorum will
prevail in all other cases.
   (B)   Voting. The votes of each member of any question pending before the
City Council will be recorded in the minutes except as provided in division (C)
below. If any City Councilmember present does not vote, the Clerk will so
indicate in the minutes.
   (C)   Vote recording. When the meeting minutes show a resolution or motion
was adopted without showing how each City Councilmember voted, it will be
considered a unanimous vote in which all City Councilmembers present voted in
favor of the resolution or motion.
(Prior Code, § 31.05)
§ 31.06 ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, AND PETITIONS.
   (A)   Readings. Every ordinance will be presented in writing and will
receive three readings before the City Council prior to final adoption, except
that rezonings or other zoning ordinance amendments shall require only one
reading. However, an ordinance may be adopted at the meeting in which it is
first read or at a subsequent meeting if the City Council rules are suspended
for that purpose. Every ordinance introduced will be recorded in the minutes by
title.
   (B)   Signing and proof of publication. Every ordinance and resolution
passed by the City Council will be signed by the Mayor, attested by the Clerk,
and will be numbered, recorded, and filed in an ordinance or resolution book
within 20 days after its publication. Proof of publication of every ordinance
will be attached to and filed with the ordinance. No resolution will be
published unless the laws of the state require it to be published or unless it
is directed to be published by the City Council.
   (C)   Repeals and amendments. Every ordinance or resolution repealing or
amending all or a part of a previous ordinance or resolution will give both the
title and the number of the ordinance, resolution, or code section to be
repealed or amended. Every amending ordinance or resolution also will set forth
in full each section or subdivision to be amended.
   (D)   Petitions. Every petition or other communication addressed to the City
Council will be in writing and will be read in full upon presentation to the
City Council unless the City Council dispenses with the reading. Each petition
or other communication will be referenced in the minutes.
(Prior Code, § 31.06)
§ 31.07 COMMITTEES.
   Committees may be appointed by the City Council from time to time with
duties as may be required and defined by a majority action of the City Council.
Any matter brought before the City Council for consideration may be referred by
City Council action to an appropriate committee for a report and
recommendation. Each written committee report will be signed by a majority of
the members and will be filed with the Clerk prior to the City Council meeting
at which it is to be submitted. Minority reports may be submitted and will be
attached to the majority report.
(Prior Code, § 31.07)
§ 31.08 CITY ATTORNEY.
   All city matters referred to the City Attorney shall be referred to the
Attorney through the City Manager or designee; provided, however, that a City
Councilmember may contact the City Attorney directly for advice on, or
preparation of, an ordinance, resolution, or motion which the City
Councilmember desires to consider or introduce at a City Council meeting. In
connection with any such request from a City Councilmember, the City Attorney
shall keep a record indicating the name of the City Councilmember, the date the
request was made and the subject matter of the request. The Attorney will from
time to time, and when requested, submit a copy of the record to the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 31.08)
§ 31.09 EXPENSES OF THE CITY COUNCIL.
   All claims for reimbursement of expenses by members of the City Council must
be approved by the City Council before payment of the claim by the Treasurer. A
written report of the proceedings of all meetings, conferences, schools, and
other similar events attended by a City Councilmember for which expenses are
claimed shall be submitted to the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 31.09)
§ 31.10 INFORMATION TO RESIDENTS.
   No City Councilmember will submit, send, or cause to be distributed, at city
expense, for general distribution, any written material pertaining to or
referring to any policy of the city, or indication of the City Council’s
general feeling or position with respect to any city matter, or action taken by
the City Council, without prior approval of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 31.10)
§ 31.11 SUSPENSION OR AMENDMENT OF RULES.
   The rules set forth in this chapter, or any part of them, may be temporarily
suspended by a majority vote of all the City Councilmembers. The rules may not
be repealed or amended except by a majority vote of the whole City Council
after notice has been given at a preceding regular City Council meeting. (Prior
Code, § 31.11)
§ 31.12 MAYOR AND CITY COUNCILMEMBER SALARIES.
   (A)   Mayor. The salary of the Mayor is $725 per month.
   (B)   Mayor Pro Tem. The salary of the Mayor Pro Tem is $663 per month.
   (C)   Councilmembers. The salary of each Councilmember other than the Mayor
or Mayor Pro Tem is $600 per month.
   (D)   Duration. The salaries established in this section will remain in
effect until amended in accordance with M.S. § 415.11, as it may be amended
from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 31.12) (Ord. 2012-09, passed 11-13-2012; Ord. 2015-05, passed
10-13-2015)
CHAPTER 32: CITY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Planning Commission
   
32.01   Character
   
32.02   Membership
   
32.03   Vacancies
   
32.04   Compensation
   
32.05   Organization
   
32.06   Powers and duties
   
32.07   Planning Commission bylaws
   
32.08   City Council action without recommendation of the Planning Commission
Parks and Environmental Commission
   
32.20   Purpose
   
32.21   Membership
   
32.22   Terms of office
   
32.23   Vacancies
   
32.24   Compensation
   
32.25   Powers and duties
   
32.26   Parks and Environmental Commission bylaws
   
32.27   City Council action without recommendation of the Parks and
Environmental Commission
   
32.28   Requests
   
32.29   Staff liaison
   
32.30   Tree care
Public Safety
   
32.45   Policies
   
32.46   Purpose
   
32.47   City Manager’s duties
   
32.48   Police Department
   
32.49   Fire Department
   
32.50   Employee background checks
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 32.01 CHARACTER.
   The Planning Commission of the city is the planning agency within the
meaning of M.S. §§ 462.351 through 462.365, as they may be amended from time to
time. In that capacity, the Planning Commission will be advisory to the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 32.01)
§ 32.02 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The Commission will consist of seven members, all of whom will be
residents of the city appointed by affirmative vote of a majority of the
members of the City Council. Three members were appointed for a three-year term
expiring December 31, 1985, two members were appointed for a two-year term
expiring December, 31, 1984, and two members were appointed for a one-year term
expiring December 31, 1983.
   (B)   All subsequent appointments or renewals will be for a three-year term
except where a vacancy occurs in the middle of a term, in which case the
appointment will be for the duration of the unexpired term.
   (C)   A member whose term is expiring must be notified by the City Manager
or designee 60 days in advance of expiration of the term, and the member must
indicate in writing his or her desire to be reappointed to another term.
(Prior Code, § 32.02)
§ 32.03 VACANCIES.
   (A)   Any of the following will cause the office of a Planning Commission
member to become vacated:
      (1)   Death;
      (2)   Disability or failure to serve;
      (3)   Removal of legal residence from the city;
      (4)   Resignation in writing;
      (5)   Failure to uphold the oath of office; and/or
      (6)   Failure to attend four or more scheduled meetings of the Planning
Commission in a calendar year, unless waived by the City Council after a
written request from the member.
   (B)   The city will publish an open invitation to all residents interested
in serving on the Planning Commission to inform the City Manager or designee in
writing of their interest and desire to be interviewed.
(Prior Code, § 32.03)
§ 32.04 COMPENSATION.
   Planning Commission members shall be compensated at $35 per meeting
attended, and the Chair will be compensated at $45 meeting attended. The
compensation will be effective January 1, 2015.
(Prior Code, § 32.04) (Ord. 2009-003, passed 2-24-2009; Ord. 2014-04, passed
11-10-2014)
§ 32.05 ORGANIZATION.
   The City Manager or designee will appoint a Secretary, who may, but need
not, be a member of the Commission. The Commission will hold one regular
meeting every month, when necessary. At the first meeting of each year, the
Commission will arrange the dates of its regular monthly meetings through the
end of that year. Prior to the first meeting of each year, the City Council
will appoint a Chair and Vice Chair.
(Prior Code, § 32.05) (Ord. 2014-04, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 32.06 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Planning Commission will:
   (A)   Review and make recommendations to the City Council as to a
comprehensive municipal plan, including the land use plan, a community
facilities plan, a transportation plan, and recommendations for plan adoption
and execution;
   (B)   Consider and make recommendations to the City Council as to all
proposed subdivisions and plats;
   (C)   Consider and make recommendations to the City Council as to all
proposed amendments to
Chapters 153 and
154 of this code regarding subdivisions and zoning;
   (D)   Consider, hold hearings, and make recommendations on conditional use
permit applications;
   (E)   Review all applications for variance to zoning, hold hearings, and
make recommendations to the City Council; and
   (F)   Review requests for sign variances.
(Prior Code, § 32.06)
§ 32.07 PLANNING COMMISSION BYLAWS.
   (A)   A schedule of meeting dates shall be established and may be changed or
altered at any regular scheduled meeting. One regular meeting date is
established each month on the third Tuesday at 7:00 p.m. in the City Council
chambers.
   (B)   Additional meetings may be held at any time upon the call of the Chair
or by majority of the voting members of the Commission or upon the request of
the City Council following at least 24-hour notice to each member of the
Commission.
   (C)   Prior to the first regular meeting of each year, the City Council
shall appoint a Chair and Vice Chair.
   (D)   The duties and powers of the officers of the Planning Commission shall
be as follows:
      (1)   Chair.
         (a)   Preside at all meetings of the Commission;
         (b)   Call, amend, or cancel meetings of the Commission in accordance
with the bylaws; and
         (c)   Before scheduled meetings, review agenda with staff.
      (2)   Vice Chair. During the absence, disability, or disqualification of
the Chair, the Vice Chair shall perform all the duties and be subject to all
the responsibilities of the Chair; and
      (3)   Recording Secretary. Appointed by the City Manager or designee to
record the proceedings of all the meetings.
   (E)   Matters referred to the Commission by the City Council shall be placed
on the calendar for consideration and action at the first meeting of the
Commission after the reference.
   (F)   Four members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.
   (G)   Reconsideration of any decision of the Commission may be had when the
interested party of the reconsideration makes a showing, satisfactory to the
Chair and/or City Manager or designee that without fault on the part of the
party, essential facts were not brought to the attention of the Commission.
   (H)   Robert’s Rules of Order are hereby adopted for the government of the
Commission in all cases not otherwise provided for in these rules. These rules
may be amended at any meeting by a vote of the majority of the entire
membership of the Commission, and City Council approval, provided five days’
notice has been given to each member of the Commission.
   (I)   The deadline for filing for placement on the agenda for application of
any planning related issue shall be exactly one month prior to the meeting the
applicant desires to be heard.
   (J)   For the order of consideration of agenda items, the following
procedure will normally be observed; however, it may be arranged by the Chair
for individual items if necessary for the expeditious of business:
      (1)   Staff presents report and makes presentation;
      (2)   The Planning Commission may ask questions regarding the staff
presentation and report;
      (3)   Proponents of the agenda items make presentation;
      (4)   Any opponents make presentation;
      (5)   Applicant makes rebuttal of any points not previously covered; and
      (6)   The Planning Commission asks any questions it may have of the
proponents, opponents, or staff, then takes action.
   (K)   Any member of the Planning Commission who shall feel that he or she
has a conflict of interest on any matter that is on the Planning Commission
agenda shall voluntarily excuse himself or herself, vacate his or her seat, and
refrain from discussing and voting on those items as a Planning Commissioner.
   (L)   Each member of the Planning Commission who has knowledge of the fact
that he or she will not be able to attend a scheduled meeting of the Planning
Commission shall notify the City Manager or designee at the earliest possible
opportunity and, in any event, prior to 4:30 p.m. on the date of the meeting.
The City Manager or designee shall notify the Chair of the Commission in the
event that the projected absences will produce a lack of quorum.
   (M)   The Chair shall be an ex officio member of all committees, with voice
but not vote.
   (N)   The Vice Chair shall succeed the Chair if he or she vacates his or her
office before his or her term is completed, the Vice Chair to serve the
unexpired term of the vacated office. A new Vice Chair shall be elected at the
next regular meeting.
   (O)   The bylaws may be amended at any meeting of the Planning Commission by
a quorum of the Commission, provided that notice of the proposed amendment is
given to each member in writing at least two weeks prior to the meeting. In
addition, any amendment to the Planning Commission bylaws must be approved by
the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 32.07) (Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-1-2012; Ord. 2014-04, passed 11-
10-2014; Ord. 2019-01, passed 3-20-2019)
§ 32.08 CITY COUNCIL ACTION WITHOUT RECOMMENDATION OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION.
   If a matter is required to be referred to the Planning Commission and is
referred to the Planning Commission, and if no recommendation is transmitted by
the Planning Commission to the City Council within 60 days after referral to
the Planning Commission, the City Council may take action without the
recommendation. If a matter not required to be referred to the Planning
Commission is referred to the Planning Commission, the City Council may at any
time take action without the recommendation of the Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 32.08)
PARKS AND ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
§ 32.20 PURPOSE.
   The city does now operate and maintain public parks for the benefit and
pleasure of its residents. A City Parks and Environmental Commission is hereby
established to advise the City Council regarding the promotion of the
systematic, comprehensive, and effective development of park facilities
necessary for the overall health, ability, and well-being of city residents of
all ages. The Parks and Environmental Commission advises the City Council
regarding policies, practices, and proposals that relate to the sustainable use
and management of environmental resources, including air, water, energy, land,
ecological resources, and waste.
(Prior Code, § 32.20) (Ord. 2019-02, passed 4-23-2019)
§ 32.21 MEMBERSHIP.
   The Parks and Environmental Commission will consist of seven members, five
voting and two nonvoting, all of whom will be residents of the city. Five of
the seven will be appointed by affirmative vote of a majority of the members of
the City Council. There will be two nonvoting liaison members. The School Board
of District #282 will appoint a member and the City Council will appoint a
School District #282 student liaison.
(Prior Code, § 32.21) (Ord. 2019-02, passed 4-23-2019)
§ 32.22 TERMS OF OFFICE.
   (A)   Members appointed by the City Council will serve three-year terms. The
first Parks and Environmental Commissioners will be appointed as follows:
 
Two members   One-year terms
Three members Two-year terms
Two members   Three-year terms
 
   (B)   Thereafter, members shall be appointed to three-year terms when the
original term of office expires, except where a vacancy occurs in the middle of
a term. In which case, the appointment will be for the duration of the
unexpired term. The three liaison members will serve at the pleasure of their
respective organizations and can be replaced at any time. Members of the Parks
and Environmental Commission shall be residents of the city throughout their
term of office.
(Prior Code, § 32.22)
§ 32.23 VACANCIES.
   (A)   Any of the following will cause the office of a Parks and
Environmental Commission member to become vacated:
      (1)   Death;
      (2)   Disability or failure to serve;
      (3)   Removal of legal residence from the city;
      (4)   Resignation in writing;
      (5)   Failure to uphold the oath of office; and/or
      (6)   Failure to attend four or more scheduled meetings of the Parks and
Environmental Commission in a calendar year, unless waived by the City Council
after a written request from the Parks and Environmental Commission member.
   (B)   The city will publish an open invitation to all residents interested
in serving on the Parks and Environmental Commission to inform the City Manager
or designee in writing of their interest and desire to be interviewed for a
seat on the Parks and Environmental Commission.
(Prior Code, § 32.23)
§ 32.24 COMPENSATION.
   The Parks and Environmental Commission members shall be compensated at $25
per meeting attended, and the Chair will be compensated at $35 per meeting
attended. The compensation will be effective January 1, 2015.
(Prior Code, § 32.24) (Ord. 2014-04, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 32.25 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   To prepare, revise, and maintain a comprehensive, long-term plan for
the redevelopment of parks within the city. This plan shall be viewed as a
working document that serves as a framework and reference to future
redevelopment;
   (B)   To make recommendations to and advise the City Council and staff
regarding park and environmental issues and ideas;
   (C)   To establish priorities and recommend a phasing plan and schedule for
implementing innovative park and environmental initiatives, improvements,
renovations, and plans;
   (D)   To work with other communities to explore cooperative arrangements to
develop connecting routes in the form of bikeways, walking paths, and corridors
of green space wherever possible;
   (E)   To investigate funding sources, including requests for increases in
the city budget, designated for parks, green spaces, and environmental
initiatives;
   (F)   To seek new areas for additional parks, natural areas, walking paths,
bikeways, and green space corridors;
   (G)   To generate community involvement in the development of parks,
environmental initiatives, and their elements;
   (H)   To review and recommend revisions to the operation and maintenance of
city parks and environmental initiatives; and
   (I)   To periodically review, re-evaluate, and update the comprehensive park
and environmental initiatives plan to reflect current and future park needs of
the city.
(Prior Code, § 32.25) (Ord. 2019-02, passed 4-23-2019)
§ 32.26 PARKS AND ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION BYLAWS.
   (A)   A schedule of meeting dates shall be established and changed or
altered at any regularly scheduled meeting between the Chair and the Public
Works Director or designee.
   (B)   Additional meetings may be held at any time upon the call of the Chair
or by a majority of the voting members of the Parks Commission or upon request
of the City Council following at least 24 hours’ notice to each member of the
Commission and adhering to the requirements of the Open Meeting Law, being M.S.
§§ 13D.001 et seq., as they may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   Prior to the first regular meeting of each year, the City Council
shall appoint a Chair and Vice Chair.
   (D)   The duties and powers of the members of the Parks and Environmental
Commission shall be as follows:
      (1)   Chair.
         (a)   Preside at all meetings of the Parks and Environmental
Commission;
         (b)   Call, amend, or cancel meetings of the Parks and Environmental
Commission in accordance with the bylaws; and
         (c)   Review agenda with staff prior to the scheduled meeting.
      (2)   Vice Chair. During the absence, disability, or disqualification of
the Chair, the Vice Chair shall exercise or perform all the duties and be
subject to all the responsibilities of the Chair; and
      (3)   Secretary. Record the proceedings of all meetings.
   (E)   Matters referred to the Parks and Environmental Commission by the City
Council or School Board shall be placed on the calendar for consideration and
action at the first meeting of the Parks Commission after the referral.
   (F)   Three members of the Parks and Environmental Commission shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
   (G)   Reconsideration of any decision of the Parks and Environmental
Commission may be had when the interested party for the reconsideration makes a
showing, satisfactory to the Chair and/or Public Works Director or designee
that without fault on the part of the party, essential facts were not brought
to the attention of the Parks and Environmental Commission.
   (H)   Robert’s Rules of Order are hereby adopted for the government of the
Parks and Environmental Commission in all cases not otherwise provided for in
these bylaws. The bylaws can be amended at any meeting by a vote of the
majority of the entire membership of the Parks and Environmental Commission,
and by City Council and School Board approval, provided five days’ notice has
been given to each member of the Parks and Environmental Commission.
   (I)   Deadline for filing for placement on the agenda for any related parks
issue shall be exactly one week prior to the meeting the applicant desires to
be heard.
   (J)   Any member of the Parks and Environmental Commission who shall feel
that he or she has a conflict of interest on any matter that is before the
Parks and Environmental Commission shall voluntarily excuse himself or herself,
vacate his or her seat, and refrain from discussing and voting on item(s) in
question.
   (K)   Any Parks and Environmental Commissioner who has advanced knowledge
that he or she will not be able to attend a scheduled meeting of the Parks and
Environmental Commission, shall notify the Public Works Director or designee at
the earliest possible opportunity and, in any event, prior to 3:30 p.m. on the
date of the meeting. The Public Works Director or designee shall notify the
Chair of the Parks and Environmental Commission in the event that the projected
absences will produce a lack of quorum.
   (L)   The Vice Chair shall succeed the Chair if he or she vacates his or her
office before his or her term is completed; the Vice Chair to serve the
unexpired term of the vacated office. A new Vice Chair shall be elected at the
next regular meeting.
   (M)   The bylaws may be amended at any meeting of the Parks and
Environmental Commission by a quorum of the Parks and Environmental Commission,
provided that notice of the proposed amendment be given to each member in
writing at least two weeks prior to the meeting. In addition, any amendment to
the Parks and Environmental Commission bylaws must be approved by the City
Council and the School Board.
(Prior Code, § 32.26) (Ord. 2014-04, passed 11-10-2014)
§ 32.27 CITY COUNCIL ACTION WITHOUT RECOMMENDATION OF THE PARKS AND
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION.
   If a matter is referred to the Parks and Environmental Commission, and if no
recommendation is transmitted by the Parks and Environmental Commission to the
City Council after referral to the Parks and Environmental Commission, the City
Council make take action without the recommendation.
(Prior Code, § 32.27)
§ 32.28 REQUESTS.
   All requests shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for review before
the request is submitted to the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 32.28)
§ 32.29 STAFF LIAISON.
   The Public Works Director, or designee, will be the staff liaison to the
Parks Commission.
(Prior Code, § 32.29)
§ 32.30 TREE CARE.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      PARK TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation in
public parks, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the public has free
access as a park.
      STREET TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation in
the public right-of-way within the city.
   (B)   Creation and establishment of a City Tree Board. There is hereby
created and established a City Tree Board for the city which shall consist of
the members of the City Parks Commission, who are appointed by the City
Council.
      (1)   Term of office. The term of the five persons to be in accordance
with the terms of the City Parks Commission.
      (2)   Compensation. Members of the Board shall serve without additional
compensation.
      (3)   Duties and responsibilities. It shall be the responsibility of the
Board to study, investigate, council, develop and/or update, and administer a
written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting,
removal, or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets, and in
other public areas. Such plan will be presented to the City Council, and upon
their acceptance and approval, shall constitute the official comprehensive city
tree plan for the city. The Board, when requested by the City Council, shall
consider, investigate, make finding, report, and recommend upon any special
matter or question coming within the scope of its work.
      (4)   Operation. The Board may choose its own officers, make its own
rules and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the
members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business.
   (C)   Street tree species to be planted. All trees planted must be in
compliance with city ordinance.
   (D)   Spacing. The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the
species size classes; except in special plantings designed or at the discretion
of the City Manager or designee.
   (E)   Distance from curb and sidewalk. The distance trees may be planted
from curbs or curblines and sidewalks will be in accordance with city
ordinance.
   (F)   Distance from street corners and fireplugs. No street tree shall be
planted closer than 35 feet of any street corner, measured from the point of
the nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No street tree shall be planted
closer than ten feet of any fireplug or at the discretion of the City Manager
or designee.
   (G)   Utilities. No street trees may be planted under or within ten lateral
feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five lateral feet of any
underground water line, sewer line, transmission line, or other utility, or at
the discretion of the City Manager or designee.
   (H)   Public tree care. The city shall have the right to plant, prune,
maintain, and remove trees, plants, and shrubs within the lines of all streets,
alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, and public grounds, as may be necessary to
ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such
public grounds.
   (I)   Tree topping. It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person
or firm to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property.
TOPPING is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than
three inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to
remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by
storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires, or other
obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from
this section at the determination of the Board or at the discretion of the City
Manager or designee.
   (J)   Pruning, corner clearance. Owners shall remove all dead, diseased, or
dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the
safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub
on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along
the street from a street light or interferes with visibility of any traffic
control device or sign.
   (K)   Removal of stumps. All stumps of street and park trees shall be
removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not
project above the surface of the ground.
   (L)   Arborist’s license and bond. It shall be unlawful for any person or
firm to engage in the business or occupation of pruning and/or treating trees
within the city without first applying for and procuring a license. The license
fee shall be in accordance with the city’s fee schedule provided, however, that
no license shall be required of any public service company or city employee
doing such work in the pursuit of their public service endeavors. Before any
license shall be issued, each applicant shall first file evidence of possession
of liability insurance for bodily injury and property damage indemnifying the
city or any person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of such
endeavors as herein described.
(Prior Code, § 32.39) (Ord. 2016-02, passed 5-24-2016)
PUBLIC SAFETY
§ 32.45 POLICIES.
   The City Council has the authority and duty to provide for the government
and good order of the city, the suppression of vice and immorality, the
prevention of crime, the protection of public and private property, the benefit
of residence, trade, and commerce, and the promotion of health, safety, order,
convenience, and the general welfare of the residents by means not inconsistent
with the Constitutions and laws of the United States and the state.
(Prior Code, § 32.40)
§ 32.46 PURPOSE.
   This section is intended to further the policies stated in §
32.45 and to provide for the organization of separate Police and Fire
Departments for the city.
(Prior Code, § 32.41)
§ 32.47 CITY MANAGER’S DUTIES.
   The City Manager or designee will see that statutes relating to the city and
the laws, ordinances, resolutions, and other official acts of the city are
enforced. The City Manager or designee will exercise supervision and control
over the Police Department and the Fire Department and will be responsible for
hiring and firing all supervisory and other members and employees of the Police
and Fire Departments.
(Prior Code, § 32.42)
§ 32.48 POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Responsibilities. The Police Department will have the duties and
responsibilities given in accordance with the Constitutions and laws of the
United States and the state, this code and other official acts of the city. The
Police Department, under the direction of the Chief of Police, is charged with
the protection of all persons and property within the corporate limits of the
city, and the other areas as agreed upon by the City Council or required by
law. The Police Department will be responsible for prevention of crimes,
accidents, and civil disorders, control of traffic, and general enforcement of
this code and applicable statutory laws.
   (B)   Chief of Police. The Police Department is under the supervision and
direction of a Chief of Police, who will report directly to the City Manager or
designee. In addition to supervising the Department, the Chief’s
responsibilities and duties will include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Control and responsibility for all police equipment, including, but
not limited to, its use, care, maintenance, and condition;
      (2)   Maintenance of a complete record of the statistics and other
information as will enable the Chief to make a written monthly activities
report to the City Council and any other reports as required by the City
Manager or designee, by the City Council, and by law;
      (3)   Preparation of a report, to be made annually to the City Council at
its first meeting in September of each year, with respect to the condition of
equipment and the needs of the Police Department;
      (4)   Preparation of recommendations to the City Manager or designee for
the rules and regulations for the operation of the Police Department as the
Chief deems desirable to promote effective, efficient, and economical service;
      (5)   Responsibility for the proper training and discipline of the
members of the Police Department; and
      (6)   Preparation of an annual written evaluation of the performance of
each member of the Police Department.
   (C)   Employees of the Police Department. The Police Department will be
staffed by any assistant supervisory employees, deputy assistant supervisory
employees, officers, patrol officers, and other full-time employees as are
deemed necessary by the City Manager or designee consistent with the budgetary
allowances approved by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 32.43) (Ord. 2009-008, passed 6-23-2009; Ord. 2012-08, passed
10-23-2012)
§ 32.49 FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Responsibilities. The Fire Department will be responsible for fire and
life safety, and fire protection for the city in accordance with the
Constitutions and laws of the United States and the state, and this code and
other official acts of the city.
   (B)   Fire Chief. The Fire Department will be under the supervision and
direction of the Fire Chief, who will report directly to the City Manager or
designee. In addition to supervising the Department, the Chief’s
responsibilities and duties will include, but not be limited to, the same
responsibilities and duties as set forth in §
32.48(B) as they relate to the Fire Department.
   (C)   Employees of the Fire Department. The Fire Department will be staffed
by assistant supervisory employees, deputy assistant supervisory employees,
firefighters, and other full-time and part-time employees as are deemed
necessary by the City Manager or designee consistent with the budgetary
allowances approved by the City Council.
   (D)   Part-time employees. The complement of full-time firefighters shall be
supplemented by a part-time force of firefighters, all of whom will be
responsible to the Fire Chief, subject to the Chief’s supervision and subject
to departmental rules and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 32.44) (Ord. 08-001, passed 4-8-2008)
§ 32.50 EMPLOYEE BACKGROUND CHECKS.
   (A)   The purpose and intent of this section is to establish regulations
that will allow law enforcement access to the state’s computerized criminal
history information for specified noncriminal purposes of employment background
checks for city positions.
   (B)   The City Police Department is hereby required, as the exclusive entity
within the city, to do a criminal history background investigation on the
applicants for the following positions within the city, unless the city’s
hiring authority concludes that a background investigation is not needed: all
full and part-time positions.
   (C)   In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order
to screen employment applicants, the Police Department is authorized to access
data maintained in the State Bureau Department of Criminal Apprehensions
computerized criminal history information system in accordance with BCA policy.
Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Police
Department under the care and custody of the chief law enforcement official, or
his or her designee. A summary of the results of the computerized criminal
history data may be released by the Police Department to the hiring authority,
the City Manager or designee.
   (D)   Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize
the Police Department by written consent to undertake the investigation. The
written consent must fully comply with the provisions of M.S. Chapter 13, as it
may be amended from time to time, regarding the collection, maintenance, and
use of the information. Except for the positions set forth in M.S. § 364.09, as
it may be amended from time to time, the city will not reject an applicant for
employment on the basis of the applicant’s prior conviction unless the crime is
directly related to the position of employment sought and the conviction is for
a felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the city
rejects the applicant’s request on this basis, the city shall notify the
applicant in writing of the following:
      (1)   The grounds and reasons for the denial;
      (2)   The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in M.S. §
364.09, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (3)   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment; and
      (4)   That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered
upon reapplication.
(Prior Code, § 32.50)
CHAPTER 33: FEES, RATES, AND CHARGES
Section
Fees, Rates, and Charges Established
   
33.001   Fees
   
33.002   Collection
Sewer
   
33.015   Charges to owner
   
33.016   Residential premises
   
33.017   Other premises charged quarterly
   
33.018   Sewer charge rates and Metro Waste surcharge
   
33.019   Checking water meters
   
33.020   Separate meters
   
33.021   Objections to sewer charges
Water
   
33.035   Charges to owner
   
33.036   Residential premises
   
33.037   Commencing or discontinuing service
   
33.038   Testing meter
   
33.039   Fire control devices
   
33.040   Untimely payment; late payment penalty
   
33.041   Certification of delinquent account balances
License and Permit Fees
   
33.055   Fees
   
33.056   Bicycles
   
33.057   Impounding fees
   
33.058   Street excavation permit
   
33.059   Other license fees
   
33.060   Establishment of fee amounts
   
33.061   Fees established by resolution
Charges and Assessments for Special Street Lights
   
33.075   City Manager may order certain work done
   
33.076   Record of cost
   
33.077   Collection before levy as a special assessment
   
33.078   Levy of assessment
   
33.079   Other ordinances and remedies
Storm Water Facilities
   
33.090   Charges for storm water facilities
Assessments for Unpaid Charges
   
33.105   Owner’s obligation
   
33.106   Special assessments
   
33.107   Procedure for assessment
FEES, RATES, AND CHARGES ESTABLISHED
§ 33.001 FEES.
   The city’s fees, rates, and charges for licenses, permits, and municipal
services are the amounts set forth in this chapter. Actions taken without first
obtaining the required licenses or permits or any applications for renewal
license submitted after the license term expiration or otherwise a declared
application deadline are subject to a penalty fee, which shall be determined
from time to time by the City Council. Licenses or permits shall expire if not
completed prior to the time specified on the approval or as allowed by code.
However, if not otherwise prohibited by code, a permit or license holder may
seek an extension from the reviewing authority without additional fee, at the
sole discretion of the reviewing authority, upon a showing that the permitted
activity is in progress, and the holder is making active progress toward
completion, with completion expected within a reasonable time.
(Prior Code, § 33.001) (Ord. 2025-02, passed 4-22-2025)
§ 33.002 COLLECTION.
   Payment of city billings must be made not later than the date specified in
the billing. If the amount is not paid when due, a late charge may be added. If
a charge is more than 15 days past due, it will be considered delinquent. All
delinquent accounts will be certified to the Clerk, who will prepare an
assessment roll each year providing for assessment of the delinquent amounts,
plus interest at the rate of 8% per annum from the date amounts become
delinquent, against the respective properties served. The assessment roll will
be delivered to the City Council for adoption on or before the second Tuesday
of October of each year. Assessment will not preclude any other legal action to
collect delinquent accounts.
(Prior Code, § 33.002) (Ord. 2012-10, passed 11-27-2012)
SEWER
§ 33.015 CHARGES TO OWNER.
   The owner of any property connected with the city sanitary sewer system must
pay, as basic rental, charges for the use of the system the charges set forth
in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 33.015)
§ 33.016 RESIDENTIAL PREMISES.
   (A)   Charges based on water usage. All single-family, two-family, and
townhouse dwellings will be charged quarterly based upon the number of gallons
of water used during the months of January, February, and March of each year,
as determined from meter readings obtained by the water meters electronically.
   (B)   Leak or malfunction. The quarterly charge will be based upon the
actual meter readings for the first quarter, notwithstanding any leak or
malfunction in the plumbing system during the period. If the leak or
malfunction occurs during first quarter, the owner is responsible for paying
the charges during that period. When the leak is repaired by the city, the
quarterly charge will be based upon meter history or the subsequent quarter for
which there is no leak or malfunction in the plumbing system.
   (C)   Meter not used in first quarter. If a person becomes the occupant of
residential premises during or after the first quarter, and in any other case
where a water meter is not in use during all of the first quarter, the
quarterly charge will be based on the previous fourth quarter or upon actual
usage during the second quarter. The charge will be prorated from the date of
occupancy.
   (D)   Water service from other city. The occupants of any one-family or two-
family dwelling which is connected to the water system of any other
municipality must obtain and submit to the city water meter readings of the
type required by §
52.05.
(Prior Code, § 33.016)
§ 33.017 OTHER PREMISES CHARGED QUARTERLY.
   All premises other than single-family, two-family, and townhouse dwellings
will be charged quarterly in the same manner as set forth in §
33.016, except that the charge to be paid for each quarter will be based upon
the number of gallons of water used during that quarter. The usage for the
first quarter will not be the basis for the sewer charges for the remaining
three quarters of the year.
(Prior Code, § 33.017)
§ 33.018 SEWER CHARGE RATES AND METRO WASTE SURCHARGE.
   All sewer charges will be billed at the current rate of $5.12 per 1,000
gallons, quarterly collection system charge $23.25 per residential equivalency
unit.
(Prior Code, § 33.018) (Ord. 2009-007, passed 11-24-2009; Ord. 2012-04, passed
4-10-2012; Ord. 2014-06, passed 12-9-2014; Ord. 2017-01, passed 3-14-2017; Ord.
2017-04, passed 12-12-2017; Ord. 2018-02, passed 12-11-2018; Ord. 2019-10,
passed 11-26-2019; Ord. 2020-03, passed 12-8-2020; Ord. 2021-05, passed 12-14-
2021; Ord. 2022-08, passed 12-13-2022; Ord. 2023-10, passed 12-12-2023; Ord.
2024-07, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 33.019 CHECKING WATER METERS.
   The city has the right to check water meter readings from time to time on a
random basis or when the city believes the meter is not functioning properly.
(Prior Code, § 33.020)
§ 33.020 SEPARATE METERS.
   Water which is used for an evaporative cooling system and is not discharged
into the sanitary sewer system and is separately metered, will not be included
in the meter readings upon which the sewer charges are based.
(Prior Code, § 33.021)
§ 33.021 OBJECTIONS TO SEWER CHARGES.
   Any owner or occupant having any objection to sewer charges may appeal to
the City Council by filing a written appeal with the Clerk. The appeal must
fully describe the specific sewer charges included in the appeal, a description
of the premises involved, and other relevant facts relating to the sewer
charges included in the appeal.
(Prior Code, § 33.022)
WATER
§ 33.035 CHARGES TO OWNER.
   The owner of property connected with the municipal water system must pay the
water service charges set forth in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 33.035)
§ 33.036 WATER RATES.
   (A)      (A)   Water usage billing will be computed quarterly based on
metered water used according to the tiered rates system below, quarterly
distribution system charge $27.00 per residential equivalency unit.
      (1)   Residential.
 
         Consumption (Gallons) Rate (Per 1,000 Gallons)
Tier I   0—7,500             $3.44
Tier II  7,500—15,000        $3.62
Tier III 15,000—22,500       $3.99
Tier IV  22,500—30,000       $4.57
Tier V   Over 30,000           $5.73
 
      (2)   Multi-family. The multi-family quarterly water usage billing is
based on the total consumption divided by the number of units to determine the
consumption per unit. Multi-family customers are billed according to the
residential tier rate structure.
      (3)   Commercial.
 
         Consumption (Gallons) Rate (Per 1,000 Gallons)
Tier I   0—7,500             $3.44
Tier II  7,500—53,500        $3.62
Tier III 53,500—175,000      $3.99
Tier IV  175,000—300,000     $4.57
Tier V   Over 300,000          $5.73
   
      (4)   Wilshire Elementary.
 
         Consumption (Gallons) Rate (Per 1,000 Gallons)
Tier I   0—7,500             $3.44
Tier II  7,500—510,000       $3.62
Tier III 510,000—610,000     $3.99
Tier IV  610,000—710,000     $4.57
Tier V   Over 710,000          $5.73
 
      (5)   St. Anthony High School.
 
         Consumption (Gallons) Rate (Per 1,000 Gallons)
Tier I   0—7,500             $3.44
Tier II  7,500—850,000       $3.62
Tier III 850,000—1,150,000   $3.99
Tier IV  1,150,000—1,450,000 $4.57
Tier V   Over 1,450,000        $5.73
 
      (6)   Happy’s Potato Chips.
 
         Consumption (Gallons) Rate (Per 1,000 Gallons)
Tier I   0—7,500             $3.44
Tier II  7,500—3,650,000     $3.62
Tier III 3,650,000—4,650,000 $3.99
Tier IV  4,650,000—5,650,000 $4.57
Tier V   Over 5,650,000        $5.73
 
   (B)   All metered irrigation systems will be charged at the IV (fourth) tier
rate for all usage.
   (C)   Annually, all sewer rates will be set by resolution by the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 33.036) (Ord. 2009-006, passed 11-24-2009; Ord. 2012-04, passed
4-10-2012; Ord. 2014-06, passed 12-9-2014; Ord. 2017-01, passed 3-14-2017; Ord.
2017-04, passed 12-12-2017; Ord. 2018-02, passed 12-11-2018; Ord. 2020-03,
passed 12-8-2020; Ord. 2021-05, passed 12-14-2021; Ord. 2022-08, passed 12-13-
2022; Ord. 2023-10, passed 12-12-2023; Ord. 2024-07, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 33.037 COMMENCING OR DISCONTINUING SERVICE.
   A hookup charge of $105 must be paid before water service to a property is
first provided. A charge of $15 will be made for shutting off or turning on the
water supply to a premises.
(Prior Code, § 33.038) (Ord. 2019-10, passed 11-26-2019; Ord. 2022-08, passed
12-13-2022; Ord. 2023-10, passed 12-12-2023; Ord. 2024-07, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 33.038 TESTING METER.
   The fee for this service is set by resolution.
(Prior Code, § 33.039) (Ord. 2012-10, passed 11-27-2012)
§ 33.039 FIRE CONTROL DEVICES.
   The fee for this service is set by resolution.
(Prior Code, § 33.040) (Ord. 2012-10, passed 11-27-2012)
§ 33.040 UNTIMELY PAYMENT; LATE PAYMENT PENALTY.
   The fee for this section is set by resolution.
(Prior Code, § 33.043) (Ord. 2012-10, passed 11-27-2012)
§ 33.041 CERTIFICATION OF DELINQUENT ACCOUNT BALANCES.
   Delinquent account balances greater than $50 and at least two quarters past
due will be certified to the taxpayer of record for the real property,
including rental property of any type by November 30 of each year, or such
earlier date as may be required by the applicable county. Accounts
significantly exceeding either of these criterias are considered at-risk and
are subject to early certification or water shut-off at the city’s directions.
(Prior Code, § 33.044) (Ord. 2012-10, passed 11-27-2012; Ord. 2022-03, passed
5-24-2022)
LICENSE AND PERMIT FEES
§ 33.055 FEES.
   Fees for licenses and permits referred to in this subchapter must be paid in
the amounts set forth in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 33.055)
§ 33.056 BICYCLES.
   Bicycles are to be registered under state law. The city has no requirement
for licensing or registration of bicycles.
(Prior Code, § 33.056)
§ 33.057 IMPOUNDING FEES.
   (A)   Impounding fee. $50, plus $15 per day.
   (B)   Boarding fee for each day or part thereof dog is impounded. Amounts to
be paid under §
91.36.
(Prior Code, § 33.058)
§ 33.058 STREET EXCAVATION PERMIT.
   The fee is set by resolution as stated in §
33.061.
(Prior Code, § 33.059) (Ord. 2012-13, passed - -)
§ 33.059 OTHER LICENSE FEES.
   The fee is set by resolution as stated in §
33.061.
(Prior Code, § 33.060) (Ord. 08-004, passed 5-13-2008; Ord. 2012-13, passed - -
)
§ 33.060 ESTABLISHMENT OF FEE AMOUNTS.
    These fees are set by resolution as stated in §
33.061. The dollar amounts of fees required by this code are stated in the
following table. In addition to the application fee, applicants are responsible
for the city’s out-of-pocket costs for the planner, engineer, attorney, and/or
other consultants to review the application. To provide for payment of such
costs, the applicant will make a deposit (escrow) with the city at the end of
the time of application submittal, in an amount determined by the City Manager
or designee. If costs are less than the deposit (escrow), the difference will
be billed to the applicant.
   (A)   Building permit.
Total Valuation
Total Valuation
$1 to $2,000                                        $83.50
                                                    $83.50 for the first $2,000
$2,001 to $25,000                                   plus $16.55/additional $1,000
                                                    or fraction thereof, to
                                                    including $25,000
                                                    $464.15 for the first $25,000
$25,001 to $50,000                                  plus $12/additional $1,000 or
                                                    fraction thereof, to
                                                    including $50,000
                                                    $764.15 for the first $50,000
$50,001 to $100,000                                 plus $8.45/additional $1,000
                                                    or fraction thereof, to
                                                    including $100,000
                                                    $1,186.65 for the first
                                                    $100,000 plus $6.75/
$100,001 to $500,000                                additional $1,000 or fraction
                                                    thereof, to including
                                                    $500,000
                                                    $3,886.65 for the first
                                                    $500,000 plus $5.50/
$500,001 to $1,000,000                              additional $1,000 or fraction
                                                    thereof, to including
                                                    $1,000,000
                                                    $6,636.65 for the first
$1,000,001 and up                                   $1,000,000 plus $4.50/
                                                    additional $1,000 or fraction
                                                    thereof
Inspections outside of normal business hours        $75 per hour
(minimum charge, two hours)
Reinspection; fees assessed under provisions of §  $65
32.08
Inspections for which no fee is specifically        $105 per hour
indicated (minimum charge, one-half hour)
Additional plan review required by changes,
additions, or revisions to plans                    $105 per hour
(minimum charge, one-half hour)
For use of outside consultants for plan checking    Actual costs*
and inspections, or both
Plan review                                         65% of building permit fee
Plan review when there is a Master Plan when
approved, the review fee shall not exceed 25% of    25% of building permit fee
the permit fee for submittal documents reviewed
using a Master Plan set.
Review fee for a Master Plan set                    65% of the permit fee
Review of state approved construction documents     25% of building permit fee
Pre-final inspection (new home or structure)        $75
Re-inspection**                                     $65
                                                    100% of permit fee, in
Special investigation***                            addition to original fee
                                                    amount
Permit renewal within six month of expiration (no   50% of the original permit
plan changes, no code changes, new permit number)   fee
Refunds and Fee Adjustments
Plan review                                         No refund
Building maintenance permit fee                     No refund
Permit fee (work started)                           No refund
Permit fee (permit processed and ready to issue)    80%
Permit fee (work not started and within six months  60%
of permit issuance)
Notes to table:
*   Actual costs include administrative and overhead costs.
**   (A)   A re-inspection fee may be assessed:
   (1)Each inspection or re-inspection when the work for which the inspection was
scheduled is not complete at the time of the scheduled inspection. For valuation-
based building permits, this fee is not assessed the first time an inspection
fails, and a re-inspection is required;
   (2)When the address of the jobsite is not posted;
   (3)When the inspection record card is not posted or provided at the worksite;
   (4)When the approved plans are not readily available for the inspector;
   (5)When access to conduct the inspection is not provided;
   (6)When the inspector is not met by the individual responsible (no show);
   (7)When corrections are required to be re-inspected for residential
maintenance permits;
   (8)When work completed has deviated from the approved plans without prior
approval from the Building Inspections Department.
(B)   Re-inspection fees are due on or before the scheduled re-inspection.
   (C)   Payment shall be made payable to the municipality.
***   (A)   Applicable when work was started prior to obtaining any permit
required by City Code.
   (B)   This fee is due at the discretion of the City Manager or designee,
regardless of whether a permit is issued.
   A plan review fee of 65% of the permit fee will be charged for building
permits which require the submittal of plans.
   Fees for similar plans will be charged in accordance with provisions of Minn.
Rules Chapter 1300.0160, Subd. 5.
 
   (B)   Electrical permits. The inspection fee for installation of solar PV
systems is as follows (plan review fee is $100 per hour).
 
Wattage                              Cost
0 watts to and including 5,000 watts $90
5,001 watts to and including 10,000  $150
watts
10,001 watts to and including 20,000 $225
watts
20,001 watts to and including 30,000 $300
watts
30,001 watts to and including 40,000 $375
watts
40,001 watts and larger              $374 and $25 for each additional 10,000
                                     watts over 40,001 watts
 
   (C)   Heating, air conditioning, and refrigeration.
Purpose of Fee Amount
Purpose of Fee                          Amount
Residential (R-1, R-1A, and R-2)
New appliances                          $37.50 per appliance, $75 minimum
Gas line only permit                    $75, includes all gas lines
Gas fitting/connection                  $50 (with a mechanical permit/includes
                                        all gas lines/fittings)
Fixture maintenance (furnace, gas
range, gas dryer, hot water heater, air $50 for first appliance, $75 for two
conditioner, gas piping, duct work,     appliances, additional $37.50 for each
boiler, piping, hydronics systems, and  additional appliance
the like activity requires a regular
mechanical permit)
Commercial, Light Industrial, and
Multi-Family (C, LI, R-3, and R-4)
All                                     3% of contract price
Add $50 administrative fee and $0.50
surcharge to all permits
Plan review fee                         65% of permit fee
Special investigation*                  100% of permit fee, in addition to
                                        original fee amount
Permit renewal within six months of
expiration (no plan changes, no code    50% of the original permit fee
changes, new permit number)
Refunds and Fee Adjustments
Plan review                             No refund
Building maintenance permit fee         No refund
Permit fee (work started)               No refund
Permit fee (permit processed and ready  80%
to issue)
Permit fee (work not started and within 60%
six months of permit issuance)
Inspections outside of normal business  $75 per hour ($150 minimum)
hours (includes travel time both ways)
Inspections for which no fee is
indicated (miscellaneous and special    $75 per hour ($37.50 minimum)
services)
Notes to table:
*   (A)   Applicable when work was started prior to obtaining any permit
required by City Code.
   (B)   This fee is due at the discretion of the City Manager or designee,
regardless of whether a permit is issued.
   The minimum permit fee for commercial, industrial, institutional, or
business occupancies is $20 plus state permit fee surcharge.
 
   (D)   Plumbing fees.
Purpose of Fee Amount
Purpose of Fee                          Amount
Residential (R-1, R-1A, and R-2)
New fixtures                            $10 per fixture, $75 minimum
Lawn irrigation                         $50
Fixture maintenance (the replacement of $50 for first appliance, $75 for two or
only one existing fixture or            more appliances
appliance)*
Commercial, Light Industrial, and
Multi-Family (C, LI, R-3, and R-4)
All                                     3% of contract price
Lawn sprinklers, residential            $20
Lawn sprinklers, commercial             $30
Add $50 administrative fee and $0.50
surcharge to all permits
Plan review fee                         65% of permit fee
Special investigation**                 100% of permit fee, in addition to
                                        original fee amount
Permit Renewal within six month of
expiration (no plan changes, no code    50% of the original permit fee
changes, new permit number)
Refunds and Fee Adjustments
Plan review                             No refund
Building maintenance permit fee         No refund
Permit fee (work started)               No refund
Permit fee (permit processed and ready  80%
to issue)
Permit fee (work not started and within 60%
six months of permit issuance)
Inspections outside of normal business  $75 per hour ($150 minimum)
hours (includes travel time both ways)
Inspections for which no fee is
indicated (miscellaneous and special    $75 per hour ($37.50 minimum)
services)
Notes to table:
*   Examples include the replacement of a sink, water softener, hose bib, or
water heater. Alterations, additions, and/or removal of vent systems, drain/
waste/vent piping, water lines, or other like activity requires a regular
plumbing permit.
**   (A)   Applicable when work was started prior to obtaining any permit
required by City Code.
   (B)   This fee is due at the discretion of the City Manager or designee,
regardless of whether a permit is issued.
 
   (E)   Small cell fees.
      (1)   Application fees.
         (a)   The fee for a small wireless facility permit application seeking
to collocate up to five small wireless facilities shall be $500. This fee shall
increase by $100 for each additional small wireless facility that an applicant
seeks to collocate.
         (b)   The fee for a small wireless facility permit application seeking
to install or replace a wireless support structure in addition to collocating
of a small wireless facility on the wireless support structure shall be $1,000.
      (2)   Annual small wireless facility permit fee. $150 per year for each
small wireless facility.
      (3)   City-owned wireless support structure fees.
         (a)   One-hundred fifty dollars per year for rent to occupy space on
wireless support structure;
         (b)   Twenty-five dollars per year for maintenance associated with the
space occupied on the wireless support structure; and
         (c)   Monthly fee for electricity used to operate the small cell
wireless facility, if not purchased directly form a utility, at a rate of:
            1.   Seventy-three dollars per radio node less than or equal to 100
max watts;
            2.   One-hundred eighty-two dollars per radio node over 100 max
watts; or
            3.   The actual costs of electricity, if the actual costs exceed
the above.
      (4)   Annual city-owned property fees. $150 per year for each collocating
small wireless facilities on city-owned property not located in the public
right-of-way.
   (F)   Land use fees.
Purpose of Fee (Code No:) Amount
Purpose of Fee (Code No:)     Amount
Appeal                        $500 and an escrow deposit of $1,500
Comprehensive Plan            $750 and an escrow deposit of $1,500 for
                              residential and $3,500 for commercial
Conditional use permits (§   $1,000 and an escrow deposit of $750 for
154.243)                      residential and $2,500 commercial
Easement vacation             $200 and an escrow deposit of $500
Final plat                    $500 with an escrow deposit of $750
Garage setback permit (§     $60
154.176)
Planned unit development (§  $1,500 and escrow deposit of $2,500, plus $50
154.205)                      escrow per residential lot
Preliminary plat (            $750 with a $1,500 escrow deposit
Chapter 153)
Rezoning (§                  $750 with a $1,500 escrow deposit
154.242)
Sign permit (                 $75 for cost of $1 to $500, plus $5 for each $100
Chapter 157)                  over $500
Sign plan, review (           $75
Chapter 157)
Site plan (§                 $500 with an escrow deposit of $750
154.241)
Subdivision/lot split (       $500 with a $1,500 escrow deposit
Chapter 153)
Variance (§                  $1,000 and an escrow deposit of $750 for
154.245)                      residential and $2,500 commercial
 
   (G)   Miscellaneous permits.
Permit Fee
Permit                             Fee
Antennas, disk antennas and towers Per building permit fee schedule
Demolition                         $75 residential
                                   $100 commercial
Driveway/sidewalk                  $75
Fence                              $75
Hydrant meter rental               $500 deposit plus cost of water usage per
                                   Tier IV water fee
Public safety                      $20
Solar                              Fee based on building permit valuation
Zoning permit                      $75
Storage tank removal               $95
 
   (H)   Licenses.
License Fee
License                                         Fee
Alarm permits (§
112.32)
   Commercial                                $30
   Residential                               $15
Christmas tree lots
   Non-profit                                No fee
   Other applicants                          $50
Contractors (§                                 $35
112.51)
Courtesy ad bench (§                           $40 per bench annually
94.32)
Dangerous dog/potentially dangerous dog         $500
Fireworks (§                                   $100 existing
114.070)                                        $350 standalone
Gasoline service stations                       $75 for station and one
(stations with multiple products dispensed      production line, plus $15 for
through one hose)                               each product line dispensed.
Haulers of garbage or recyclables (§           $150
115.051)
Kennel (§                                      $50
91.15)
Laundromats                                     $10 per machine, up to a
(coin-operated, not in multiple-family          maximum of $190 per location
building)
Liquor (March 15 renewal date; annually) (
Chapter 116)
   Beer: off-sale; 3.2% malt liquor license  $125
   Beer: on-sale; 3.2% malt liquor license   $375
   Beer: temporary on-sale; 3.2% malt liquor None
license
   Liquor: on-sale intoxicating liquor       $8,000
   Liquor: Sunday, on-sale                   $200
   Wine: only                                $400 license fee; and
                                                $100 processing fee
   Wine: with strong beer endorsement        $1,500 license fee; and $100
                                                processing fee
   Wine: temporary                           None
Cannabis                                        $500 initial license; $1,000
                                                renewals
Rental dwelling (
Chapter 152)
($100 penalty fee added if received after July 1)
   Single, duplex, triplex                   $175
   Multiple dwelling                         $175 base fee, plus $12 per
                                                unit for three or more
Pawnbroker (§                                  $8,000 license fee;
113.37)                                         $750 investigation fee
Peddler (§                                     $50
115.067)
Physical culture and health service or club,
reducing club or salon, sauna parlor,           $500 investigation;
therapeutic massage studio (§                  $250 therapist
114.021)
Secondhand goods dealer (§                     $5,000 license fee;
113.03)                                         $750 investigation fee
Tobacco or tobacco-related products
(§                                             $300
115.003)
Transient merchant (§                          $50
115.067)
 
   (I)   Right-of-way permits.
Type Fee
Type                                   Fee
                                       $2,000 minimum escrow (for up to ten
                                       lots), plus $20 escrow per additional
Escrow                                 lot. All applications to be reviewed by
                                       the Public Works Director. Additional
                                       escrow may be requested depending on
                                       scope of work.
Application fee                        $75
Hole                                   $150
                                       $70 for first 100 lineal feet;
Trench                                 $25 for each additional 50 lineal feet
                                       (plus hole fee)
Obstruction permit base fee            $50 plus $.05/lineal foot
Permit extension fee                   $55
Street excavation (§ 150.046)         $75
Small cell wireless ROW rent           $150 per year, plus $25 per site
                                       Actual cost or $73 per radio node less
Small cell wireless monthly electrical than or equal to 100 maximum watts; $182
fee                                    per radio node over 100 maximum watts
                                       (whichever is greater)
 
(Prior Code, § 33.061) (Ord. 2011 03, passed 6-28-2011; Ord. 2012-13, passed 1-
8-2013; Ord. 2019-04, passed 4-9-2019; Ord. 2019-07, passed 7-23-2019; Ord.
2019-10, passed 11-26-2019; Ord. 2020-03, passed 12-8-2020; Ord. 2021-05,
passed 12-14-2021; Ord. 2022-08, passed 12-13-2022; Ord. 2022-10, passed 1-10-
2023; Ord. 2023-10, passed 12-12-2023; Ord. 2024-07, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 33.061 FEES ESTABLISHED BY RESOLUTION.
   Fees will be payable to the city in amounts established by resolution of the
City Council for miscellaneous items and administrative services, including,
without limitation, special assessment searches, accident reports, copying,
ordinances, maps, minutes of City Council and various commission meetings,
printed forms, and certified copies.
(Prior Code, § 33.062)
CHARGES AND ASSESSMENTS FOR SPECIAL STREET LIGHTS
§ 33.075 CITY MANAGER MAY ORDER CERTAIN WORK DONE.
   The City Manager or designee may from time to time order the installation
and operation of lighting systems for public streets and sidewalks pursuant to
M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, which are in addition
to and/or different than the normal street lighting installed and operated at
the city’s sole expense (hereinafter referred to in this subchapter as special
street lighting). The order will state the location and type of the special
street lighting work to be done. The City Manager or designee will transmit a
copy of the order to the Public Works Director or designee, who will then have
the work done by entering into contracts for the work with the appropriate
public utility company or other appropriate parties.
(Prior Code, § 33.075)
§ 33.076 RECORD OF COST.
   The Public Works Director or designee will keep records of and report to the
City Clerk the actual cost of all special street lighting work, and, in the
case of costs to be charged prior to the time they are incurred, the estimated
cost of the work. In either case, the records and reports will include the cost
of all special street lighting work done or to be done and all operating costs
of the city incurred and to be incurred with respect to the special street
lighting.
(Prior Code, § 33.076)
§ 33.077 COLLECTION BEFORE LEVY AS A SPECIAL ASSESSMENT.
   All costs incurred or to be incurred for special street lighting or the
operation of the special street lighting, or the portion thereof as the City
Council by resolution from time to time shall determine to charge under this
subchapter, will be charged with the frequency as the City Council by
resolution from time to time determines, to each owner of each separate lot or
parcel of land benefitted by the special street lighting, in proportion to the
benefits conferred upon the lots or parcels. If any charge is made for a cost
to be incurred and, based upon subsequent actual costs, is found to be
excessive, subsequent charges shall be reduced by the excess, and, if
deficient, subsequent charges shall be increased by the deficiency. Any charge
not paid in full by November 15 of each year shall be levied as a special
assessment against the lot or parcel of land benefitted by the special street
lighting.
(Prior Code, § 33.077)
§ 33.078 LEVY OF ASSESSMENT.
   On or before November 15 of each year, the City Clerk will prepare an
assessment roll assessing all costs for the special street lighting reported
under this subchapter against each separate lot or parcel of land benefitted by
the special street lighting, in proportion to the benefits conferred upon the
lots or parcels. The City Council will examine the assessment roll submitted by
the City Clerk, and if satisfactory, will call a public hearing and levy
special assessments for any unpaid charges for the special street lighting in
accordance with M.S. § 429.061, as it may be amended from time to time. All the
special assessments will be payable in a single installment, or the additional
annual installments, not to exceed ten, as may be fixed by the resolution
approving the special assessments, with interest thereon at the rate fixed in
the resolution approving the special assessments, but not to exceed the highest
rate allowed by law.
(Prior Code, § 33.078)
§ 33.079 OTHER ORDINANCES AND REMEDIES.
   The methods and remedies authorized by this subchapter are in addition to
any other methods or remedies available to the city by state statute or city
ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 33.079)
STORM WATER FACILITIES
§ 33.090 CHARGES FOR STORM WATER FACILITIES.
 
Classification                                             Quarterly Charge
1 - Cemeteries, parks, golf courses, parks, golf courses,  $18.94 per acre
railroads, and vacant land
2 - R-1, R-1A, and R-2 Residential                         $18.35 per unit
3 - R-3 Residential                                        $18.35 per unit
4 - Schools and institutional uses                         $61.15 per acre
5 - R-4 Residential, churches, and manufactured home parks $78.21 per acre
6 - Commercial and industrial                              $99.98 per acre
 
(Prior Code, § 33.090) (Ord. 2022-08, passed 12-13-2022; Ord. 2023-10, passed
12-12-2023; Ord. 2024-07, passed 12-10-2024)
ASSESSMENTS FOR UNPAID CHARGES
§ 33.105 OWNER’S OBLIGATION.
   Property owners are responsible for all city charges levied for city
services and for work performed by the city because the owner has failed to
perform the work as required by this code. If an owner fails to correct
conditions which are in violation of any provisions of this code after written
notice by the city to do so, the city may correct the conditions and charge the
owner the cost and expenses of doing so.
(Prior Code, § 33.105)
§ 33.106 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   If an owner fails to pay the city charges within 30 days after being billed
for the charges, the city may levy the amount of the charges plus interest as a
special assessment against the property to which the charges pertain. This
section applies to all charges which may be assessed under M.S. § 429.101, as
it may be amended from time to time, and to all sewer and water charges which
may be assessed under M.S. § 444.075, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 33.106)
§ 33.107 PROCEDURE FOR ASSESSMENT.
   Any special assessment levied under this subchapter will be payable in a
single installment. With this exception, M.S. §§ 429.061, 429.071, and 429.081,
as they may be amended from time to time, will govern the procedures for
levying the special assessments. If delinquent bills from the city are not paid
as required in this code, the city may certify the delinquent balance to the
County Auditor to be paid with the real estate taxes against the property
served, for collection as other taxes are collected.
(Prior Code, § 33.107)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   STORM WATER AND SANITARY SEWERS
      
51.   STORM WATER FACILITIES, CHARGES, AND FUND
      
52.   WATER SYSTEM
      
53.   SEWER AND WATER FUNDS
      
54.   TOILETS AND CONNECTIONS TO WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS
CHAPTER 50: STORM WATER AND SANITARY SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   City Manager to control
   
50.02   Plans to be approved
   
50.03   Prerequisites to issue of permits
   
50.04   Sewer permits
   
50.05   Connection with public sewer
   
50.06   Responsibility for repairs and maintenance
   
50.07   Construction requirements
   
50.08   Separate connections
   
50.09   Obstruction prohibited
   
50.10   Storm drains
   
50.11   Grease
   
50.12   Prohibited waste
   
50.13   Inspection and repairs
   
50.14   Street excavating
   
50.15   Surety bond
   
50.16   Prohibited discharges into sanitary system
Illicit Discharge and Connection
   
50.30   Purpose and intent
   
50.31   Definitions
   
50.32   Applicability
   
50.33   Responsibility for administration
   
50.34   Ultimate responsibility
   
50.35   Discharge prohibitions
   
50.36   Suspension of MS4 access
   
50.37   Industrial or construction activity discharges
   
50.38   Monitoring of discharges
   
50.39   Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce storm water pollutants by
the use of best management practices
   
50.40   Watercourse protection
   
50.41   Notification of spills
   
50.42   Enforcement
   
50.43   Enforcement measures after appeal
   
50.44   Cost of abatement of the violation
   
50.45   Injunctive relief
   
50.46   Compensatory action
   
50.47   Violations deemed a public nuisance
 
   
50.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 CITY MANAGER TO CONTROL.
   The City Manager or designee, under the direction of the City Council, will
have control of the storm water and sanitary sewer systems, repair, and
maintenance of the systems and connections to the systems.
(Prior Code, § 50.01)
§ 50.02 PLANS TO BE APPROVED.
   No storm sewer or sanitary sewer line will be built, repaired, extended, or
connected with any public storm sewer or sanitary sewer unless and until all of
the provisions of this chapter are complied with and a permit has been issued
as provided in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 50.02) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.03 PREREQUISITES TO ISSUE OF PERMITS.
   No storm sewer or sanitary sewer line may be built, repaired, extended, or
connected with the public systems, except by a person duly licensed, in
accordance with the provisions of this code and M.S. § 326B.44, as it may be
amended from time to time, relating to the licensing of plumbers, to perform
the work; nor shall a permit be issued or approved except when granted to the
person. A permit will not be issued until the property owner agrees in writing
to pay for the connection and the connection fee established by the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 50.03) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.04 SEWER PERMITS.
   All applicants for sanitary or storm sewer permits must be made on forms
provided by the City Manager or designee by the person employed to do the work.
Before beginning the work, the applicant must file with the City Manager or
designee a plan for the work showing the whole course of the line from its
connection with the public sewer to the house or other building, with the
location of all branches, traps, and fixtures to be connected to the sewer. The
applicant must also file drawings of the sewer proposed to be constructed. If
the proposed sewer, as shown in the drawings, complies with the provisions of
the plumbing code and other applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances, the
permit will be issued.
(Prior Code, § 50.04)
§ 50.05 CONNECTION WITH PUBLIC SEWER.
   All work will be in accordance with the plan and drawings approved by the
city. The permit holder shall notify the City Public Works Director or
contracted Plumbing Inspector of the progress of the work at the stage in the
course of the construction as the City Public Works Director or contracted
Plumbing Inspector may direct. The permit holder must notify the City Public
Works Director or contracted Plumbing Inspector when the construction of the
sewer is complete and ready for connection with the public sewer, but before
the connection is made. When the inspector signs the connection permit, the
sewer may then be connected to the public sewer. Work must be inspected by the
City Public Works Director or contracted Plumbing Inspector after it is
completed but before the excavations are filled in.
(Prior Code, § 50.05) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.06 RESPONSIBILITY FOR REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
   The owner of property having a building connected to the public sewer system
is responsible for all repairs and maintenance of that portion of the sewer
system which runs from the building to its connection with a common sewer line,
including the connection to the line.
(Prior Code, § 50.06)
§ 50.07 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   All connections with the public sewer must be made with pipe approved under
applicable plumbing codes having an internal diameter of four inches. No sewer
pipe connecting with any public sewer may have a fall of less than one-quarter
inch to the foot. All pipes must be inspected and subject to approval by the
City Public Works Director or contracted Plumbing Inspector before the same is
laid. After any connection has been laid from a public sewer to the street
line, the pipe may not be covered until it has been duly inspected by the City
Public Works Director or contracted Plumbing Inspector and approved. The
requirements of §
50.14 regulating excavations in public streets are to be strictly complied with
in excavations for sewers.
(Prior Code, § 50.07) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.08 SEPARATE CONNECTIONS.
   Every building shall separately and independently connect with the public
sewer, and in no instance, with the exception of a single dwelling house, shall
an area greater than 25 feet frontage be drained through one connection.
(Prior Code, § 50.08) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.09 OBSTRUCTION PROHIBITED.
   No refuse or solids of any sort obstructive to the flow of waste water may
be placed, thrown, or allowed to enter any public sewer, or allowed to remain
in or on any trap or catch basin so as to obstruct the sewer. No person may
injure, or break, or remove any portion of any catch basin, covering flag, gull
grating, flush tank, or manhole, or any part of any sewer, nor do any act
obstructing or in any way interfering with the use of any sewer or the flow of
waste water through any sewer.
(Prior Code, § 50.09) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.10 STORM DRAINS.
   No property owner or occupant shall cause or permit a storm drain, rain
spout, or any other form of drainage or surface drainage to be connected with
or to enter any public sanitary sewer.
(Prior Code, § 50.10) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.11 GREASE.
   A grease trap and grated slop basin must be constructed under the sink of
every laundry, restaurant, or other public cooking establishment.
(Prior Code, § 50.11) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.12 PROHIBITED WASTE.
   No person shall cause or permit any of the following items to enter the
public sewer systems:
   (A)   Hazardous waste, hazardous chemicals, flammable or explosive
materials, radioactive substances, and toxic chemicals, including those
substances listed in the United States Department of Transportation Hazardous
Materials Table (49 C.F.R. § 172.101);
   (B)   Refuse from butcher shops, rendering establishments, packing houses,
and other industrial establishments;
   (C)   Refuse, either liquid or solid, of the character, quality, or nature
that will unreasonably interfere with the ordinary treatment processes of any
sewage treatment plant; and/or
   (D)   Items prohibited by state law.
(Prior Code, § 50.12) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.13 INSPECTION AND REPAIRS.
   The City Public Works Director or contracted Plumbing Inspector has the
right to enter upon any premises or into any building within the city at all
the reasonable hours, to inspect the sewers and drains and traps and fixtures
connected with the sewer. If it is found from the inspection or otherwise that
the provisions of law are not being complied with in any respect or that any
part of the drainage system is in need of clearing out or repairs, the City
Public Works Director or contracted Plumbing Inspector shall serve a notice
upon the owner and the occupant specifying the work to be done to make the
sewer system comply with the law, or to put it in good working condition. The
notice will also specify the time as is reasonable, considering the amount of
work to be done and the nature of the emergency, within which the defects must
be remedied. It will then become the duty of every person served with the
notice to comply with it; and if the notice is not complied with, the City
Council may cause the work to be done at the expense of any person so served.
(Prior Code, § 50.13)
§ 50.14 STREET EXCAVATING.
   No person may make any excavation in any street, sidewalk, or public ground
without first having secured a permit from the City Manager or designee. The
fee for the permit is the amount set forth in Chapter 33. When a fee is paid
for a sewer construction permit or a permit to connect with the water supply,
the excavation permit for the necessary digging incidental to the installation
of the sewer or water pipes shall also be obtained.
(Prior Code, § 50.14) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.15 SURETY BOND.
   If the applicant for an excavation permit is any person other than a
licensed plumber with a bond already on file, the applicant must file a bond of
the same sort required to be filed by every licensed plumber with the City
Manager or designee before the permit will be issued.
(Prior Code, § 50.15)
§ 50.16 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES INTO SANITARY SYSTEM.
   (A)   Applicability and purpose. This section shall apply to all water
entering the sanitary sewer system unless explicitly exempted by the city. The
city and its representatives are authorized to administer, implement, and
enforce the provisions of this section.
      (1)   The City Council finds that the discharge from roofs, rainspouts,
yard drains, surfaces, groundwater, sump pumps, footing tiles or swimming
pools, foundation drains, yard fountains, ponds, cistern overflows, water
discharged from any nonresidential air conditioning unit or system, or other
means of transmitting natural precipitation and surface waters, collectively
referred to as excess infiltration and inflow, into the sanitary sewer system,
will and has in the past overloaded the sanitary sewer system. The City
Council, therefore, finds it essential for compliance with mandated city code
requirements that the provisions of this section be strictly enforced.
      (2)   This section is not intended to modify or repeal any other
ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of
this section are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule,
regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this section
imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule,
regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive
or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment
shall apply.
   (B)   Clear water drainage. CLEARWATER DRAINAGE, for the purpose of this
section, is defined as stormwater, natural precipitation, melting snow, ground
water or flow from roof runoff, ground surface runoff, subsurface drainage,
down spouts, eave troughs, rainspouts, yard drains, sump pumps, footing tiles
or swimming pools, foundation drains, yard fountains, ponds, cistern overflows,
water discharged from any nonresidential air conditioning unit or system, or
any other water that is not required to be treated by state or federal law,
that enters the sanitary sewer system through any separation, gap, crack,
fracture, collapse or other structural defect in the sewer lateral. Swimming
pool water that is required to be treated in accordance with city, county or
state regulations shall not be considered clear water.
   (C)   Private sewer lateral. PRIVATE SEWER LATERAL, for the purpose of this
section, is defined as all sewer service pipes extending from the city sanitary
sewer main to the dwelling, building or structure it serves.
   (D)   Ownership responsibility. The property owner shall own and be
responsible for the routine maintenance and repair of the sanitary private
sewer lateral, including the connection to the city sanitary sewer main.
   (E)   Prohibited discharges into the sanitary sewer system. It shall be
unlawful for any person whose property is provided with sanitary sewer service
to directly or indirectly cause or permit to be discharged, pumped or drained
any clear water drainage into the city's sanitary sewer system.
   (F)   Prohibited connections. No person shall make or maintain a connection
between any conductor, device or system designed to move clear water drainage
from its source to any pipe, cleanout, floor drain, foundation drain, sink or
any other apparatus with a direct connection to the city's sanitary sewer
system.
   (G)   Sump pumps. A sump pump is a mechanical device used to remove liquid
collected in a sump usually constructed below the normal grade of the gravity
system, usually below basement floor level. Dwellings and other buildings and
structures that require a sump pump system to collect and discharge excess
clear water drainage because of the infiltration of water into basements, crawl
spaces and the like shall obtain a permit and have a permanently installed
discharge line that complies with the following:
      (1)   It shall not any time discharge water into the city's sanitary
sewer system or be capable of connection or reconnection to the city's sanitary
sewer system;
      (2)   It shall provide for year-round discharge capability to the outside
of the dwelling, building or structure, to the city's storm sewer system;
      (3)   It shall consist of a rigid discharge line constructed ofrigid
piping material inside the dwelling or building, without any connections for
altering the path of discharge, and if connected to the city's storm sewer
line, must include a check valve of an approved type and diameter; and
      (4)   It must be directed toward the front or rear yard so as not to
trespass or discharge onto adjoining properties.
   (H)   Single-family, owner-occupied properties. No person shall sell,
advertise for sale, give or transact a change in title or property ownership of
real property with one or more buildings or structures, without first obtaining
a certificate of inflow and infiltration (I&I) compliance from the city or
complying with division (L) of this section. Inspections shall be required for
purposes of complying with the mandates of this section to eliminate clear
water drainage into the sanitary sewer system. Failure to have an inspection as
required in this section is a violation of the city code.
      (1)   Sump pump inspections for all properties that discharge into the
city's sanitary sewer system for the limited purpose of confirming that there
is no sump pump discharge of clear water drainage shall be conducted by the
Public Works Director or his or her designee. Such inspection shall be at no
expense to the owner.
      (2)   Private service lateral inspections for all properties that
discharge into the city’s sanitary sewer system for the limited purpose of
confirming that there is no inflow and infiltration (I&I) shall be conducted by
a licensed plumber to determine whether the property use is in accordance with
city sanitary sewer service regulations as provided in division (I)(3) and
submit the inspection report and video to the city. The applicant for a
certificate of I&I compliance inspection is responsible for all expenses
associated to providing an inspection of the property. The entire property and
all buildings on the property shall be made available for inspection.
      (3)   Inspections shall not be required under the following
circumstances:
         (a)   It is a newly constructed dwelling and title to the property is
transferred to the first owner;
         (b)   It is the sale or other transfer of title of any property with a
dwelling that is being conveyed to a public body;
         (c)   It is the sale or transfer of title of any property that
contains a dwelling that will be demolished;
         (d)   It is the sale or conveyance of any property that contains a
dwelling by a sheriff or other public or court officer in the performance of
their official duties. This exception does not apply to the sale by a person
appointed by a probate court; or
         (e)   The property has no public sewer access or has been granted a
connection waiver by the city.
      (4)   Video inspections shall be valid for three years from the
inspection date. Only videos containing a time stamp and location stamp clearly
indicating the day, year, and property address will be accepted. Upon review of
the video inspection, the city shall issue a certificate of compliance if the
inspection verifies the conditions provided in division (I) are met.
   (I)   I&I certificates of compliance.
      (1)   Issuance. If, following inspection, it is determined that the
property is in compliance with this section, the city shall issue a certificate
of compliance. No new inspections or certificates for single- family, owner-
occupied properties shall be required unless the property is offered for sale,
or conveyance by deed, or contract for deed.
      (2)   Certificate of compliance period. Certificates of compliance are
valid as follows:
         (a)   For any property that had a full sewer service line and/or
lining replacement, the certificate is valid for 25 years from the date of
issuance.
         (b)   For any property that had a partial sewer service line and/or
lining replacement, the certificate is valid for ten years from the date of
issuance.
      (3)   The city shall issue a certificate of compliance if the inspection
verifies that all of the following conditions are met:
         (a)   There is no sewer pipe joint degradation, as evidenced by root
intrusion and mineral staining, scaling and deposits;
         (b)   There are no prohibited discharges or connections as defied by
divisions (E) and (F) above;
         (c)   There are no misaligned joints obstructing the flow of wastes
causing blockages, exfiltration of the intrusion of roots or minerals; or
         (d)   The lateral is free of holes, cracks, fractures, collapses, or
other structural defects.
   (J)   Residential rental properties. For residential rental properties, the
property owner is required to locate the building’s sewer cleanout, open the
cleanout to ensure functionality, identify any private manholes or outside
cleanouts and locate all sump pump systems (if applicable). The property owner
shall obtain an independent inspection and submit an inspection report to the
city upon submission of a new or renewal rental license application. The
inspection report shall indicate that the property is free from prohibited
discharges and prohibited connections, including illegal sump pumps. If any
violations are discovered, corrections must be made pursuant to division (L)
above. The city shall receive a post- repair video to verify compliance. Upon
verification that the corrections have been made, the city shall issue a
certificate of compliance.
   (K)   Commercial, industrial and HOA properties. For commercial and
industrial properties and condominium or townhome residential properties with a
homeowners’ association (“HOA properties”), property owners are required to
locate the building’s sewer cleanout, open the cleanout to ensure
functionality, identify any private manholes or outside cleanouts and location
of all sump pump systems (if applicable). The property owner shall obtain an
independent inspection and submit an inspection report to the city. The
inspection report shall indicate that the property is free from prohibited
discharges and prohibited connections, including illegal sump pumps. If any
violations are discovered, corrections must be made pursuant to division (L)
below. The city shall receive a post-repair video to verify compliance. Upon
verification that corrections have been made, the city shall issue a
certificate of compliance.
   (L)   Violations.
      (1)   Violations, generally. Except as provided in division (L)(2) below,
for owner-occupied single-family private sewer lateral violations discovered
during a time of sale inspection, if an inspection discloses there has been a
violation of any provision of this division, the city will give notice of the
violation to the owner and occupant in writing and allow time for compliance as
follows.
         (a)   For single-family properties, private sewer lateral violations
shall be corrected within 18 months from the date of the sale of the property.
         (b)   For residential rental, commercial, industrial and HOA
properties, private sewer lateral violations shall be corrected within 24
months of the property’s annual rental license renewal.
         (c)   For all sump pump violations, regardless of the classification
of the property, the violation shall be corrected within 14 days of discovery
of the violation.
      (2)   Violations discovered at time of sale.
         (a)   Seller responsibilities. If the inspection discloses there has
been a violation of any provision of this section prior to the sale, the seller
is responsible for correcting the violations prior to the sale, unless the
buyer has assumed such responsibility as provided in division (L)(2)(b) below.
Failure of a seller to disclose to a buyer that there are uncorrected
violations of this section is a violation of the city code. When correcting the
violations, all necessary permits shall be obtained from the city. Upon
completion of the corrections, the seller shall provide a copy of a post-repair
video to the city to verify compliance.
         (b)   Buyer responsibilities. If a seller cannot correct the
violations prior to the sale, the seller must require the buyer to assume the
responsibility for correcting the violations, in which case, the seller and the
buyer shall sign and submit a written acknowledgment to the city that includes:
            1.   The buyer's acceptance and assumption of responsibility for
correcting the violations within 18 months from the date of the sale of the
property;
            2.   The buyer's understanding that a copy of a post-repair video
must be provided to the city in order to verify that the corrections have been
completed;
            3.   The buyer's agreement to hold the city harmless from
liabilities and claims if the buyer occupies the dwelling prior to corrections
of the violations; and
            4.   The buyer's understanding that failure to correct violations
or deficiencies, failure to provide a post-repair video or failure to allow a
reinspection is a violation of the city code and subjects the buyer to
penalties as stated in divisions (M), (O), and (R).
      (3)   Violations and corrections under the roadway. When the inspection
discloses that there has been a violation of any provision of this section and
the violations are under the roadway, the property owner will perform the
repairs, except as stated in division (L)(4) below. However, a property owner
shall not excavate in the roadway without permission from the Public Works
Director.
      (4)   Non-excavation violations and corrections. When the property owner
is correcting violations of the private sewer lateral between the street and
the building using a cured in place pipe ("pipe liner") or similar approved
repair methods, and the corrections only involve the lining of the private
sewer lateral, the contractor shall terminate the pipe liner as close to the
connection with the city's public sanitary sewer main as possible. If the pipe
liner extends into the public main, the contractor shall trim off the excess
portion and report its approximate location to the Public Works Department as
soon as possible.
      (5)   The city reserves the right to periodically reinspect any property
or structure to confirm continued compliance with this section. Any property
found not to be in compliance upon reinspection or any person refusing to allow
their property to be reinspected shall, following notification from the city,
comply within 14 calendar days or be subject to the surcharge hereinafter
provided for.
   (M)   Penalty.
      (1)   A monthly penalty of $100 for owner-occupied, single-family
properties; and a monthly penalty of $300 for residential rental, commercial,
industrial and HOA properties shall be sent an invoice if:
         (a)   An owner fails to complete an inspection pursuant to divisions
(H), (J) and (K);
         (b)   An owner whose property was found in violation of this section
did not make the necessary repairs and furnish proof of those changes to the
city within the time frames required by this section;
         (c)   An owner fails to allow an inspection or reinspection to verify
compliance; or
         (d)   The property owner or occupant reconnects a clear water
discharge line to the municipal sanitary sewer system after it has been
previously disconnected at the city's or a court's direction. The property
owner will be subject to the penalty for all months between the last
inspection.
      (2)   The surcharge shall be added every month until the property is
determined by the city to be in compliance with this section. The city shall
not issue building, plumbing, electrical, or mechanical permits for any
property that is not in compliance with this section until the property is
determined by the city to be in compliance with this section.
   (N)   Temporary waiver. The City Council, upon recommendation of the Public
Works Director or his or her designee, shall hear and decide requests for
temporary waivers from the provisions of this section where strict enforcement
would cause a threat to public safety because of circumstances unique to the
individual property under consideration. Any request for a temporary waiver
shall be submitted to the Public Works Director in writing. Upon approval of a
temporary waiver from the provisions of this section, the property owner shall
agree to pay an additional fee for sanitary sewer services based on the number
of gallons discharged into the sanitary sewer system as estimated by the Public
Works Director or his or her designee.
   (O)   Public Works Director. The Public Works Director may set conditions to
any temporary waiver issued. The Public Works Director may terminate the waiver
upon a failure to comply with any conditions imposed in the temporary waiver or
may take appropriate legal action to enforce those conditions. The Public Works
Director must give a five-day written notice of the termination to the property
owner and occupant setting forth the reasons for the termination. After
expiration or termination of a temporary waiver, the property owner must comply
with the provisions of this section.
   (P)   If a property owner demonstrates a financial hardship to pay for the
disconnection cost of a noncompliant system, they may petition the City Council
to assess the disconnection cost on the property. Under this petition, the
property owner must waive their right to a public hearing and waive their right
to appeal the assessments. Assessments initiated in this manner and associated
interest charges must be paid back to the city within five years.
   (Q)   Remedies. The remedies provided in this section do not limit the right
of the city to pursue any other available legal remedy.
   (R)   Violation of this section is a misdemeanor and each day that the
violation continues is a separately prosecutable offense. The imposition of the
surcharge shall not limit the city's authority to prosecute the criminal
violations, seek an injunction in district court ordering the person to
disconnect the nonconforming connection to the sanitary sewer, or for the city
to connect the violation and certify the costs of connection as an assessment
against the property on which the connection was made.
(Prior Code, § 50.16) (Ord. 2022-09, passed 1-24-2023) Penalty, see §
50.99
ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION
§ 50.30 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the health, safety,
and general welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of non-
storm water discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent
practicable as required by federal and state law. This subchapter establishes
methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process.
   (B)   The objectives of this subchapter are:
      (1)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) by storm water discharges by any user;
      (2)   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system; and
      (3)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection,
surveillance, and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with
this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 50.30) (Ord. 2009-002, passed 2-24-2009)
§ 50.31 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. The City of St. Anthony, Minnesota.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good house keeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
storm water, receiving waters, or storm water conveyance systems. BMPs also
include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.
   CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251
et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES construction permits.
These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre
or more. Such ACTIVITIES include, but are not limited to, clearing and
grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety,
property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of, or otherwise managed.
   ILLEGAL DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the
storm drain system, except as exempted in this subchapter.
   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system
including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any non-storm water
discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the
storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor
drains and sinks, regardless of whether the drain or connection had been
previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency,
or any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use
to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(14).
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER
DISCHARGE PERMIT. A permit issued by MPCA that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on
an individual group, or general area-wide basis.
   NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is
not composed entirely of storm water.
   PERSON. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation, or other entity recognized by law and action as either the owner
or as the owner’s agent.
   POLLUTANT. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. POLLUTANTS may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes and
residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or
offensive matter of any kind.
   PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
   STORM DRAIN SYSTEM. Publicly-owned facilities by which storm water is
collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm
drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-
made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
   STORM WATER. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of
water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN. A document which describes the best
management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business
to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to
eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to storm water, storm water conveyance
systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
   WASTE WATER. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm
water, discharged from a facility.
(Prior Code, § 50.31) (Ord. 2009-002, passed 2-24-2009)
§ 50.32 APPLICABILITY.
   This subchapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system
generated on any developed or undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by
an authorized enforcement agency.
(Prior Code, § 50.32) (Ord. 2009-002, passed 2-24-2009)
§ 50.33 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
   The authorized enforcement agency shall administer, implement, and enforce
the provisions of this subchapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon
the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the director
of the authorized enforcement agency to persons or entities acting in the
beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency.
(Prior Code, § 50.33) (Ord. 2009-002, passed 2-24-2009)
§ 50.34 ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY.
   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this subchapter
and minimum standards; therefore this subchapter does not intend or imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
(Prior Code, § 50.34) (Ord. 2009-002, passed 2-24-2009)
§ 50.35 DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Prohibition of illegal discharges.
      (1)   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, into the
municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including, but not
limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or
contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than
storm water.
      (2)   The commencement, conduct, or continuance of any illegal discharge
to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows:
         (a)   The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this subchapter: water line flushing or other potable water
sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising
ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped
ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active ground water
dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs,
non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wet-land flows,
swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less than one ppm chlorine), fire
fighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants;
         (b)   Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement
agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety;
         (c)   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the
test; and
         (d)   The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental
Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and
regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any
discharge to the storm drain system.
   (B)   Prohibition of illicit connections.
      (1)   The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of
illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
      (2)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of the
connection.
      (3)   A person is considered to be in violation of this subchapter if the
person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection
to continue.
(Prior Code, § 50.35) (Ord. 2009-002, passed 2-24-2009) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.36 SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS.
   (A)   Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The City
Council may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person
when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge
which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of
the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order
issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps
as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the
United States, or to minimize danger to persons.
   (B)   Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the MS4 in violation of this subchapter may have his, her, or
their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an
illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of
the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the
authorized enforcement agency for reconsideration and a hearing. A person
commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated
pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the authorized
enforcement agency.
(Prior Code, § 50.36) (Ord. 2009-002, passed 2-24-2009) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.37 INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES.
   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES storm
water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof
of compliance with the permit may be required in a form acceptable to the City
Council prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
(Prior Code, § 50.37) (Ord. 2009-002, passed 2-24-2009)
§ 50.38 MONITORING OF DISCHARGES.
   (A)   Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have storm
water discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction
activity.
   (B)   Access to facilities.
      (1)   The authorized enforcement agency shall be permitted to enter and
inspect facilities subject to regulation under this subchapter as often as may
be necessary to determine compliance with this subchapter. If a discharger has
security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary
arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement
agency.
      (2)   Facility operators shall allow the authorized enforcement agency
ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, examination, and copying of records that must be kept under the
conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge storm water, and the performance of
any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
      (3)   The authorized enforcement agency shall have the right to set up on
any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the
authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
facility’s storm water discharge.
      (4)   The authorized enforcement agency has the right to require the
discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility’s
sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All
devices used to measure storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated to
ensure their accuracy.
      (5)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the authorized enforcement agency
and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by
the operator.
      (6)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the authorized enforcement agency
access to a permitted facility is a violation of a storm water discharge permit
and of this subchapter. A person who is the operator of the facility with a
NPDES permit to discharge storm water associated with industrial activity
commits an offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency
reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any
activity authorized or required by this subchapter.
      (7)   If the authorized enforcement agency has been refused access to any
part of the premises from which storm water is discharged, and the city is able
to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
subchapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this
subchapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public
health, safety and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement
agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent
jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 50.38) (Ord. 2009-002, passed 2-24-2009)
§ 50.39 REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORM WATER POLLUTANTS BY
THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.
   (A)   The city will adopt requirements identifying best management practices
(BMPs) of any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to
pollution or contamination of storm water, the storm drain system, or waters of
the United States.
   (B)   The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment
shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm
drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-
structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premises,
which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to
implement, at the person’s expense, additional structural and non-structural
BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES
permit authorizing the discharge of storm water associated with industrial
activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliant with the
provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a storm water pollution
prevention plan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the
NPDES permit.
(Prior Code, § 50.39) (Ord. 2009-002, passed 2-24-2009)
§ 50.40 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.
   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person’s lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so
that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical
integrity of the watercourse.
(Prior Code, § 50.40) (Ord. 2009-002, passed 2-24-2009)
§ 50.41 NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.
   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible
for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a
facility or operation, has information of any known or suspected release of
materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants
discharging into storm water, the storm drain system, or water of the United
States, that person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of
hazardous materials, the person shall immediately notify emergency response
agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a
release of non-hazardous materials, the person shall notify the authorized
enforcement agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next
business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written
notice addressed and mailed to the city within three business days of the phone
notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or
industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall
also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to
prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three
years.
(Prior Code, § 50.41) (Ord. 2009-002, passed 2-24-2009)
§ 50.42 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Notice of violation. Whenever the city finds that a person has
violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this subchapter, the
authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of
violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without
limitation:
      (1)   The performance of monitoring, analysis, and reporting;
      (2)   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
      (3)   Violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
      (4)   The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
      (5)   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
and
      (6)   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
   (B)   Deadline and failure to comply. If abatement of a violation and/or
restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a
deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. The
notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or
restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated
governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to
the violator.
(Prior Code, § 50.42) (Ord. 2009-002, passed 2-24-2009)
§ 50.43 ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL.
   If the violation had not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 15 days
of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the
authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the authorized
enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property and are
authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or
restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent, or
person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency
or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth
above.
(Prior Code, § 50.43) (Ord. 2009-002, passed 2-24-2009) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.44 COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION.
   Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property
will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The
property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the
assessment within 15 days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner
as determined by the decision of the municipal authority, the charges shall
become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on
the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this subchapter shall become liable to the city by reason of such
violation.
(Prior Code, § 50.44) (Ord. 2009-002, passed 2-24-2009)
§ 50.45 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this subchapter. If a person has
violated and continues to violate the provisions of this subchapter, the
authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent
injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further
violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the
violation.
(Prior Code, § 50.45) (Ord. 2009-002, passed 2-24-2009) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.46 COMPENSATORY ACTION.
   In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by
this subchapter, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a violator
alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at
compliance workshops, creek clean-up, and the like.
(Prior Code, § 50.46) (Ord. 2009-002, passed 2-24-2009)
§ 50.47 VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this subchapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is
declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the
violator’s expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel
the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
(Prior Code, § 50.47) (Ord. 2009-002, passed 2-24-2009)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violation of §
50.16 is a misdemeanor, and each day that the violation continues is a
separately prosecutable offense. The imposition of the surcharge shall not
limit the city’s authority to prosecute the criminal violations, seek an
injunction in district court ordering the person to disconnect the
nonconforming connection to the sanitary sewer, or for the city to connect the
violation and certify the costs of connection as an assessment against the
property on which the connection was made.
(Prior Code, § 50.16)
   (C)   Any person that has violated or continues to violate §§
50.30 through
50.47 shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law,
and shall be subject to a criminal penalty of $1,000 per violation per day and/
or imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed 90 days. The authorized
enforcement agency may recover all attorney’s fees, court costs, and other
expenses associated with enforcement of this subchapter, including sampling and
monitoring expenses.
(Prior Code, § 50.48)
(Ord. 2009-002, passed 2-24-2009)
CHAPTER 51: STORM WATER FACILITIES, CHARGES, AND FUND
Section
   
51.01   Establishment of Storm Water Facilities Fund
   
51.02   Findings and determinations
   
51.03   Rates and charges
   
51.04   Other land uses
   
51.05   Exemptions
   
51.06   Separate fund
   
51.07   Adjustment of charges
   
51.08   Public hearing and notice
   
51.09   Establishment of a tax lien
   
51.10   Recalculation of charges
§ 51.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF STORM WATER FACILITIES FUND.
   Pursuant to M.S. § 444.075, as it may be amended from time to time, the city
establishes a Storm Water Facilities Fund and authorizes the imposition of just
and equitable charges for the use and availability of storm sewer facilities.
For purposes of this chapter, all provisions of M.S. § 444.075, as it may be
amended from time to time, relating to storm water facilities are incorporated
by reference and are made a part of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 51.01)
§ 51.02 FINDINGS AND DETERMINATIONS.
   (A)   In the exercise of its governmental authority and in order to promote
the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare, the city has
constructed, operated, and maintained a storm sewer system, including mains,
holding areas, and ponds, and other appurtenances and related facilities (the
“facilities”). This chapter is adopted in the further exercise of the authority
in the future, for the same purposes, and for purposes of financing the cost of
building, constructing, reconstructing, repairing, operating, maintaining,
enlarging, improving, or in any other manner obtaining, the facilities or any
portion of them (the “facilities costs”).
   (B)   The facilities have heretofore been financed and paid for through the
imposition of special assessments and ad valorem taxes. It is now necessary and
desirable to provide an alternative method of recovering some or all of the
future facilities costs through the imposition of charges as provided in this
chapter.
   (C)   In imposing charges for the facilities (“facilities charges”), it is
necessary to establish a procedure designed to make the charges just and
equitable. Taking into account the status of completion of the facilities, past
methods of recovering facilities costs, the topography of the city, and other
relevant factors, it is determined that it would be just and equitable to
assign responsibility for some or all of the future facilities costs on the
basis of the expected storm water runoff from the various parcels of land
within the city during a standard rainfall event. For purposes of this chapter,
a standard rainfall event is defined as a ten-year rainfall of 24-hour
duration, assuming Hydrologic Soil Group §B§ soils according to methods in the
Hydrology Guide for Minnesota, published by the Soil Conservation Service.
   (D)   The City Council finds that assigning costs and making facilities
charges based upon expected typical storm water runoff cannot be done with
mathematical precision but can only be accomplished within reasonable and
practical limits. The provisions of this chapter undertake to establish a
reasonable and practical method for imposing the charges.
(Prior Code, § 51.02)
§ 51.03 RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Rates and charges for the use and availability of the facilities will
be determined by the use of a residential equivalent factor (“REF”). For
purposes of this chapter, one REF is defined as the ratio of runoff volume (in
inches) for a particular land use, to the runoff volume (in inches) for a
typical single-family residential lot.
   (B)   The City Council hereby adopts the charges set forth in §
33.090 for the use and availability of the facilities. The charges to be made
against each parcel of land in the city will be determined by multiplying the
REF for the parcel, based on actual land use, times the parcel’s acreage, times
the facilities charge per acre, except that all R-1, R-1A, and R-2 residential
parcels will be presumed to be one-third acre per dwelling unit on the
presumption that most such parcels in the city are approximately that size and
in order to avoid computation of the actual area of every such parcel in the
city.
(Prior Code, § 51.03)
§ 51.04 OTHER LAND USES.
   Other land uses not listed in the table in §
33.090 will be classified by the Public Works Director or designee by assigning
them to classes most nearly like the listed uses from the standpoint of runoff
volume for the standard rainfall event. An appeal from the Public Works
Director’s determination of the property classification may be made to the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 51.04)
§ 51.05 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following land uses are exempt from facilities charges:
   (A)   City, county, and state road and highway rights-of-way;
   (B)   Lakes and ponds; and
   (C)   City-owned property.
(Prior Code, § 51.05)
§ 51.06 SEPARATE FUND.
   All facilities charges, when collected, and all moneys received from the
sale of any facilities or equipment, or any byproducts, will be placed in a
separate fund, and used first to pay the normal, reasonable, and current costs
of operating and maintaining the facilities. The net revenues received in
excess of the costs may be pledged by resolutions of the City Council, or may
be used though not so pledged, for the payment of principal and interest on
obligations issued as provided in M.S. § 444.075, Subd. 2, as it may be amended
from time to time, or to pay the portion of the principal and interest as may
be directed in the resolutions.
(Prior Code, § 51.06)
§ 51.07 ADJUSTMENT OF CHARGES.
   The City Council may by ordinance adopt policies providing for the
adjustment of facilities charges for parcels or groups of parcels, based upon
land use data supplied by affected property owners, which data demonstrates a
runoff volume for the standard rainfall event substantially different from the
REF being used for the parcel or parcels. The adjustment will be made only upon
recommendation of the Public Works Director or designee and will not be made
effective retroactively.
(Prior Code, § 51.07)
§ 51.08 PUBLIC HEARING AND NOTICE.
   The city will hold a hearing prior to determining whether to build,
construct, enlarge, or improve facilities financed in whole or in part by the
imposition of facility charges. Notice of the hearing will be published in the
official city newspaper at least ten days prior to the date of hearing. Owners
of all property adjoining a proposed improvement will be mailed or served with
a notice at least ten days in advance of the hearing. Failure to give mailed
notice or any defects in the notice will not invalidate the proceedings.
(Prior Code, § 51.08)
§ 51.09 ESTABLISHMENT OF A TAX LIEN.
   Any facilities charges in excess of 90 days past due on October 1 of any
year may be certified to the County Auditor for collection with real estate
taxes in the following year pursuant to M.S. § 444.075, Subd. 3, as it may be
amended from time to time. In addition, the city may bring a civil action or
exercise other legal remedies to collect unpaid facilities charges.
(Prior Code, § 51.09)
§ 51.10 RECALCULATION OF CHARGES.
   If a property owner or other person responsible for paying facilities
charges questions the correctness of the charges, the person may have the
determination of the facilities charges recomputed by written request to the
Public Works Director or designee. The request must be made within 30 days of
the mailing of the billing in question.
(Prior Code, § 51.10)
CHAPTER 52: WATER SYSTEM
Section
   
52.01   Separate connections
   
52.02   Account name and liability
   
52.03   Rates and charges
   
52.04   Meters
   
52.05   Water reading and billing
   
52.06   Right to discontinue service
   
52.07   Taking water without authority
   
52.08   Water restrictions
   
52.09   Sprinkling regulations
   
52.10   Violations
   
52.11   Responsibility for repairs and maintenance
§ 52.01 SEPARATE CONNECTIONS.
   Every building other than an accessory building must have a separate water
service connection which meets the requirements of state law, this code, and
the city’s Water Department. A hook-up charge in the amount as set forth in
Chapter 33 must be paid before water service is connected.
(Prior Code, § 52.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.02 ACCOUNT NAME AND LIABILITY.
   Applications for water service are to be made on forms provided by the City
Manager or designee. All accounts will be carried in the name of the owner of
the property served or the owner’s lessee who personally, or by an authorized
agent, applies for the service. In all cases, including those where application
for water service is made by a lessee, the property owner will be liable for
water service.
(Prior Code, § 52.02)
§ 52.03 RATES AND CHARGES.
   Rates, charges, and prepayments for water use and service will be in the
amounts set forth in
Chapter 33.
(Prior Code, § 52.03)
§ 52.04 METERS.
   For properties in all zoning districts other than R-1, R-1A, R-2, and R-3,
meters meeting city specifications shall be purchased and maintained by the
property owner at the owner’s expense. The city will determine where the water
meter will be installed. City employees have the authority to enter upon
premises served by city water at any reasonable hour for the purposes of
inspection or repair of meter and for turning service on or off. Tampering with
meters is prohibited. Once a meter for a property in an R-1, R-1A, R-2, or R-
3 district has been paid for by the owner, the city will repair and maintain
the meter at city’s expense.
(Prior Code, § 52.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.05 WATER READING AND BILLING.
   (A)   Meter reading. All water meters will be read quarterly on or before
January 3, April 3, July 3, and October 3.
   (B)   Billing and payment. Quarterly water statements will be sent out on or
around January 20, April 20, July 20, and October 20, and are payable on or
before the twentieth day of the following month. If payment is made by U.S.
mail, a bill will be considered paid as of the date of postmark. If the payment
date deadline falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, payment may be
made on or prior to the first day thereafter on which city offices are open. If
payment is not timely made, a late fee in the amount set forth in
Chapter 33 is due. If payment on a quarterly statement is not made on or prior
to March 5, June 5, September 5, or December 5 respectively, the city retains
the right to send a final notice of payment overdue to the customer by
certified mail, notifying the customer that: payment must be received at the
City Hall within five days; failure to make the payment in full within the
five-day period will result in the discontinuance of water service; and the
customer has the right to a hearing before the Public Works Director before
water service is discontinued, provided the customer has made a request for a
hearing within the five-day period. If a request for a hearing is timely made
by the customer, a hearing will be held in accordance with the provisions of §
52.06. If a payment is not received and a hearing request is not timely made,
the city may discontinue service to the customer. A charge will be made to the
customer in the case of discontinuance of service for nonpayment of a water
bill, and a charge will also be made to the customer for turning on the water
service after it has been shut off for nonpayment, each in the amounts set
forth in Chapter 33. Payments of any bill must be made at the City Hall, and
employees of the Water Department are not authorized to accept payment of any
bill.
(Prior Code, § 52.05)
§ 52.06 RIGHT TO DISCONTINUE SERVICE.
   No water service will be shut off for nonpayment until the customer has been
afforded an opportunity for an impartial hearing pursuant to §
52.05(B). If no hearing is requested within the required time, service will be
shut off. If a hearing is requested, service will be shut off unless a valid
reason for nonpayment is demonstrated at the hearing. If a hearing is so
requested, it will be held by the City Manager, or the City Manager’s designee,
within six working days of the request. If, as a result of the hearing, the
City Manager, or the City Manager’s designee, finds that the amount claimed to
be owing is actually due and unpaid and that there is no legal reason why the
water service may not be discontinued, then the city may discontinue water
service.
(Prior Code, § 52.06)
§ 52.07 TAKING WATER WITHOUT AUTHORITY.
   It is unlawful for any person to use city water service without proper
authority.
(Prior Code, § 52.07) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.08 WATER RESTRICTIONS.
   To promote and protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the city
and its residents, it may be necessary during periods of drought or unusual
water use for the City Council to declare the existence of an emergency with
respect to the use of city water and to provide for restricted use. The City
Council will sit as an Emergency Water Supply Board, which may declare the
existence of the emergencies as, and when, it may be necessary to impose and
enforce water use restrictions.
(Prior Code, § 52.08)
§ 52.09 SPRINKLING REGULATIONS.
   No person may draw or use the city water system for the purpose of watering
lawns or gardens during any period of emergency as declared under §
52.08, except during the days and hours permitted. Notice of the emergency and
any permitted watering will be given by publication and posting. At no time may
a hose larger than one inch in diameter be used from any service pipe without
special permission of the City Council, and upon payment of a fee set forth in
Chapter 33 for the water to be used from the special connection.
(Prior Code, § 52.09)
§ 52.10 VIOLATIONS.
   If a person violates the water emergency provisions, the City Council may
cause the person’s water service to be shut off. Service will not be restored
until payment of the fee set forth in Chapter 33.
(Prior Code, § 52.10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.11 RESPONSIBILITY FOR REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   R-1, R-1A, and R-2 property owners. Each owner of single-family
residential (R-1), (R-1A), or two-family residential (R-2) property having a
building connected to the public water system is responsible for all repairs
and maintenance of that portion of the system which runs from the building to
the curb stop, including any connection at the curb stop.
   (B)   Owners of property other than R-1, R-1A, and R-2. The owners of
properties other than single-family residential (R-1), (R-1A), and two-family
residential (R-2) having a building connected to the public water system are
responsible for all repairs and maintenance of that portion of the system which
runs from the building to its connection with a common water line, including
the connection to the line.
(Prior Code, § 52.11) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 53: SEWER AND WATER FUNDS
Section
   
53.01   Sewer and Water Fund
§ 53.01 SEWER AND WATER FUND.
   Net profits from the operation of city sewer and water services will not be
transferred to, or considered a part of, general funds or revenues or any other
non-bonded debt fund of the city which is separate from those pertaining to the
sewer and water services.
(Prior Code, § 53.01)
CHAPTER 54: TOILETS AND CONNECTIONS TO WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS
Section
   
54.01   Inside toilet and water required
   
54.02   Installation by city
   
54.03   Certain outside toilets and septic tanks declared nuisances
   
54.04   Water supply other than city
§ 54.01 INSIDE TOILET AND WATER REQUIRED.
   The owner of every residence or business building abutting upon any street
or alley in which city water and sewer lines are maintained must connect with
city water service and install a toilet in the building and connect it with the
municipal water and sewer lines within 30 days after written notice to do so
has been served by the City Manager or designee on order of the City Council.
Service may be made on the owner, or authorized agent, personally or by mail
sent to the owner’s last known address. If the owner cannot be reached by mail
so addressed, service may be made upon the occupant.
(Prior Code, § 54.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.02 INSTALLATION BY CITY.
   If the notice provided for in §
54.01 is not complied with, the City Council may direct installation of a water
connection or a toilet and connection with the water and sewer by the city. The
cost of the installation or connection will be paid initially from the General
Fund and then assessed by the City Council against the property benefitted. If
the assessment is not paid within ten days after the City Manager or designee
has served written notice, the City Manager or designee will certify the
assessment to the County Auditor for collection in the manner of other special
assessments.
(Prior Code, § 54.02)
§ 54.03 CERTAIN OUTSIDE TOILETS AND SEPTIC TANKS DECLARED NUISANCES.
   When a toilet is connected with the city water and sewer system, any outside
toilet, cesspool, septic tanks, or other sanitation facility on the property
will be deemed a nuisance, which must be removed by the owner within ten days
after the connection to the water and sewer system has been made.
(Prior Code, § 54.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.04 WATER SUPPLY OTHER THAN CITY.
   It is unlawful for any person other than the city to use or maintain any
well, private water system, or open cistern in the city for supplying drinking
water.
(Prior Code, § 54.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
72.   TRUCK RESTRICTIONS
      
73.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   State law
   
70.03   Driver’s license required
   
70.04   Stopping before emerging from alley
   
70.05   Backing around corner
   
70.06   Locking ignition
   
70.07   Use of driver’s license
   
70.08   Driving after suspension
   
70.09   Blind persons
   
70.10   Unreasonable acceleration
Restrictions on Use
   
70.25   Definition
   
70.26   Places where operation is prohibited
   
70.27   Other restrictions and prohibitions
   
70.28   Leasing
   
70.29   Exceptions
Restrictions on Vehicle Sales
   
70.40   Residential districts
   
70.41   Nonresidential districts
Cross-reference:
   Streets, Sidewalks, and Public Property, see
Chapter 95
   Towing services, see §§
115.025 through
115.036
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle as defined in M.S. § 169.011, Subd. 92, as it may
be amended from time to time, which is powered all or in part by a motor or
engine.
   ROADWAY. Any street, highway, alley, or similar area in the city designed or
intended for motor vehicle travel.
   SEMI-PUBLIC PROPERTY. A public parking lot on public or private property and
driveways or other vehicle parking or driving areas open to public use for
shopping, restaurants, or other purposes.
(Prior Code, § 70.01)
§ 70.02 STATE LAW.
   The regulatory provisions of M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be amended from
time to time, are hereby incorporated into this title by reference and will
control the use of roadways and, unless obviously inapplicable, semi-public
property, located within the city.
(Prior Code, § 70.02)
§ 70.03 DRIVER’S LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person, except those exempted under the provisions of M.S. § 171.03, as
it may be amended from time to time, may operate or drive any motor vehicle
upon any roadway unless the person has in his or her immediate possession a
valid license as a driver under the provisions of M.S. Chapter 171, as it may
be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 70.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.04 STOPPING BEFORE EMERGING FROM ALLEY.
   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building must
come to a complete stop before driving into a sidewalk area. The driver may
then proceed with caution but must yield the right-of-way to all moving
vehicles or pedestrians on the roadway or sidewalk entered.
(Prior Code, § 70.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.05 BACKING AROUND CORNER.
   No person may back a vehicle without ample warning, and while backing,
proper lookout must be maintained. No person may back any vehicle around a
corner at an intersection.
(Prior Code, § 70.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.06 LOCKING IGNITION.
   Every person parking a motor vehicle in an unattended parking area or on a
public street or alley shall lock the ignition and remove the key.
(Prior Code, § 70.06) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.07 USE OF DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   No person shall:
   (A)   Display, or cause or permit to be displayed, or have in possession any
cancelled, revoked, suspended, fictitious, or fraudulently altered driver’s
license;
   (B)   Permit his or her driver’s license to be used by another; and/or
   (C)   Display or represent as the person’s own any driver’s license not
issued to that person.
(Prior Code, § 70.07) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.08 DRIVING AFTER SUSPENSION.
   No person whose license or nonresident’s operating privilege has been
cancelled, suspended, or revoked may operate any motor vehicle in the city
while the cancellation, suspension, or revocation is in effect.
(Prior Code, § 70.08) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.09 BLIND PERSONS.
   Any person operating a motor vehicle within the city must bring the vehicle
to a stop and give the right-of-way at the intersection of any roadway to a
blind person carrying a white cane when the blind person enters the
intersection by holding out a white cane.
(Prior Code, § 70.09) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.10 UNREASONABLE ACCELERATION.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      UNREASONABLE ACCELERATION. Acceleration which spins a tire, resulting in
the breaking of traction between a tire and the street or road surface, and
which is accomplished in a manner as to cause the emission of squealing or
screeching sounds by the tire, or the throwing of sand or gravel by the tire of
the vehicle, or both.
   (B)   Prohibited. Unreasonable acceleration, as defined in this section, of
any motor vehicle is declared to be a public nuisance and is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 70.10) Penalty, see §
10.99
RESTRICTIONS ON USE
§ 70.25 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Deemed to include motorized bicycles, motorcycles, motor
scooters, trail bikes, minibikes, all-terrain vehicles, and go-carts.
(Prior Code, § 70.25)
§ 70.26 PLACES WHERE OPERATION IS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in the following
places:
   (A)   On private property of another person, except with the written
permission of the owner or lawful occupant of the property. The written
permission must be carried on the person operating the motor vehicle at all
times while operating the motor vehicle on private property;
   (B)   On public property, including, but not limited to, parks, playgrounds,
school property, sidewalks, recreational areas, golf courses, cemeteries, and
wild areas, except as provided in §
70.29; and/or
   (C)   Public streets and highways, except to the extent permitted by state
law.
(Prior Code, § 70.26) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.27 OTHER RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS.
   No person may operate a motor vehicle:
   (A)   In a manner so as to create unnecessarily loud or unusual noise which
unreasonably disturbs, annoys, or interferes with the peace and quiet of other
persons;
   (B)   Carelessly or heedlessly in disregard of the rights and safety of
others, or in a manner so as to endanger any person or property;
   (C)   While under the influence of alcohol or drugs as defined by state law;
   (D)   At a speed greater than reasonable or proper under all surrounding
conditions and circumstances; and/or
   (E)   While the motor vehicle has more persons in or on it than it was
originally designed by its manufacturer to accommodate.
(Prior Code, § 70.27) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.28 LEASING.
   No person shall engage in the business of leasing motor vehicles to others
for use on the property of the lessor, or charging or authorizing another
person to charge for allowing a motor vehicle to be operated on public or
private property within the city without first obtaining approval of the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 70.28) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.29 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter do not apply to snowmobiles or to golf
carts while operated on golf courses.
(Prior Code, § 70.29) Penalty, see §
10.99
RESTRICTIONS ON VEHICLE SALES
§ 70.40 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Motor vehicles and recreational vehicles which are permitted within
the respective residential district may be advertised for sale and sold,
provided the vehicle is owned by the resident on whose property the vehicle is
parked and to whom the vehicle is currently licensed and is operable.
   (B)   Commercial vehicles in excess of 10,000 pounds or intended to seat 12
or more passengers shall not be parked in a residential district and advertised
for sale.
(Prior Code, § 70.40) (Ord. 2022-03, passed 5-24-2022) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.41 NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   Motor, commercial, and recreational vehicles shall not be displayed “for
sale” or sold within nonresidential districts unless the vehicle is owned by
the employee of the business where the vehicle is parked and with the consent
of the business owner.
(Prior Code, § 70.41) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 71: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
71.01   Certain stopping and parking prohibited
Private Parking Lots
   
71.15   Regulations
Removal of Abandoned Vehicles and Illegally Parked Vehicles
   
71.30   Definitions
   
71.31   Vehicles impounded
   
71.32   Storage of impounded vehicles
   
71.33   Disposition of impounded vehicles
   
71.34   Reports of police officers and city impound
   
71.35   Authorization
   
71.36   Parking during snow removal
   
71.37   Parking in excess of 24 hours
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 71.01 CERTAIN STOPPING AND PARKING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Rights-of-way. No person may drive upon or across, stop, leave
standing, or park a vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon any boulevard
or other portion of a public right-of-way abutting the traveled portion of a
roadway. This prohibition will not apply to driveways which give access from a
roadway. In the event of an emergency resulting from vehicle failure in an area
where the parking is prohibited, the vehicle operator must attempt where
practical to move the vehicle off the traveled portion of the roadway. A clear
and unobstructed width of at least 15 feet of the traveled part of the roadway
opposite the standing vehicle must be left for the free passage of other
vehicles.
   (B)   Obstruction of mailboxes. No person may park a vehicle so as to
obstruct a mailbox.
   (C)   Order to proceed. No person may stop or park a vehicle on a roadway
when directed or ordered to proceed by a police officer.
   (D)   Signs and posting. No person may stop or park a vehicle at any place
where official signs prohibit the stopping or parking. When a roadway is
temporarily posted by order of the police for the purpose of traffic control,
removal of snow, ice, or waste, maintenance, or improvement or otherwise,
evidence of the posting constitutes prima facie evidence of the order of the
police and notice of same.
(Prior Code, § 72.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
PRIVATE PARKING LOTS
§ 71.15 REGULATIONS.
   No person may operate a motor vehicle on semi-public property in violation
of any official sign, or operate at a speed greater than is safe and reasonable
under the conditions then existing, and in no event at a speed in excess of 15
mph. Parking of vehicles on semi-public property must conform to any designated
stalls or positions for parking. No vehicles may be parked or allowed to stand
in an area designated or used as a lane for moving traffic so as to interfere
with the movement of traffic. The Police Department may post signs at any
entrance to semi-public property from a roadway to designate one-way traffic
for entrance or exit, and the driver of any vehicle entering or leaving the
semi-public property must comply with any one-way sign so posted.
(Prior Code, § 72.15) Penalty, see §
10.99
REMOVAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES AND ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES
§ 71.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle which:
      (1)   Has remained for a period of more than 48 hours on public property
illegally or without vital operating component parts;
      (2)   Has remained for a period of more than 48 hours on private property
without the consent of the person who controls the property;
      (3)   Remains on private property, is not in a garage, and is in such an
inoperable condition that it has no substantial potential further use
consistent with its usual functions; or
      (4)   Has been impounded and not reclaimed by its owner within the period
prescribed in this section.
   CITY IMPOUND. The person or company designated by the City Manager or
designee to be responsible for towing and storage of vehicles impounded by the
city.
   MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE. A vehicle as defined in M.S. § 169.011, Subd. 92,
as it may be amended from time to time, which is powered all or in part by a
motor or engine.
   VITAL COMPONENT PARTS. Those parts of a motor vehicle essential to the
mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including, but not limited to, the
motor, drive train, and wheels.
(Prior Code, § 72.30)
§ 71.31 VEHICLES IMPOUNDED.
   The following motor vehicles may be impounded by the city impound at the
direction of any police officer:
   (A)   Any unoccupied motor vehicle found in violation of any provision of
any traffic or parking provision of this code or resolution of the city, or any
disabled or abandoned motor vehicle;
   (B)   A motor vehicle tagged by a police officer to be impounded, unless the
owner or operator of the vehicle appears before the tagged vehicle has been
towed, in which case the vehicle will be released without the payment of any
fee, other than towing or service charges already incurred; and/or
   (C)   A motor vehicle directed by a police officer to be impounded because
the officer considers possession of the vehicle necessary in the prosecution of
a person for violation of law.
(Prior Code, § 72.31)
§ 71.32 STORAGE OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLES.
   Any vehicle directed to be impounded, from the time it is in possession of
the city impound until the time it is released, will be considered to be in the
custody of the law. No work may be done on the vehicle by the city impound, nor
may the city impound permit anyone to do any work on the vehicle or remove any
part, or change or repair any part.
(Prior Code, § 72.32)
§ 71.33 DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Notice of impoundment. When a motor vehicle has been impounded, the
Police Department will give notice of the impoundment within ten days after it
is taken into custody. The notice will set forth the date and place of the
taking, the year, make, model, and serial number of the vehicle, and the place
where the vehicle is being held. The notice will inform the owner and any
readily identifiable lienholders of their right to reclaim the vehicle, and
state that failure of the owner or lienholders to exercise their right to
reclaim the vehicle within the prescribed time period will be deemed a waiver
by them of all right, title, and interest in the vehicle, and a consent to the
sale of the vehicle at public auction or by sealed bid. When a motor vehicle is
more than seven model years of age, is lacking vital component parts, and does
not display a license plate currently valid in the state, or any other state or
foreign country, it will immediately be eligible for sale at public auction or
by sealed bid, and will not be subject to the notification provided herein.
   (B)   Notice sent by mail. The notice will be sent by mail to the registered
owner, if known, of the impounded vehicle and to all readily identifiable
lienholders of record. If it is not reasonably possible to determine the
identity and address of the registered owner and all lienholders or record, the
notice will be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the area
where the motor vehicle was abandoned.
   (C)   Right to reclaim. The owner or any lienholder of an impounded motor
vehicle has a right to reclaim the vehicle upon payment of all towing, storage,
and impounding charges resulting from taking the vehicle into custody. The
reclamation must occur within 15 days after the date the notice was given.
Reclamation may not occur when the police consider the retention of the vehicle
necessary for the prosecution of any person for violation of law. The city
impound will provide to the City Manager or designee a schedule of charges
acceptable to the City Manager or designee for the towing, storage, and
impounding of vehicles, and the schedule will be kept in the Police Department.
Upon receipt of the release payment, the city impound will release the vehicle
by a written release stating the date of the release, together with the
enumerated charges and the purpose for which the charges were made. The release
must be made in one original and three copies, all of which must be signed by
the city impound and the owner of the vehicle to whom the release is made. The
city impound is to retain the original of the release, deliver one copy to the
owner of the vehicle, one copy to the Police Department, and one copy to the
City Manager or designee.
   (D)   Sale of vehicle. An impounded motor vehicle subject to sale under this
subchapter may be sold to the highest bidder at public auction or sale or by
sealed bid, following published notice of the sale. The purchaser will be given
a receipt in a form prescribed by law, which will be sufficient title to
dispose of the vehicle. The receipt will also entitle the purchaser to register
the vehicle and receive a certificate of title, free and clear of all liens and
claims of ownership. The proceeds of the sale of a motor vehicle will be used
to pay the cost of towing, storage, and impounding the vehicle, all notice and
publication costs, and all other costs reasonably incurred by this city with
respect to the vehicle. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale will be held
for the owner of the vehicle or entitled lienholder for 90 days, and thereafter
will be deposited in the state treasury. If no bid is received for an abandoned
motor vehicle, the vehicle may be disposed of in accordance with division (E)
below.
   (E)   Disposal of vehicles not sold at public sale. The city may contract
with any person licensed by the State Pollution Control Agency for the
collection, storage, incineration, volume reduction, transportation, or other
services necessary to prepare abandoned motor vehicles and other scrap metal
for recycling or other methods of disposal. Where no bid has been received for
an abandoned motor vehicle, the city may dispose of the vehicle pursuant to the
contract.
(Prior Code, § 72.33)
§ 71.34 REPORTS OF POLICE OFFICERS AND CITY IMPOUND.
   (A)   Traffic tags will be used by police officers when directing the towing
and impounding of a vehicle. The tag is to be in the form prescribed by the
Chief of Police and will include the make and license number of the vehicle
tagged, the date and time of the offense, the nature of the offense charged,
and any further information which the Chief of Police deems necessary and
advisable. The police officer will, if possible, await the arrival of a tow
truck.
   (B)   When a vehicle is towed and impounded, it is the duty of the city
impound to keep a “tow sheet,” on a form furnished by the City Manager or
designee, on any tows. The tow sheet must give the description of the vehicle,
with an inventory of any personal property visible in the vehicle at the time
of the arrival of the vehicle at the city impound. The description and
inventory must include the make and license number of the vehicle and the time
of arrival at the city impound, together with a statement of information as may
be necessary to describe the vehicle and property. All tow sheets will be
consecutively numbered. The original and one copy of each tow sheet must be
delivered to the Police Department, which will deliver a copy to the City
Manager or designee.
(Prior Code, § 72.34)
§ 71.35 AUTHORIZATION.
   Whenever it is found necessary under any section of this code or state law
to remove a vehicle illegally parked on a roadway, any police officer is hereby
authorized to provide for the removal of the vehicle to the nearest convenient
garage, impound lot, or other place of safety.
(Prior Code, § 72.35)
§ 71.36 PARKING DURING SNOW REMOVAL.
   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle on any city street for a period of 48
hours, commencing immediately after two inches or more of continuous snowfall,
or until snow removal has been completed curb to curb.
   (B)   Whenever it is necessary to the proper direction control, regulation
of traffic, plowing, and/or the removal of snow, ice, or waste, or maintenance
or improvement of any highway or street to remove any vehicle standing on a
highway or street in the city, then any police officer is authorized to provide
for the removal of the vehicle and have the same removed to the nearest
convenient garage or other place of safety. The cost of removal and storage of
the vehicle will be charged to the owner of the vehicle, and to the person
causing the violation.
(Prior Code, § 72.36) (Ord. 08-005, passed 5-27-2008; Ord. 2009-005, passed 7-
28-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.37 PARKING IN EXCESS OF 24 HOURS.
   If any vehicle is left standing for a period in excess of 24 hours, then the
vehicle may be deemed a traffic impediment, and a police officer is authorized
to provide for the removal of the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 72.37)
CHAPTER 72: TRUCK RESTRICTIONS
Section
   
72.01   Trucks prohibited on certain streets
   
72.02   State aid roads excepted
   
72.03   Seasonal load restrictions
   
72.04   Gross weight stencil required
   
72.05   Special permits
§ 72.01 TRUCKS PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   (A)   Weight regulations. No person may operate or cause to be operated any
vehicle having a gross weight in excess of 9,000 pounds, other than a public
transportation vehicle, upon any roadway in the city without a permit from the
city, unless the roadway is designated a state or county roadway or truck
route, or unless necessary for the purpose of delivering or removing goods or
materials to or from premises abutting the roadway.
   (B)   Residential areas. No person may stop, park, or leave a vehicle in
excess of 9,000 pounds unattended on a roadway or on public or private property
in any area zoned residential for a period of more than two hours between the
hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except that a property owner is allowed to
park on the owner’s property a maximum of one camping or recreational type
vehicle and is allowed to operate the vehicle upon city roadways for the
purpose of ingress and egress to the property.
(Prior Code, § 73.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.02 STATE AID ROADS EXCEPTED.
   State aid roads within the corporate limits of this city, other than St.
Anthony Boulevard, are excepted from the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 73.02)
§ 72.03 SEASONAL LOAD RESTRICTIONS.
   The Public Works Director may prohibit the operation of vehicles upon all
roadways including state aid roads, or impose restrictions as to the weight of
vehicles to be operated on all roadways, whenever a roadway, by reason of
deterioration, rain, snow, or other climatic conditions, will be seriously
damaged or destroyed unless the use of vehicles on it is prohibited or the
permissible weight allowed is reduced. The Public Works Director will post
signs plainly indicating the prohibition or restriction at each end of the
affected roadway.
(Prior Code, § 73.03)
§ 72.04 GROSS WEIGHT STENCIL REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a truck within the limits of this
city without having the gross weight of the vehicle for which the license tax
is paid stenciled in a conspicuous place on each side of the vehicle in letters
not less than two and one-half inches high and three-eighths inch stroke in a
color giving a marked contrast with that of the part of the vehicle on which it
is placed, with a good quality paint that will endure throughout the term of
the registration. The stenciling must be on a part of the vehicle itself and
not on a removable plate or placard of any kind, and must be kept clean and
visible at all times.
(Prior Code, § 73.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.05 SPECIAL PERMITS.
   (A)   Issuance by Public Works Director. The Public Works Director may, upon
application in writing and for good cause shown, issue a special permit, in
writing, authorizing the applicant to move a vehicle or combination of vehicles
of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum allowed by this
chapter.
   (B)   Required information. The application for any such permit must
specifically describe the vehicle or combination of vehicles and loads to be
moved and the particular streets for which the use is requested, and the period
of time for which the permit is requested.
   (C)   Conditions for permits. The Public Works Director is authorized to
issue or withhold the permit at the Public Works Director’s discretion. If a
permit is issued, the Public Works Director may limit or prescribe conditions
of operation of the vehicle or vehicles when necessary to prevent undue damage
to the roadway foundations, surfaces, or structures. The Public Works Director
may require any undertaking or other security as may be deemed necessary to
compensate for any injury or damage to any roadway or road structure. The
Public Works Director also may require that the operator or owner of the
vehicle or vehicles have in effect, with respect to the operation of the
vehicle or vehicles, a policy of liability insurance or bond affording coverage
with respect to injury to persons and damage to property.
   (D)   Display and inspection of permit. The permit must be carried in the
vehicle to which it refers and must be open to inspection by any police officer
or authorized agent of the city.
(Prior Code, § 73.05)
CHAPTER 73: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Bicycle Operation
   
73.01   Generally
   
73.02   Equipment
   
73.03   Responsibility of parents
Snowmobiles
   
73.15   Interpretation
   
73.16   Definitions
   
73.17   Places where operation prohibited
   
73.18   Operating permitted on Silver Lake
   
73.19   Direct crossing of public streets and highways
   
73.20   Miscellaneous restrictions and prohibition
   
73.21   Youthful operators
   
73.22   Equipment
   
73.23   Driving rules applicable
   
73.24   Leaving snowmobile unattended
   
73.25   Leasing
BICYCLE OPERATION
§ 73.01 GENERALLY.
   All bicycle operators and riders are subject to the following rules.
   (A)   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway is granted all of the
rights and is subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a motor
vehicle.
   (B)   A person riding a bicycle may not ride other than upon a permanent and
regular seat attached to the bicycle. No bicycle may be used to carry more
persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. No
person riding upon any bicycle may attach it or a person to any other vehicle
upon a roadway.
   (C)   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway must ride as near to the right
side of the roadway as practicable and may not ride more than two abreast
except on paths or roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
(Prior Code, § 71.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.02 EQUIPMENT.
   Every bicycle in use at night time must be equipped with a lamp on the front
which emits a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the
front and with a reflector on the rear of a type approved by the Commissioner
of Public Safety which is visible from distances up to 300 feet to the rear
when directly in front of lawful upper beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
A lamp may be used in addition to the reflector. Every bicycle must be equipped
with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on
dry, level, and clean pavement.
(Prior Code, § 71.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.03 RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENTS.
   It is unlawful for the parent of any minor child to authorize or knowingly
permit the child to violate any provision of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 71.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
SNOWMOBILES
§ 73.15 INTERPRETATION.
   Provisions of this subchapter are supplementary to those in M.S. Chapter 84,
as it may be amended from time to time, which relate to snowmobiles. This
subchapter is not to be interpreted as allowing what state law prohibits or as
prohibiting what state law expressly allows.
(Prior Code, § 74.01)
§ 73.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMISSIONER. The Commissioner of Natural Resources of the state.
   DEADMAN THROTTLE. A device which, when pressure is removed from the engine
accelerator or throttle, causes a snowmobile rotor to be disengaged from the
driving track.
   OPERATE. To ride in or on, or to physically control the operation of a
snowmobile.
   OPERATOR. Any person who operates or is in actual physical control of the
snowmobile.
   OWNER. A person, other than a lien holder, having the property interest in
or title to a snowmobile, or entitled to the use or possession thereof.
   SNOWMOBILE. A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice, or
natural terrain, steered by wheels, skis, or runners.
   STATE COMMISSIONER OF NATURAL RESOURCES. Individual that leads the
Department of Natural Resources of the state.
(Prior Code, § 74.02)
§ 73.17 PLACES WHERE OPERATION PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile in the places listed
in §
70.26, on any lake or pond (except as permitted in §
73.18), or within 100 feet of any fisherman, skating area, sliding area, or
skiing area.
(Prior Code, § 74.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.18 OPERATING PERMITTED ON SILVER LAKE.
   Operation of snowmobiles may take place on Silver Lake between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. and is prohibited at all other times.
(Prior Code, § 74.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.19 DIRECT CROSSING OF PUBLIC STREETS AND HIGHWAYS.
   To the extent that state law permits snowmobiles to travel on trunk, county
state-aid, and county highways within the city, a snowmobile so traveling may
make a direct crossing of any street or highway within the city except for an
interstate highway or freeway, provided:
   (A)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the street or highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents
a quick and safe crossing;
   (B)   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
shoulder or main-traveled way;
   (C)   The operator yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard;
   (D)   In crossing a divided street or highway, the crossing is made only at
an intersection of a street or highway with another public street or highway;
and
   (E)   If the crossing is made between the hours of one-half hour after
sunset to one-half hour before sunrise or in conditions of reduced visibility,
only if both front and rear lights are on.
(Prior Code, § 74.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.20 MISCELLANEOUS RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITION.
   No person may operate a snowmobile contrary to the restrictions in §
70.27 pertaining to motor vehicles, or during the hours from 10:00 p.m. to 8:00
a.m. of any day, or to tow anything other than with a rigid tow bar attached to
the rear of the snowmobile.
(Prior Code, § 74.06) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.21 YOUTHFUL OPERATORS.
   No person under 14 years of age may make a direct crossing of a roadway as
the operator of a snowmobile. A person 14 years of age or older, but less than
18 years of age, may make a direct crossing of a roadway as the operator of a
snowmobile only if he or she has in his or her immediate possession a valid
snowmobile safety certificate issued by the Commissioner. It is unlawful for
the owner of a snowmobile to permit the snowmobile to be operated by another
person contrary to the provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 74.07) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.22 EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Mufflers. Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, no person
may operate a snowmobile without a muffler in good working order which blends
the exhaust noise into the overall snowmobile noise and is in constant
operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise. The exhaust system may not
emit or produce a sharp popping or crackling sound. This section does not apply
to organized races or similar competitive events held on private lands, with
the permission of the owner, lessee, or custodian of the land; public lands or
water under the jurisdiction of the Commissioner, with the Commissioner’s
permission; or other public lands, with the consent of the public agency owning
the land. No person shall have for sale, sell, or offer for sale on any new
snowmobile any muffler that fails to comply with the specifications of the
Commissioner.
   (B)   Lamps and brakes. No person may operate a snowmobile upon a roadway
unless it is equipped with at least one head lamp, one tail lamp, each of
minimum candlepower as prescribed by regulation of the Commissioner, reflector
material of a minimum area of 16 square inches mounted on each side forward of
the handle bars, and with brakes, each of which conforms to the standards
prescribed by the Commissioner.
   (C)   Deadman throttle. No person may operate a snowmobile upon any public
property unless it is equipped with a deadman throttle in operating condition.
   (D)   Pennant flag. No person may operate a snowmobile upon a roadway unless
it is equipped with a pennant flag of red or blaze colored material, of a size
not less than 12 inches by 12 inches by nine inches, at a height of not less
than six feet from the ground level at any time when the vehicle is operated on
the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 74.08) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.23 DRIVING RULES APPLICABLE.
   The provisions of M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be amended from time to time,
apply to the operation of snowmobiles on roadways, except those relating to
required equipment, and those which by their nature have no application. No
person may operate a snowmobile on a roadway in violation of the provisions of
M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 74.09) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.24 LEAVING SNOWMOBILE UNATTENDED.
   No person may leave or allow a snowmobile to be or remain unattended on
public property.
(Prior Code, § 74.10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.25 LEASING.
   No person may engage in the business of leasing snowmobiles to others on the
property of the lessor, or charging or authorizing another person to charge for
allowing a snowmobile to be operated on public or private property within the
city.
(Prior Code, § 74.11) Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS
      
91.   ANIMALS
      
92.   NUISANCES
      
93.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
94.   RIGHTS-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
      
95.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
      
96.   CEMETERIES
      
97.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
CHAPTER 90: WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   City Council findings
Wireless Telecommunications Towers
   
90.15   Purpose
   
90.16   Definitions
   
90.17   Tower and facility building and design standards
   
90.18   Permitted uses/administrative approval
   
90.19   Permitted conditional uses
   
90.20   Applications for towers and WTFs
   
90.21   Nonconforming uses
   
90.22   Removal of abandoned towers and WTFs
   
90.23   Regulation of dish antennas
Small Wireless Facilities
   
90.35   Purpose
   
90.36   Definitions
   
90.37   Establishment of general standards
   
90.38   Small wireless facility permit applications
   
90.39   Small wireless facility application review process
   
90.40   Small wireless facility permit conditions
   
90.41   Small wireless facility permit term
   
90.42   Denial or revocation of a small wireless facility permit
   
90.43   City inspection of a small wireless facility or wireless support
structure
   
90.44   Abandonment
   
90.45   Removal of a small wireless facility or wireless support structure
   
90.46   Appeals
   
90.47   Insurance
   
90.48   Indemnification and defense of city
   
90.49   Fees and costs
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 CITY COUNCIL FINDINGS.
   The Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunication Act of
1996, being 47 U.S.C. §§ 201 et seq., grants the Federal Communications
Commission jurisdiction over many aspects of telecommunications services. The
city’s regulation of towers and WTFs in the city will not have the effect of
prohibiting any person from providing wireless telecommunications services in
violation of the Act.
(Prior Code, § 90.01)
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
§ 90.15 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The general purpose of this chapter is to regulate the placement,
construction, and modification of towers and WTFs in order to protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the public, while at the same time encouraging
the development of the competitive wireless telecommunications marketplace in
the city.
   (B)   The specific purposes of this subchapter are:
      (1)   To allow the location of telecommunication towers and WTFs in the
city;
      (2)   To protect residential areas from potential adverse impact of
towers and WTFs;
      (3)   To minimize adverse visual impact of towers and WTFs through
careful design, siting, landscaping, and innovative camouflaging techniques;
      (4)   To promote and encourage shared collocation of towers and antenna
support structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional
single-use towers;
      (5)   To promote and encourage utilization of technological designs that
will either eliminate or reduce the need for erection of new tower structures
to support WTFs;
      (6)   To avoid potential damage to property caused by towers and WTFs by
ensuring the structures are soundly and carefully designed, constructed,
modified, maintained, and removed when no longer used or are determined to be
structurally unsound;
      (7)   To ensure that towers and WTFs are compatible with surrounding land
uses;
      (8)   To overcome the potential adverse impacts that poorly or
unregulated towers and WTFs could have on the public health, safety, and
welfare; and
      (9)   Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services
to provide the services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently.
(Prior Code, § 90.02)
§ 90.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANTENNA. Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower,
building, or other structure and used in communications that radiate or capture
electromagnetic waves, digital signs, analog signals, radio frequencies
(excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunication signals, or other
communication signals.
   COLLOCATION. The sharing of structures by two or more wireless service
providers on a single support structure or otherwise sharing a common location.
   DISH ANTENNA. A parabolic-shaped antenna (including all supporting
apparatus) which is used for transmitting or receiving telecommunication,
television, or radio signals, which is located on the exterior of, or outside
of, any building or structure.
   HEIGHT. When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured
from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the tower or
other structure, including the base pad and any antenna.
   MONOPOLE. A slender self-supporting tower used to support telecommunications
equipment.
   TOWER. Any pole, spire, or other structure, including supporting lines,
cables, wires, braces, and masts, intended primarily for the purpose of
mounting an antenna or similar apparatus above grade.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WTF). Any cables, wires, lines, wave
guides, antennas, and any other equipment or facilities associated with the
transmission or reception of communications (other than radio or television
broadcast communications) which a person seeks to locate or have installed upon
or near a tower, building, or structure, but shall not include:
      (1)   Any satellite earth station antenna two meters in diameter or less
which is located in any light industrial or commercial zoning district;
      (2)   Any satellite earth station reception antenna one meter or less in
diameter, regardless of zoning district;
      (3)   Automatic meter reading systems;
      (4)   Military, federal, state, and local government communication towers
and antennas used for navigational purposes, emergency preparedness, or public
safety purposes; and
      (5)   A WTF to the extent that a permit issued by the Federal
Communications Commission or state authority specifically provides that the WTF
is exempt from local regulation.
(Prior Code, § 90.03)
§ 90.17 TOWER AND FACILITY BUILDING AND DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Generally. All towers and WTFs must be constructed in accordance with
the following standards.
   (B)   Specifically.
      (1)   Siting. WTFs located on or attached to existing structures are
regulated by the provisions of the zoning district for each parcel. Towers may
only be located on parcels within commercial and light industrial zoning
districts (as defined by the city’s zoning and land use regulations) and on
city-owned property. Towers are not permitted in public rights-of-way.
      (2)   Color and architecture. All WTFs shall be concealed or camouflaged
and shall utilize materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping to
blend in with the surrounding natural setting and built environment. If a WTF
is proposed on any part of a building or structure, it must blend with the
structure’s design, architecture, and color, including exterior finish. The
term CAMOUFLAGE shall not mean invisible, but rather appearing as part of
another structure, such as a building, wall, or roof, or designed to appear as
another structure, such as a building, clock tower, chimney, flag pole, light
pole, or tree.
      (3)   Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the
landscaping surrounding towers; provided, however, that the City Council, after
considering the recommendation of city staff, may waive the requirements if the
visual impact of a proposed tower or WTF would be minimal or if the purposes of
this subchapter would otherwise be better served thereby.
         (a)   Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
materials that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from property
used for residences. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at
least four feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound.
         (b)   Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as
towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property
perimeter may be sufficient buffer. Existing mature trees and other vegetation
at the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
      (4)   Signs. The use of any portion of a tower or WTF for signs or
advertising other than warning or equipment information signs is prohibited.
      (5)   Lighting. WTFs or towers shall not be illuminated by artificial
means and shall not display strobe lights unless the lighting is specifically
required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other federal or state
authority. When incorporated into the approved design of a WTF, light fixtures
used to illuminate ball fields, parking lots, or similar areas may be attached
to the tower.
      (6)   Monopole. New towers shall be of a monopole design, without guide
wires, unless the City Council determines that an alternative design would
better blend into the surrounding environment.
      (7)   Setbacks. Towers and WTFs shall comply with the principal structure
setbacks of the underlying zoning district and the following additional
standards.
         (a)   The tower or WTF is setback from all residential dwellings at
least one foot for each foot in height.
         (b)   Towers and WTFs shall not encroach upon any easements unless
permission is obtained from the underlying property owner and holder of the
easement.
         (c)   Towers and WTFs shall not be located between a principal
structure and a public street.
         (d)   The required setbacks may be reduced or the location in relation
to a public street modified, at the sole discretion of the city, when the WTF
is integrated into an existing or proposed structure such as a building, light,
or utility pole.
      (8)   Height.
         (a)   The height of any tower shall not exceed 75 feet.
         (b)   Antennas located on an existing structure that is taller than
the limit allowed in the underlying zoning district may extend up to five feet
above the height of the structure.
      (9)   Safety and environmental standards.
         (a)   Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural
integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in
compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local building codes
and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic
Industries Alliance, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the
city concludes that a tower fails to comply with the codes and standards and
constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to
the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring the tower into
compliance with the standards. Failure to bring the tower into compliance
within the 30-day period shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower
or antenna at the owner’s expense.
         (b)   Interference with public safety telecommunications. No tower or
WTF shall interfere with public safety telecommunications. All towers or WTFs
shall comply with FCC regulations and licensing requirements.
         (c)   Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing
not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate
anticlimbing device; provided, however, that the City Council, after
considering the recommendations of the city staff, may waive the requirements,
as it deems appropriate.
         (d)   Noise. If the proposed WTF includes equipment that causes or a
WTF otherwise causes significant increased sound levels, sound buffers may be
required, including, but not limited to, baffling, barriers, enclosures, walls,
and plantings.
         (e)   Radio frequency emissions and interference. WTFs must comply
with Federal Communication Commission standards for radio frequency emissions
and interference.
         (f)   Risk of danger. Towers and WTFs shall not pose an unreasonable
risk of explosion, fire, or other danger due to its proximity to volatile,
flammable, explosive, or hazardous materials.
         (g)   Maintenance. All commercial towers or WTFs shall at all times:
            1.   Be kept and maintained in good condition, order, and repair so
that the same shall not menace or endanger the life or property of any person;
and
            2.   Allow sufficient access for service vehicles and personnel.
      (10)   Collocation requirements. To every extent possible:
         (a)   All proposed WTFs shall be placed on an existing tower,
building, or structure located within one-half mile of the desired location for
the proposed WTF;
         (b)   All wireless telecommunication providers shall cooperate with
each other in collocating WTFs and shall exercise good faith in collocating
with other licensed carriers and in the sharing of sites, including the sharing
of technical information necessary to evaluate the feasibility of collocation.
In the event a dispute arises as to a collocation issue, the city may require a
third-party technical study to evaluate the feasibility of collocating at the
expense of either or both wireless telecommunications providers;
         (c)   All new towers and any pre-existing tower owned by a wireless
telecommunications provider shall be made available for use by the owner or
initial user thereof, together with as many other licensed carriers as can be
technically located thereon;
         (d)   If determined appropriate by the city, all new towers shall be
designed and constructed in such a manner as to accommodate at least one other
comparable WTF in addition to the applicant’s; and
         (e)   All new wireless telecommunications towers that are less than 75
feet shall be designed and constructed in a manner that allows the tower to be
expanded to a height of 75 feet in order to allow for future collocation.
      (11)   Exceptions to collocation. The city may waive any or all of the
collocation requirements, if it is determined that:
         (a)   The planned WTF would exceed the structural capacity of the
existing or approved tower, building, or structure, as documented by a
qualified and licensed professional engineer, and the existing or approved
tower, building, or structure cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to
accommodate planned or equivalent equipment;
         (b)   The planned WTF would cause interference materially impacting
the usability of other existing or planned WTFs at the structure as documented
by a qualified radio frequency engineer selected by the city and the
interference cannot be prevented; and
         (c)   No existing tower, building, or structure within an applicant’s
search radius can or will accommodate the planned equipment at a height
necessary to function reasonably as documented by a qualified radio frequency
engineer selected by the city.
(Prior Code, § 90.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.18 PERMITTED USES/ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVAL.
   (A)   Towers and WTFs shall be a permitted use in a light industrial
district, as described in Chapter 154, and on city-owned property. Towers and
WTFs proposed in a light industrial district or on city-owned property may be
administratively approved.
   (B)   The following provisions shall govern the issuance of administrative
approvals for towers and WTFs.
      (1)   Each applicant for administrative approval shall submit an
application to the City Manager or designee providing the information set forth
in §
90.20, when applicable, and a nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of
the City Council to reimburse the city for the costs of reviewing the
application.
      (2)   The City Manager or designee shall review an application for
administrative approval of a tower or WTF and determine if the proposed use
complies with this chapter.
      (3)   The City Manager or designee shall respond to each such application
within 60 days after the filing of the application by either approving or
denying the application. If the City Manager or designee fails to respond to
the applicant within 60 days, then the application shall be deemed to be
approved, unless the time has been extended under M.S. § 15.99, as it may be
amended from time to time.
      (4)   In connection with any such administrative approval, the City
Manager or designee may, in order to encourage shared use, or the use of
alternative tower structures, administratively waive or modify any zoning
district setback requirements in or separation distances between towers by up
to 50%.
      (5)   If an administrative approval is denied, the applicant may file an
appeal to the City Council. Any appeal must be filed by the applicant within 30
days of the receipt of the City Manager’s or designee’s decision.
   (C)   The following uses may be approved by the City Manager or designee
after conducting an administrative review:
      (1)   Locating a tower or WTF, including the placement of additional
buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with a tower or WTF,
in any light industrial district or on city-owned property; and/or
      (2)   Locating antennas on existing structures or towers consistent with
the terms of divisions (C)(2)(a) and (C)(2)(b) below:
         (a)   Antennas on existing structures. Any WTF proposed to be affixed
to an existing building or structure may be approved by the City Manager or
designee as an accessory use to the building or structure, provided:
            1.   The antenna does not extend more than 30 feet above the
highest point of the building or structure;
            2.   The antenna complies with all applicable federal regulations;
and
            3.   The antenna complies with all applicable building codes.
         (b)   Antennas on existing towers. Any WTF which is proposed to be
attached to an existing tower may be administratively approved by the City
Manager or designee and, to minimize adverse visual impacts associated with the
proliferation and clustering of towers, collocation of antennas by more than
one carrier on existing towers shall take precedence over the construction of
new towers, provided the collocation is accomplished in a manner consistent
with the following: a tower which is modified or reconstructed to accommodate
the collocation of an additional antenna shall be of the same tower type as the
existing tower, unless the City Manager or designee allows reconstruction as a
monopole.
(Prior Code, § 90.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.19 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   Generally. Unless it is a permitted use in accordance with §
90.18, a tower or WTF shall be permitted only if a conditional use permit has
been issued for that use by the City Council. The following provisions shall
govern the issuance of conditional use permits for towers or WTFs by the City
Council.
      (1)   Applications for conditional use permits under this section shall
be subject to the procedures and requirements of
Chapter 154, except as modified in this section.
      (2)   In granting a conditional use permit, the City Council may impose
conditions to the extent necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the
proposed tower or WTF on adjoining properties.
      (3)   Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant
submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified by a
licensed professional engineer.
      (4)   An applicant for a conditional use permit shall submit the
information described in this section and a nonrefundable fee as established by
resolution of the City Council to reimburse the city for the costs of reviewing
the application.
   (B)   Towers. In addition to any information required for applications for
conditional use permits pursuant to
Chapter 154, applicants for a conditional use permit for a tower shall submit
the following information:
      (1)   A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type, and
height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses
and zoning, adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks from property
lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower and any other structures,
topography, parking, and other information deemed by the city staff to be
necessary to assess compliance with this section;
      (2)   The legal description of the property on which the proposed tower
is to be constructed;
      (3)   The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest
residential property;
      (4)   The separation distance from other towers and, if known, the type
of construction of the existing tower(s) and the identity of the owner(s)/
operator(s) of the existing tower(s);
      (5)   A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials;
      (6)   Method of fencing, and finished color and, if applicable, the
method of camouflage;
      (7)   A statement of compliance with all applicable federal, state, or
local laws;
      (8)   A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether construction
of the tower will accommodate collocation of additional antennas for future
users;
      (9)   A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers,
other structures, or alternative technology not requiring the use of a tower or
new structure to provide the services to be provided through the use of the
proposed new tower; and
      (10)   A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or WTFs
within the city based upon existing physical, engineering, technological, or
geographical limitations in the event the proposed tower is erected.
   (C)   Factors considered in granting conditional use permits for towers. In
addition to any standards for consideration of conditional use permit,
applications pursuant to Chapter 154, the City Council shall consider the
following factors in determining whether to issue a conditional use permit, no
one of which shall be conclusive, although the City Council may waive or reduce
the burden on the applicant of one or more of these criteria if city staff or
City Council concludes that the goals of this subchapter are better served
thereby:
      (1)   Height of the proposed tower;
      (2)   Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential
district boundaries;
      (3)   Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
      (4)   Surrounding topography;
      (5)   Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
      (6)   Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual
obtrusiveness;
      (7)   Proposed ingress and egress; and
      (8)   Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or structures.
   (D)   Existing facilities. No new tower shall be permitted unless the
applicant demonstrates, to the reasonable satisfaction of the City Council,
that there is no existing tower, structure, or alternative technology not
requiring a tower or structure that can accommodate the applicant’s proposed
WTF or tower. An applicant shall submit information requested by the City
Council related to the availability of suitable existing towers, other
structures, or alternative technology. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that
no existing tower, structure, or alternative technology can accommodate the
applicant’s proposed WTF may consist of any of the following.
      (1)   No existing tower or structure is located within the geographic
area that meet the applicant’s engineering requirements.
      (2)   Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet
the applicant’s engineering requirements.
      (3)   Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural
strength to support the applicant’s proposed WTF and related equipment.
      (4)   The applicant’s proposed WTF would cause electromagnetic
interference with one or more WTFs on existing towers or structures, or a WTF
on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the
applicant’s proposed WTF.
      (5)   The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in
order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or
structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development
are presumed to be unreasonable.
      (6)   The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors
that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.
      (7)   The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that does
not require the use of towers or structures, such as a cable microcell network
using multiple low-powered transmitters/receivers attached to a wireline
system, is unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology that exceed new tower or
antenna development shall not be presumed to render the technology unsuitable.
   (E)   Separation. All towers for which a conditional use permit is required
shall be separated by a minimum of 750 feet between the proposed tower and any
pre-existing tower; provided, however, that the City Council, after considering
any recommendations of city staff, may reduce the standard separation
requirements if the purposes of this chapter would be better served thereby.
The separation distance shall be measured by drawing or following a straight
line between the base of the existing tower and the proposed base, pursuant to
a site plan, of the proposed tower.
(Prior Code, § 90.06)
§ 90.20 APPLICATIONS FOR TOWERS AND WTFS.
   (A)   Application. In addition to an applicant’s name, address, proposed
site for a WTF antenna or tower, site plan, grading and landscaping plans,
written permission of the property owner (unless the property owner is the
city), and any other similar information, an application for a conditional use
permit, building, or other permit relating to the installation or construction
of a WTF or tower, the applicant shall include the following:
      (1)   A statement indicating that failure to comply with the conditions
of approval shall result in the revocation of the permit and removal of the WTF
and/or tower;
      (2)   A statement indicating that the expenses incurred by the city to
enforce the provisions of the permit shall be reimbursed by the applicant;
      (3)   A statement which requires the applicant to utilize the procedures
established by the Federal Communications Commission to resolve any complaints
received relating to interference allegedly caused by the facility;
      (4)   A statement indicating the applicant will cooperate in good faith
and fair dealing in collocating WTFs;
      (5)   A statement indicating that the WTF or tower will be maintained in
good and safe condition, and its original appearance and concealment, disguise,
or camouflage elements incorporated into the design at the time of approval
shall be preserved. The maintenance shall include, but is not limited to,
painting, repair of equipment, and maintenance of landscaping;
      (6)   A statement authorizing the city to enter the property for the
purpose of periodic inspections to determine that the site complies with the
provisions of this section, any conditions of approval and all safety and
building codes and permits issued. This statement shall give the city the right
to conduct the inspections at any time upon reasonable notice to the property
owner(s), and that all expenses related to the inspections shall be borne by
the applicant;
      (7)   A statement indicating that the applicant understands that a tower
or WTF which has not been used for 12 successive months shall be deemed
abandoned and may, at the sole discretion of the city, be required to be
removed in the same manner and pursuant to the same procedures as for dangerous
or unsafe structures established by M.S. § 463.16, as it may be amended from
time to time;
      (8)   A written acknowledgment of the property owner indicating that the
removal of any unused or abandoned tower or WTF, or portions of any such towers
or WTFs, are ultimately the responsibility of the property owner; and
      (9)   A statement requiring the applicant to notify the city that the WTF
continues to be in operation. The notice of continuing operation shall be hand
delivered or sent to the City Manager or designee annually by certified mail
during the last two weeks of the month of December.
   (B)   Escrowed funds. At the time of application for a tower or WTF
conditional use or building permit, an escrow deposit shall be posted in an
amount determined from time to time by City Council resolution. No interest
shall accrue on any such escrowed funds. The city may charge against this
deposit to recover its costs for reviewing the tower or WTF application. These
costs may include, but are not limited to, city staff time over and above that
covered by the application fee, consultants’ fees, and fees for third-party
review. If a tower or WTF permit is approved, as a condition of approval,
deposit of additional escrow funds may be required. The city will charge
against this deposit to offset the city’s costs to monitor construction and
ensure compliance with the conditions of approval and standards in this
section. These charges may include, but are not limited to, city staff time,
consultants’ fees, and fees for third-party review, monitoring, and inspection.
Once construction has been completed and the applicant has complied with all
conditions of approval, any remaining deposit funds shall be refunded to the
party or entity that posted the escrow deposit. Refunds of the deposit shall
not be construed to limit the city’s ability to recover future costs associated
with review or monitoring ongoing operation of the WTF or future modifications,
amendments, or transfer of the facility.
   (C)   Assessments. In the event the city incurs charges relating to the
enforcement of this section, including, without limitation, expenses relating
to third-party consultants and removal of abandoned towers and WTFs, the city
reserves the right to assess the property owner for the charges in the same
manner in which the city assesses and collects real property taxes.
(Prior Code, § 90.07)
§ 90.21 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Collocation of additional antennas. Antennas that are collocated, in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, shall not be deemed to
constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure.
   (B)   Preexisting towers. Preexisting towers shall be allowed to continue
their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance shall be permitted on
the preexisting towers. New construction other than routine maintenance on a
preexisting tower shall comply with the requirements of this subchapter.
   (C)   Rebuilding damaged or destroyed nonconforming towers or antennas. A
nonconforming tower, antenna, or WTF that is damaged or destroyed by wind,
storm, fire, or similar acts of God may be rebuilt without having to first
obtain administrative approval or a conditional use permit. The type, height,
and location of the tower or WTF shall be of the same type and intensity as the
original facility approval. Building permits to rebuild the facility shall
comply with the then applicable building codes and shall be obtained within 180
days from the date the facility is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is
obtained or if the permit expires, the tower or antenna shall be deemed
abandoned as specified in §
90.22.
   (D)   Nonconforming use/abandonment. A nonconforming tower or WTF that
becomes nonfunctional for 30 consecutive days shall be deemed abandoned.
(Prior Code, § 90.08) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.22 REMOVAL OF ABANDONED TOWERS AND WTFS.
   Any tower or WTF that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months
shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of the tower or WTF shall remove
the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the city of the abandonment.
Failure to remove an abandoned tower or WTF within the 90-day period shall be
grounds for the city to remove the tower or WTF at the property owner’s
expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision
shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower for a
continuous period of 12 months.
(Prior Code, § 90.09)
§ 90.23 REGULATION OF DISH ANTENNAS.
   (A)   Permits. No dish antenna may be erected, constructed, or placed, or
re-erected, re-constructed, or replaced, anywhere within the city without first
making an application for and obtaining a permit from the city, except for the
following:
      (1)   Dish antennas not greater than nine square feet in cross-sectional
area, which do not exceed six feet in height as measured from the base of the
dish antenna to the highest point of the dish antenna; and
      (2)   Dish antennas and towers erected or constructed by the city for
city purposes.
   (B)   Location. The following additional requirements apply dish antennas
located in any residential district:
      (1)   Dish antennas greater than nine square feet in area may not be
located on the roof or exterior wall of a principal or accessory building;
      (2)   Dish antennas may be located only in the rear yard; and
      (3)   No dish antenna may be located or maintained, at any time,
permanently or temporarily, closer to the allowed buildable area of a principal
building on any adjacent lot than it is to the principal building on the lot on
which it is located.
   (C)   Screening. The Building Official may require, as a condition to a
permit, that a dish antenna installed in a nonresidential district be screened
from residential districts located within 100 feet of the dish antenna.
   (D)   Height. Dish antennas in residential districts may not be in excess of
12 feet in height, measured from the ground elevation at the base of the dish
antenna to the highest point of the dish antenna. In all other zoning
districts, dish antennas may have an overall height of no more than 18 feet for
either a ground mount or roof mount, as measured from the point at which the
antenna is mounted to the roof or the ground elevation to the highest point of
the dish antenna.
(Prior Code, § 90.10) Penalty, see §
10.99
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
§ 90.35 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish specific requirements
for obtaining a small wireless facility permit for the installation, mounting,
modification, operation, and replacement of small wireless facilities and
installation or replacement of wireless support structures by commercial
wireless providers on public and private property, including in the public
right-of-way. A small wireless facility permit issued under this subchapter
does not abrogate any other requirements imposed under another title of this
code.
   (B)   This subchapter does not apply to any wireline facilities, including
wireline backhaul facilities. A wireless provider must obtain an excavation
permit or an obstruction permit, as needed, pursuant to §
94.11 of this code or other applicable authorization for use of the public
right-of-way to construct, install, replace, or modify any wireline backhaul
facility, such as fiber optic cable. The granting of a small wireless facility
permit pursuant to this subchapter is not a grant of such authorization.
(Prior Code, § 98.010)
§ 90.36 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICABLE LAW. All applicable federal, state, and local laws, codes, rules,
regulations, orders, and ordinances, as the same be amended or adopted from
time to time.
   APPLICANT. Any person submitting a small wireless facility permit
application under this subchapter.
   CITY. The City of St. Anthony, Minnesota.
   COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace a small wireless facility on, under, within, or adjacent to an existing
wireless support structure that is owned privately or by the city.
   DAY. Counted in calendar days unless otherwise specified. When the day, or
the last day, for taking any action or paying any fee falls on Saturday,
Sunday, or a federal holiday, the action may be taken, or the fee paid, on the
next succeeding secular or business day.
   DECORATIVE POLE. A utility pole owned, managed, or operated by or on behalf
of the city or any other governmental entity that:
      (1)   Is specifically designed and placed for an aesthetic purpose; and
      (2)   (a)   On which a nondiscriminatory rule or code prohibits an
appurtenance or attachment, other than:
            1.   A small wireless facility;
            2.   A specialty designed informational or directional sign; or
            3.   A temporary holiday or special event attachment.
         (b)   On which no appurtenance or attachment has been placed, other
than:
            1.   A small wireless facility;
            2.   A specialty designed informational or directional sign; or
            3.   A temporary holiday or special event attachment.
   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Public Works of the city.
   DESIGN DISTRICT. Any district within the city within which architectural
design elements are required.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Department.
   EXCAVATE. To dig into or in any way remove, physically disturb, or penetrate
a part of a public right-of-way.
   FCC or COMMISSION. The Federal Communications Commission.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT. A geographically definable area, urban or rural, that
possesses a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites,
buildings, structures, or objects united historically or aesthetically by plan
or physical development. A DISTRICT may also comprise individual elements
separated geographically during the period of significance but linked by
association or function.
   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. A small wireless facility that is no larger than 24
inches long, 15 inches wide, and 12 inches high, and whose exterior antenna, if
any, is no longer than 11 inches.
   OBSTRUCT. To place a tangible object in a public right-of-way so as to
hinder free and open passage over that or any part of the public right-of-way.
   PERMITTEE. A person that has been granted a small wireless facility permit
by the Department.
   PERSON. Any individual, group, company, partnership, association, joint
stock company, trust, corporation, society, syndicate, club, business, or
governmental entity. PERSON shall not include the city.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, cartway, bicycle lane, and public sidewalk in which the city has an
interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes and
utility easement of the city.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY.
      (1)   A wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications:
         (a)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six
cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements,
the antenna and all its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of no
more than six cubic feet; and
         (b)   All other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless
facility, excluding electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications
demarcation boxes, battery backup power systems, grounding equipment, power
transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable, conduit, vertical cable runs for the
connection of power and other services, and any equipment concealed from public
view within or behind an existing structure or concealment, is an aggregate no
more than 28 cubic feet in volume.
      (2)   A micro wireless facility.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY PERMIT. A permit issued by the Department
authorizing the installation, mounting, maintenance, modification, operation,
or replacement of a small wireless facility or installation or replacement of a
wireless support structure in addition to collocation of a small wireless
facility on the wireless support structure.
   UTILITY POLE. A pole that is used in whole or in part to facilitate
telecommunications or electric service. It does not include a traffic signal
pole.
   WIRELESS FACILITY. Equipment at a fixed location that enables the provision
of wireless service between user equipment and a wireless service network,
including:
      (1)   Equipment associated with wireless service;
      (2)   A radio transceiver, antenna, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular
and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of
technological configuration; and
      (3)   A small wireless facility. WIRELESS FACILITY does not include:
         (a)   Wireless support structures;
         (b)   Wireline backhaul facilities; or
         (c)   Coaxial or fiber-optic cables between utility poles or wireless
support structures, or that are not otherwise immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with a specific antenna.
   WIRELESS PROVIDER. A provider of wireless service, including, but not
limited to, radio communication service carried on between mobile stations or
receivers and land stations, and by mobile stations communicating among
themselves and which permits a user generally to receive a call that originates
and/or terminates on the public switched network or its functional equivalent,
regardless of the radio frequencies used.
   WIRELESS SERVICE. Any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless
spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or by means
of a mobile device, that is provided using wireless facilities. WIRELESS
SERVICE does not include services regulated under Title VI of the
Communications Act of 1934, being 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq., as amended,
including a cable service under 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A new or existing structure in a public right-
of-way designed to support or capable of supporting small wireless facilities,
including, but not limited to, a utility pole or a building, as reasonably
determined by the Department.
   WIRELINE BACKHAUL FACILITY. A facility used to transport communications data
by wire from wireless facility to a communications network.
(Prior Code, § 98.020)
§ 90.37 ESTABLISHMENT OF GENERAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   General standards. The Director shall establish and maintain a set of
standards for the installation, mounting, maintenance, modification, operation,
or replacement of small wireless facilities and placing new or replacement
wireless support structures in the public right-of-way applicable to all
permittees under this subchapter (the “general standards”). The general
standards shall include, but not be limited to, information to be required in a
small wireless facility permit application, design standards, construction
standards, aesthetic standards, a form application, permitting conditions,
insurance and security requirements, and rates and fees.
   (B)   Design standards. Any design standards established by the Director
shall be reasonable and nondiscriminatory, and include additional installation
and construction details that do not conflict with this subchapter, including,
but not limited to, a requirement that: an industry standard pole load analysis
be completed and submitted to the city, indicating that the wireless support
structure to which the small wireless facility is to be attached will safely
support the load, and small wireless facility equipment on new and existing
wireless support structures be placed higher than 15 feet above ground level.
The Director shall additionally include the following in any design standards
established under this subchapter.
      (1)   Any wireless support structure installed in the public right-of-way
after May 31, 2017 may not exceed 50 feet above ground level, unless the city
agrees to a greater height, subject to local zoning regulations, and may be
subject to separation requirements in relation to other wireless support
structures.
      (2)   Any wireless support structure replacing an existing wireless
support structure that is more than 50 feet above ground level may be placed at
the height of the existing wireless support structure, unless the city agrees
to a greater height, subject to zoning regulations.
      (3)   Wireless facilities constructed in the public right-of-way after
May 31, 2017 may not extend more than ten feet above an existing wireless
support structure in place as of May 31, 2017.
      (4)   If necessary to collocate a small wireless facility, a wireless
provider may replace a decorative pole, if the replacement pole reasonably
conforms to the design and aesthetic qualities of the displaced decorative
pole.
      (5)   A wireless provider shall comply with the city’s requirements to
install facilities underground, including, without limitation, compliance with
§
94.27 of this code.
      (6)   All small wireless facilities collocated or wireless support
structures installed in a design district or historic district shall comply
with any design or concealment or other measures required by the city.
   (C)   Construction standards. Any construction standards established by the
Director shall include at least the following terms and conditions.
      (1)   Compliance with applicable law. To the extent this requirement is
not preempted or otherwise legally unenforceable, a permittee shall comply with
all applicable law and applicable industry standards.
      (2)   Prevent interference. A permittee shall collocate, install, and
continuously operate any authorized small wireless facilities and wireless
support structures in a manner that prevents interference with other wireless
facilities and other facilities in the right-of-way and the operation thereof.
With appropriate permissions from the Department, a permittee shall, as is
necessary for the safe and reliable operation, use, and maintenance of an
authorized small wireless facility or wireless support structure, maintain
trees as prescribed by standards promulgated by the Department.
      (3)   Other rights not affected. A permittee shall not construe a
contract, permit, correspondence, or other communication from the city as
affecting a right, privilege, or duty previously conferred or imposed by the
Department to or on another person.
      (4)   Restoration.
         (a)   A permittee, after any excavation of a public right-of-way,
shall provide for restoration of the affected public right-of-way and
surrounding areas, including the pavement and its foundation, to the same
condition that existed before the excavation. If a permittee fails to
adequately restore the public right-of-way within a specified date, the
Department may:
            1.   Itself restore the public right-of-way and recover from the
permittee the reasonable costs of the surface restoration; or
            2.   Recover from the permittee a reasonable degradation fee
associated with a decrease in the useful life of the public right-of-way caused
by the excavation.
         (b)   A permittee that disturbs uncultivated sod in the excavation or
obstruction of the public right-of-way shall plant grasses that are native to
the state and, wherever practicable, that are of the local eco-type, as part of
the restoration required under this section, unless the owner of the real
property over which the public right-of-way traverses objects. In restoring the
public right-of-way, the permittee shall consult with the Department of
Wildlife Conservation regarding the species of native grasses that conform to
the requirements of this division (C)(4)(b).
      (5)   Permittee’s liability. A permittee is solely responsible for the
risk and expense of the collocation of the permittee’s small wireless facility
and installing or replacing the permittee’s wireless support structure. The
city neither warrants nor represents that any area within the public right-of-
way is suitable for such collocation or installation or replacement. A
permittee shall accept the public right-of-way “as is” and “where is” and
assumes all risks related to any use. The city is not liable for damage to
small wireless facilities due to an event of damage to a wireless support
structure in the public right-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 98.040)
§ 90.38 SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Application form. The Director shall develop and make publicly
available a form application. To the extent possible, the Director shall allow
for applications to be consolidated pursuant to this section. A complete
application must be submitted for each small wireless facility permit desired.
   (B)   Consolidated applications. A wireless provider may apply for up to 15
small wireless facility permits in a consolidated application, provided all
small wireless facilities in the consolidated application are located within a
two-mile radius, consist of substantially similar equipment, and are to be
collocated on similar types of wireless support structures. The Department
shall review a consolidated application as allowed by this subchapter. If
necessary, the applied for small wireless facility permits in a consolidated
application may be approved or denied individually, but the Department may not
use the denial of one or more permits as a basis to deny all small wireless
facility permits in a consolidated application. Any small wireless facility
permits denied in a consolidated application shall be subject to a single
appeal.
   (C)   Information not required. The Department shall not require an
applicant to provide any information that:
      (1)   Has previously been provided to the Department by the applicant in
a small wireless facility permit application, if the applicant provides
specific reference to the previous application containing the information
sought by the Department and the previous information remains unchanged; and
      (2)   Is not reasonably necessary to review a small wireless facility
permit application for compliance with generally applicable and reasonable
health, safety, and welfare regulations, and to demonstrate compliance with
applicable Federal Communications Commission regulations governing audio
frequency exposure, or other information required by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 98.030)
§ 90.39 SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY APPLICATION REVIEW PROCESS.
   (A)   Eligibility for review. An application shall be eligible for review if
the application conforms to the general standards adopted by the Director.
   (B)   Authorization. A small wireless facility permit issued pursuant to any
application processed hereunder shall authorize:
      (1)   The installation, mounting, modification, operation, and
replacement of a small wireless facility in the public right-of-way or city-
owned property; or
      (2)   Construction of a new, or replacement of an existing, wireless
support structure, and collocation of a small wireless facility on the wireless
support structure.
   (C)   Review process. An application submitted pursuant to this section
shall be reviewed as follows.
      (1)   Submission of application. An applicant shall submit a complete
application accompanied by the appropriate application fee as set forth in §
90.49 to the Department. Prior to submitting a small wireless facility permit
application, an applicant shall inspect any wireless support structure on which
it proposes to collocate a small wireless facility and determine, based on a
structural engineering analysis by a state registered professional engineer,
the suitability of the wireless support structure for the proposed collocation.
The structural engineering analysis shall be submitted to the Department with
the application, and shall certify that the wireless support structure is
capable of safely supporting the proposed small wireless facility considering
conditions at the proposed location, including the condition of the public
right-of-way, hazards from traffic, exposure to wind, snow, and/or ice, and
other conditions affecting the proposed small wireless facility that may be
reasonably anticipated.
      (2)   Application review period. The Department shall, within 60 days
after the date a complete application for the collocation is submitted to the
Department, issue or deny a small wireless facility permit pursuant to the
application. The Department shall, within 90 days after the date a complete
application for a new or replacement wireless support structure in addition to
the collocation of a small wireless facility is submitted to the Department,
issue or deny a small wireless facility permit pursuant to the application. If
the Department receives applications within a single seven-day period from one
or more applicants seeking approval of small wireless facility permits for more
than 30 small wireless facilities or ten wireless support structures, the
Department may extend the 90-day review period of this subchapter by an
additional 30 days. If the Department elects to invoke this extension, it must
inform in writing any applicant to whom the extension will be applied.
      (3)   Completeness determination. The Department shall review a small
wireless facility permit application for completeness following submittal. The
Department shall provide a written notice of incompleteness to the applicant
within ten days of receipt of the application, clearly and specifically
delineating all missing documents or information. Information delineated in the
notice is limited to documents or information publicly required as of the date
of application and reasonably related to the Department’s determination of
whether the proposed equipment falls within the definition of a small wireless
facility and whether the proposed deployment satisfies all health, safety, and
welfare regulations applicable to the small wireless facility permit request
complies with this subchapter and applicable standards promulgated by the
Department. If an applicant fails to respond to the Department’s notice of
incompleteness within 90 days, the application shall be deemed expired and no
small wireless facility permit shall be issued. Upon an applicant’s submittal
of additional documents or information in response to a notice of
incompleteness, the Department shall within ten days of submission notify the
applicant in writing of any information requested in the initial notice of
incompleteness that is still missing. Second or subsequent notices of
incompleteness may not specify documents or information that were not
delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.
      (4)   Reset and tolling of review period. In the event that a small
wireless facility permit application is incomplete, and the Department has
provided a timely and complete written notice of incompleteness, then the
applicable review period shall be reset, pending the time between when a notice
is mailed and the submittal of information in compliance with the notice.
Subsequent notices shall toll the applicable review period. An applicant and
the Department can mutually agree in writing to toll the applicable review
period at any time.
      (5)   Moratorium prohibited. Notwithstanding any applicable law to the
contrary, including, but not limited to, M.S. §§ 394.34 and 462.355, as they
may be amended from time to time, the Department shall not establish any
moratorium with respect to the filing, receiving, or processing of applications
for small wireless facility permits, or issuing or approving small wireless
facility permits.
      (6)   Nondiscriminatory processing of applications. The Department shall
ensure that any application processed under this subchapter is performed on a
nondiscriminatory basis.
      (7)   Permit not required. A permittee shall provide 30 days advance
written notice to the Department, but shall not be required to obtain a small
wireless facility permit, or pay an additional small wireless facility permit
fee for:
         (a)   Routine maintenance;
         (b)   The replacement of a small wireless facility with a small
wireless facility that is substantially similar to or smaller in size; or
         (c)   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or
replacement of a micro wireless facility that is strung on a cable between
existing utility poles, in compliance with the National Electrical Safety Code.
(Prior Code, § 98.050)
§ 90.40 SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY PERMIT CONDITIONS.
   (A)   General conditions of approval. In processing and approving a small
wireless facility permit, the Department shall condition its approval on
compliance with:
      (1)   Generally applicable and reasonable health, safety, and welfare
regulations consistent with the city’s public right-of-way management;
      (2)   Reasonable accommodations for a decorative pole;
      (3)   Any reasonable restocking, replacement, or relocation requirements
when a new wireless support structure is placed in the public right-of-way;
      (4)   Construction of the proposed small wireless facility within six
months from the date the small wireless facility permit is issued;
      (5)   Obtaining additional authorization for use of the public right-of-
way for the construction of wireline backhaul facilities or any other wired
facilities;
      (6)   Compliance with the city’s general standards; and
      (7)   Compliance with all applicable law.
   (B)   Generally applicable and reasonable health, safety, and welfare
regulations. Generally applicable and reasonable health, safety, and welfare
regulations for purposes of this section include, without limitation, the
following:
      (1)   A structural engineering analysis by a state registered
professional engineer certifying that a wireless support structure can
reasonably support a proposed small wireless facility considering the
conditions of the street, the anticipated hazards from traffic to be
encountered at the proposed location, and any wind, snow, ice, or other
conditions that may be reasonably anticipated at the proposed location;
      (2)   A determination by the Department that, based upon reasonable
engineering judgment, a proposed small wireless facility is of excessive size
or weight or would otherwise subject a wireless support structure to an
unacceptable level of stress;
      (3)   A determination by the Department that, based upon reasonable
engineering judgment, a proposed small wireless facility would cause undue harm
to the reliability or integrity of the city’s electrical infrastructure or
would likely violate generally applicable electrical or engineering principles;
      (4)   A determination by the Department that a proposed small wireless
facility presents an unreasonable safety hazard as specifically and reasonably
identified by the Department;
      (5)   A determination by the Department that a proposed small wireless
facility impairs the city’s ability to operate or maintain the public right-of-
way;
      (6)   A determination by the Department that a proposed small wireless
facility cannot be placed due to insufficient capacity and the infrastructure
cannot be modified or enlarged consistent with the requirements of this
subchapter and the Department’s general standards; or
      (7)   A determination by the Department that a proposed small wireless
facility is in violation of the National Electric Safety Code or applicable
law.
   (C)   Authorized use. An approval of a small wireless facility permit under
this section authorizes the collocation of a small wireless facility on an
existing wireless support structure to provide wireless services, or the
installation or replacement of a wireless support structure and collocation of
a small wireless facility, and shall not be construed to confer authorization
to:
      (1)   Provide any service other than wireless service;
      (2)   Construct, install, maintain, or operate any small wireless
facility or wireless support structure in a right-of-way other than the
approved small wireless facility or wireless support structure; or
      (3)   Install, place, maintain, or operate a wireline backhaul facility
in the public right-of-way.
   (D)   Other permits required. Any person desiring to obstruct or perform
excavation in a public right-of-way within the city for purposes of collocating
a small wireless facility or installing or replacing a wireless support
structure shall, consistent with §
94.11 of this code, obtain the necessary permit from the city prior to
conducting any such activities.
   (E)   Exclusive arrangements prohibited. The city shall not enter into an
exclusive arrangement with any person for use of a public right-of-way for the
collocation of a small wireless facility or for the installation or operation
of a wireless support structure.
   (F)   Unauthorized small wireless facility. No person shall install, mount,
modify, operate, or replace a small wireless facility in the public right-of-
way or on city-owned property, or install or replace a wireless support
structure without first obtaining a small wireless facility permit from the
city.
      (1)   If an unauthorized small wireless facility or wireless support
structure is discovered, the Department shall provide written notice to the
owner of the unauthorized small wireless facility within five days of discovery
of the unauthorized small wireless facility. If an owner of an unauthorized
small wireless facility or wireless support structure cannot be reasonably
identified, the Department need not provide any written notice.
      (2)   If the owner of an unauthorized small wireless facility or wireless
support structure can be reasonably identified, the Department may remove the
unauthorized small wireless facility or wireless support structure without
incurring liability to the owner of the small wireless facility or wireless
support structure and at the owner’s sole expense no sooner than five days
after providing notice of the Department’s discovery of the unauthorized small
wireless facility or wireless support structure to the owner.
      (3)   If the owner of an unauthorized small wireless facility or wireless
support structure cannot be reasonably identified, the Department may remove
the unauthorized small wireless facility or wireless support structure without
incurring liability to the owner of the small wireless facility or wireless
support structure and at the owner’s sole expense.
   (G)   Relocation. The Department may require a permittee to relocate or
modify a small wireless facility or wireless support structure in a public
right-of-way or on city-owned property in a timely manner and at the
permittee’s cost if the Department determines that such relocation or
modification is required to protect public health, safety and welfare, or to
prevent interference with other facilities authorized pursuant to this chapter,
or to prevent interference with public works projects of the Department.
   (H)   Security required. Each permittee shall submit and maintain with the
Department a bond, cash deposit, or other security acceptable to the
Department, in a form and amount determined by the Department in accordance
with the general standards, securing the faithful performance of the
obligations of the permittee and its agents under any and all small wireless
facility permits issued to the permittee under this subchapter. If, in
accordance with this subchapter, the Department deducts any amounts from such
security, the permittee must restore the full amount of the security prior to
the department’s issuance of any subsequent small wireless facility permit. The
Department shall return or cancel the security should the permittee cease to
operate any small wireless facilities in the public right-of-way.
   (I)   Payment of fees required. A small wireless facility permit shall not
be issued prior to the complete payment of all applicable fees.
   (J)   Notice of assignment required. A permittee, upon or within ten
calendar days after transfer, assignment, conveyance, or sublet of an
attachment that changes the permit and/or billing entity or ownership
responsibilities, shall provide written notification to the Department.
(Prior Code, § 98.060)
§ 90.41 SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY PERMIT TERM.
   A small wireless facility permit for a small wireless facility in the public
right-of-way shall have a term equal to the length of time that the small
wireless facility is in use, unless the small wireless facility permit is
revoked under this subchapter or is otherwise allowed to be limited by
applicable law. The term for all other small wireless facility permits shall be
for a period of up to ten years.
(Prior Code, § 98.070)
§ 90.42 DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF A SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY PERMIT.
   (A)   Permit denial. The Department may deny any small wireless facility
permit if the applicant does not comply with all provisions of this subchapter,
or if the Department determines that the denial is necessary to protect public
health, safety, and welfare, or when necessary to protect the public right-of-
way and its current use.
   (B)   Permit revocation. The Department may revoke a small wireless facility
permit, with or without refund, in the event of a substantial breach of the
terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule, or regulation, or any
material condition of the small wireless facility permit. A substantial breach
includes, but is not limited to, the following:
      (1)   A material violation by act or omission of a provision of a small
wireless facility permit;
      (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of a small
wireless facility permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any
fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens;
      (3)   A material misrepresentation of fact in a small wireless facility
permit application;
      (4)   A failure to correct, in a timely manner, collocation of a small
wireless facility or installation or replacement of a wireless support
structure that does not conform to applicable standards, conditions, or codes,
upon inspection and notification by the Department of the faulty condition;
      (5)   A permittee fails to make timely payments of any fees due, and does
not correct such failure within 20 days after receipt of written notice by the
city of such failure;
      (6)   A permittee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its
debts, is adjudged bankrupt, or all or part of its small wireless facilities or
wireless support structures are sold under an instrument to secure a debt and
is not redeemed by the permittee within 60 days; or
      (7)   A failure to complete collocation of a small wireless facility or
installation, modification, or replacement of a wireless support structure
within 270 days of the date a small wireless facility permit authorizing such
activity is granted, unless the Department and the permittee agree to extend
the 270-day period or there is a lack of commercial power or communications
transport infrastructure to the installation site.
   (C)   Written notice required. Any denial or revocation of a small wireless
facility permit shall be made in writing and shall document the basis for the
denial or revocation. The Department shall notify the applicant or permittee in
writing within three days of a decision to deny or revoke a small wireless
facility permit. If a small wireless facility permit application is denied, the
applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the Department and submit its
application. If the applicant resubmits the application within 30 days of
receiving written notice of the denial, it may not be charged an additional
filing or processing fee. The Department must approve or deny the revised
application within 30 days after the revised application is submitted. If small
wireless facility permit is revoked, the small wireless facility or wireless
support structure shall be subject to removal in accordance with §
90.45.
(Prior Code, § 98.080)
§ 90.43 CITY INSPECTION OF A SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY OR WIRELESS SUPPORT
STRUCTURE.
   (A)   Inspection permitted. The Department may inspect, at any time, a
permittee’s collocation of a small wireless facility or installation or
replacement of a wireless support structure. The Department shall determine
during an inspection whether the permittee’s small wireless facility or
wireless support structure is in accordance with the requirements of the
permittee’s applicable small wireless facility permit and other applicable law.
   (B)   Suspension of activities. During an inspection, if the Department
determines that a permittee has violated any material term of the permittee’s
small wireless facility permit or this subchapter, the Department may suspend
the permittee’s small wireless facility permit. The Department shall provide
prompt written notice of any suspension to a permittee, including the
violations giving rise to the suspension. A suspension under this division (B)
is effective until a permittee corrects the alleged violation(s), at the
permittee’s sole expense. If the violation(s) are not corrected within 30 days
after the date of such notice, the small wireless facility or wireless support
structure shall be subject to removal in accordance with §
90.45. A permittee may appeal any suspension issued under this division (B) to
the Department as provided in §
90.46.
(Prior Code, § 98.090)
§ 90.44 ABANDONMENT.
   Where a small wireless facility or wireless support structure is not
properly maintained or has not been used for the primary purpose of providing
wireless services for 12 consecutive months, the Department may designate the
small wireless facility or wireless support structure as abandoned. The
Department shall provide written notice to a permittee within ten days of the
permittee’s small wireless facility or wireless support structure being
designated as abandoned.
(Prior Code, § 98.100)
§ 90.45 REMOVAL OF A SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY OR WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE.
   (A)   Removal permitted. The Department may remove, at permittee’s expense,
or require a permittee to remove, any small wireless facility or wireless
support structure if:
      (1)   The small wireless facility permit or wireless support structure
permit is revoked under this subchapter or expires without renewal; or
      (2)   The small wireless facility or wireless support structure is
designated by the Department as abandoned under §
90.44.
   (B)   Notice to permittee; time to remove. The Department shall provide
written notice to the permittee that it must remove a small wireless facility
or wireless support structure under this section, including the reasons
therefor. If the permittee does not remove the small wireless facility or
wireless support structure within 30 days after the date of such notice, the
Department may remove it at the permittee’s expense without further notice to
the permittee.
(Prior Code, § 98.110)
§ 90.46 APPEALS.
   An applicant or permittee may have the denial or revocation of a small
wireless facility permit, or fees and costs required by this subchapter
reviewed, upon written request, by the City Council, or its designee. The City
Council, or its designee, shall act on a timely written request at its next
regularly scheduled meeting. A decision by the City Council, or its designee,
affirming a denial, revocation, or fee shall be in writing and supported by
written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision.
(Prior Code, § 98.120)
§ 90.47 INSURANCE.
   (A)   Minimum coverage. The Department shall require that each permittee
maintain in full force and effect, throughout the term of a small wireless
facility permit, an insurance policy or policies issued by an insurance company
or companies satisfactory to the city’s Risk Manager. Such policy or policies
shall, at a minimum, afford insurance covering all of the permittee’s
operations, vehicles, employees, agents, subcontractors, successors, and
assigns as follows:
      (1)   Workers’ compensation, in statutory amounts, with employers’
liability limits not less than $500,000 each accident, injury, or illness;
      (2)   Commercial general liability insurance with limits not less than
$2,000,000 each occurrence combined single limit for bodily injury and property
damage, including contractual liability, personal injury, products, and
completed operations;
      (3)   Commercial automobile liability insurance with limits not less than
$2,000,000 each occurrence combined single limit for bodily injury and property
damage, including owned, non-owned and hired auto coverage, as applicable; and
      (4)   Contractors’ pollution liability insurance, on an occurrence form,
with limits not less than $1,000,000 each occurrence combined single limit for
bodily injury and property damage and any deductible not to exceed $25,000 each
occurrence.
   (B)   Insurance requirements. Each permittee’s insurance policy or policies
are subject to the following.
      (1)   Said policy or policies shall include the city and its officers and
employees jointly and severally as additional insureds, shall apply as primary
insurance, shall stipulate that no other insurance effected by the city will be
called on to contribute to a loss covered thereunder, and shall provide for
severability of interests.
      (2)   Said policy or policies shall provide that an act or omission of
one insured, which would void or otherwise reduce coverage, shall not reduce or
void the coverage as to any other insured. Said policy or policies shall afford
full coverage for any claims based on acts, omissions, injury, or damage which
occurred or arose, or the onset of which occurred or arose, in whole or in
part, during the policy period.
      (3)   Said policy or policies shall be endorsed to provide 30 calendar
days advance written notice of cancellation or any material change to the
Department.
      (4)   Should any of the required insurance be provided under a claims-
made form, a permittee shall maintain such coverage continuously throughout the
term of a small wireless facility permit, and, without lapse, for a period of
three years beyond the expiration or termination of the small wireless facility
permit, to the effect that, should occurrences during the term of the small
wireless facility permit give rise to claims made after expiration or
termination of the small wireless facility permit, such claims shall be covered
by such claims-made policies.
      (5)   Should any of the required insurance be provided under a form of
coverage that includes a general annual aggregate limit or provides that claims
investigation or legal defense costs be included in such general annual
aggregate limit, such general aggregate limit shall be double the occurrence or
claims limits specified herein.
   (C)   Indemnity obligation. Such insurance shall in no way relieve or
decrease a permittee’s or its agent’s obligation to indemnify the city pursuant
to this subchapter.
   (D)   Proof of insurance. Before the Department will issue a small wireless
facility permit, an applicant shall furnish to the Department certificates of
insurance and additional insured policy endorsements with insurers that are
authorized to do business in the state and that are satisfactory to the
Department evidencing all coverages set forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 98.130)
§ 90.48 INDEMNIFICATION AND DEFENSE OF CITY.
   (A)   Indemnification of city. As a condition of issuance of a small
wireless facility permit, each permittee agrees on its behalf and on behalf of
its agents, successors, or assigns, to indemnify, defend, protect, and hold
harmless the city from and against any and all claims of any kind arising
against the city as a result of the issuance of the small wireless facility
permit including, but not limited to, a claim allegedly arising directly or
indirectly from the following:
      (1)   Any act, omission, or negligence of a permittee or its any agents,
successors, or assigns while engaged in the permitting or collocation of any
small wireless facility or installation or replacement of any wireless support
structure, or while in or about the public right-of-way that are subject to the
small wireless facility permit for any reason connected in any way whatsoever
with the performance of the work authorized by the small wireless facility
permit, or allegedly resulting directly or indirectly from the permitting or
collocation of any small wireless facility or installation or replacement of
any wireless support structure authorized under the small wireless facility
permit;
      (2)   Any accident, damage, death, or injury to any of a permittee’s
contractors or subcontractors, or any officers, agents, or employees of either
of them, while engaged in the performance of collocation of any small wireless
facility or installation or replacement of any wireless support structure
authorized by a small wireless facility permit, or while in or about the public
right-of-way that are subject to the small wireless facility permit, for any
reason connected with the performance of the work authorized by the small
wireless facility permit, including from exposure to radio frequency emissions;
      (3)   Any accident, damage, death, or injury to any person or accident,
damage, or injury to any real or personal property in, upon, or in any way
allegedly connected with the collocation of any small wireless facility or
installation or replacement of any wireless support structure authorized by a
small wireless facility permit, or while in or about the public right-of-way
that are subject to the small wireless facility permit, from any causes or
claims arising at any time, including any causes or claims arising from
exposure to radio frequency emissions; and
      (4)   Any release or discharge, or threatened release or discharge, of
any hazardous material caused or allowed by a permittee or its agents about,
in, on, or under the public right-of-way.
   (B)   Defense of city. Each permittee agrees that, upon the request of the
Department, the permittee, at no cost or expense to the city, shall indemnify,
defend, and hold harmless the city against any claims as set forth in this
section, regardless of the alleged negligence of the city or any other party,
except only for claims resulting directly from the sole negligence or willful
misconduct of the city. Each permittee acknowledges and agrees that it has an
immediate and independent obligation to defend the city from any claims that
actually or potentially fall within the indemnity provision, even if the
allegations are or may be groundless, false, or fraudulent, which obligation
arises at the time such claim is tendered to the permittee or its agent by the
city and continues at all times thereafter. Each permittee further agrees that
the city shall have a cause of action for indemnity against the permittee for
any costs the city may be required to pay as a result of defending or
satisfying any claims that arise from or in connection with a small wireless
facility permit, except only for claims resulting directly from the sole
negligence or willful misconduct of the city. Each permittee further agrees
that the indemnification obligations assumed under a small wireless facility
permit shall survive its expiration or completion of collocation of any small
wireless facility authorized by the small wireless facility permit.
   (C)   Additional requirements. The Department may specify in a small
wireless facility permit such additional indemnification requirements as are
necessary to protect the city from risks of liability associated with the
permittee’s collocation of any small wireless facility or installation or
replacement of any wireless support structure.
(Prior Code, § 98.140)
§ 90.49 FEES AND COSTS.
   (A)   Application fees. The Department shall charge a fee for reviewing and
processing a small wireless facility permit application. These fees shall be
identified in Chapter 33 of this code. The purpose of this fee is to enable the
Department to recover its costs directly associated with reviewing a small
wireless facility permit application. Commencing January 1, 2020, the
Department shall adjust the application fees annually by the consumer price
index for the Minneapolis-Saint Paul area.
   (B)   Annual small wireless facility permit fee. The Department shall charge
an annual small wireless permit fee for each small wireless facility permit
issued to a permittee. The annual small wireless permit fee shall be determined
by the director and listed in the city’s fee schedule. The annual small
wireless permit fee shall be based upon the recovery of the city’s rights-of-
way management costs.
   (C)   City-owned wireless support structure fees. The Department shall
charge a fee or fees to the owner of any small wireless facility collocated on
a wireless support structure owned by the city or its assigned located on the
public rights-of-way. These fees shall be identified in Chapter 33.
   (D)   City-owned property fees. The Department shall charge an annual fee
for collocating small wireless facilities on city-owned property not located in
the public right-of-way. The Department shall determine a reasonable and
nondiscriminatory annual fee on a per location and per request basis.
   (E)   Discretion to require additional fees. In instances where the review
of a small wireless facility permit application is or will be unusually costly
to the Department, the Director, in his or her discretion, may, after
consulting with other applicable city departments, agencies, boards, or
commissions, require an applicant to pay a sum in excess of the other fee
amounts charged pursuant to this section. This additional sum shall be
sufficient to recover the actual, reasonable costs incurred by the Department
and/or other city departments, agencies, boards, or commissions, in connection
with a small wireless facility permit application and shall be charged on a
time and materials basis. Whenever additional fees are charged, the Director,
upon request, shall provide in writing the basis for the additional fees and an
estimate of the additional fees. The Department may not require a fee imposed
under this subchapter through the provision of in-kind services by an applicant
as a condition of consent to use to city’s public right-of-way or to obtain a
small wireless facility permit.
   (F)   Reimbursement of city costs. The Department may determine that it
requires the services of an expert in order to evaluate a small wireless
facility permit application. In such cases, the Department shall not issue a
small wireless facility permit pursuant to the application unless the applicant
agrees to reimburse the Department for the actual, reasonable costs incurred
for the services of a technical expert.
(Prior Code, § 98.150)
CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS
Section
Dogs; Generally
   
91.01   Immunization for rabies
   
91.02   Releasing impounded dog
   
91.03   Special multiple dog licenses
Kennels
   
91.15   License required
   
91.16   Conditions
Animal Control
   
91.30   Definitions
   
91.31   Destruction of domesticated animals prohibited
   
91.32   Dangerous or diseased animals
   
91.33   Running at large prohibited
   
91.34   Droppings
   
91.35   Enforcement and impounding
   
91.36   Reclaiming animals
   
91.37   Quarantine
   
91.38   Disposition of animals
   
91.39   Accounting of animals
   
91.40   Appeals
   
91.41   Report of dog bite
Animals Prohibited as Nuisances
   
91.55   Habitual barking
   
91.56   Keeping of certain animals
   
91.57   Feeding of certain animals
   
91.58   Interference with city personnel
DOGS; GENERALLY
§ 91.01 IMMUNIZATION FOR RABIES.
   (A)   All dogs in the city over the age of six months shall be vaccinated
for rabies and shall be re-vaccinated according to standard veterinary
practices thereafter. A certificate from the veterinarian vaccinating said dogs
shall be exhibited to the animal control authority upon demand.
   (B)   Each dog shall wear a sturdy collar for aid in identification. The dog
must wear a veterinarian’s metal tag showing proof of current rabies
vaccination. In lieu of a veterinarian’s metal tag, the dog’s collar must
contain identification including the name and phone number of the dog’s owner.
At the owner’s discretion, a tattoo or implanted microchip may be used in lieu
of the collar and tag.
(Prior Code, § 91.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.02 RELEASING IMPOUNDED DOGS.
   Any dog impounded when not properly licensed will be released only on
payment of the appropriate license fee. This may include the impounding fee,
and related costs, and the presentation of a current rabies immunization record
from a licensed veterinarian.
(Prior Code, § 91.04)
§ 91.03 SPECIAL MULTIPLE DOG LICENSES.
   Upon issuance of a special multiple dog license, three dogs over six months
of age may be kept at a licensed premises upon compliance with the following:
   (A)   Written approval. The filing of written approval of the occupants from
at least 75% of the residential property within 200 feet of the licensed
premises;
   (B)   Fenced yard. The yard of the licensed premises is fenced in such a
manner as to restrain dogs on the premises from leaving the yard;
   (C)   Nuisance. Dogs kept on the licensed premises do not create a nuisance
by excess barking or by creating unsanitary conditions;
   (D)   Fee. Payment of a yearly license fee pursuant to
Chapter 33; and
   (E)   Denial of application. The Chief of Police may deny requests for
renewal of a special multiple dog license based upon complaints received during
the preceding year. In the event of such a denial, the applicant may, within
ten days of being advised of the denial, request, in writing, a hearing before
the City Council on the denial.
(Prior Code, § 91.05)
KENNELS
§ 91.15 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person may keep or harbor in any place within the city, except in a
licensed kennel, more than two dogs over the age of six months. Any premises
which are kept and maintained for the business of selling, boarding, breeding,
showing, or treating dogs, and any place where more than two dogs over the age
of six months are habitually kept, is deemed to be a KENNEL. No premises may be
kept or maintained as a kennel without a kennel license issued by the city
after payment of the license fee set forth in Chapter 33.
(Prior Code, § 91.20) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.16 CONDITIONS.
   Kennels must be kept in a clean, sanitary, and well-ventilated condition at
all times. All kennels must be open to inspection by city official’s at all
reasonable times. No kennel will be maintained within the boundaries of a
residential district.
(Prior Code, § 91.21) Penalty, see §
10.99
ANIMAL CONTROL
§ 91.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APIARY. The assembly of one or more colonies of bees at a single location.
   BEEKEEPER. A person who owns or has charge of one or more colonies of bees.
   BEEKEEPING EQUIPMENT. Anything used in the operation of an apiary, such as
hive bodies, supers, frames, top and bottom boards and extractors.
   COLONY. An aggregate of bees consisting principally of workers, but having,
when perfect, one queen and at times drones, brood, combs, and honey.
   DANGEROUS DOG. Per M.S. § 347.50, Subd 2, any dog that has:
      (1)   Without provocation, inflicted substantial bodily, as defined by
M.S. § 609.02, Subd. 7a, harm on a human being on public or private property;
      (2)   Killed a domestic animal without provocation while off the owner's
property; or
      (3)   Been found to be potentially dangerous, and after the owner has
notice that the dog is potentially dangerous, the dog aggressively bites,
attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals.
   DOMESTICATED ANIMALS. House pets such as dogs, cats, and birds, and other
common pets kept in small containments which can be contained within a
principal structure throughout the entire year, provided that containment can
be accomplished without special modification to the structure requiring a
building permit from the city. In addition, the term DOMESTIC ANIMALS includes
birds (other than chickens, ducks, and geese) and rabbits normally sheltered
outside the home.
   FARM ANIMALS. Cattle, hogs, bees, sheep, goats, chickens, turkeys, horses,
and other animals commonly accepted as farm animals in the state, and/or which
are kept for agricultural purposes or food production.
   FLYWAY BARRIER. A barrier that raises the flight path of bees as they come
and go from a hive.
   HIVE. The receptacle inhabited by a colony of bees that is manufactured for
that purpose.
   HONEY BEE or HONEYBEE. All life stages of the common domestic honey bee, the
species Apis mellifera.
   LOT. An area of land intended for occupancy or use as permitted in the
zoning code, and otherwise meeting the requirements of the zoning code.
   NUCLEUS COLONY. A small quantity of bees with a queen housed in a smaller
than usual hive box designed for a particular purpose.
   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG. Per M.S. § 347.50, Subd. 3, any dog that:
      (1)   When unprovoked, inflicts bites on a human or domestic animal on
public or private property;
      (2)   When unprovoked, chases or approaches a person, including a person
on a bicycle, upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public or private property,
other than the dog owner's property, in an apparent attitude of attack; or
      (3)   Has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack
unprovoked, causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of humans or
domestic animals.
   PROPER ENCLOSURE. Securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and
locked pen or structure suitable to prevent the animal from escaping and
providing protection from the elements for the dog. A proper enclosure does not
include a porch, patio, or any part of a house, garage, or other structure that
would allow the dog to exit of its own volition, or any house or structure in
which windows are open or in which door or window screens are the only
obstacles that prevent the dog from exiting.
   SUBSTANTIAL BODILY HARM. Per M.S. § 609.02, Subd. 7a, bodily injury which
involves a temporary but substantial disfigurement, or which causes a temporary
but substantial loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or
organ, or which causes a fracture of any bodily member.
   UNDEVELOPED PARCEL. Any idle land that is not improved or actually in the
process of being improved with residential, commercial, industrial, church,
park, school or governmental facilities or other structures or improvements
intended for human occupancy, and the grounds maintained in associations
therewith. The term shall be deemed to include property developed exclusively
as a street or highway or property used for commercial agricultural purposes.
   WILD ANIMAL. Any animal which is not a domesticated animal as defined
herein, or which is not naturally tame or gentle, but is of a wild nature or
disposition, or which would constitute a danger to human life or property. The
term includes animals and birds, the keeping of which is licensed by the  state
or federal government, such as, wolves, raptors, and pheasants. By way of
example and not of limitation, the term includes: ducks, pheasants, geese,
turkeys, birds of prey, squirrels, chipmunks, raccoons, coyotes, weasels, wild
ferrets, sheep, goats, swine, monkeys, chimpanzees, and deer.
(Ord. 2022-07, passed 10-11-2022; Ord. 2024-02, passed 7-9-2024; Ord. 2025-02,
passed 4-22-2025)
§ 91.31 DESTRUCTION OF DOMESTICATED ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   No person may kill or destroy any dog or other domesticated animal found
running at large within the city, except as authorized under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 91.35) (Ord. 08-007, passed 12-8-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.32 DANGEROUS OR DISEASED ANIMALS.
   (A)   Incorporation by reference. M.S. §§ 347.50 through 347.565, as they
may be amended from time to time, are hereby incorporated by reference and
adopted as part of this chapter. Incorporation of said statutes shall not be a
release by the city of any powers or authority which it has without such
incorporation.
   (B)   Designation. Police officers or others designated by the City Manager
may declare a dog to be a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog as
defined by M.S. § 347.50, as it may be amended from time to time. If a dog is
declared a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog, a notice shall be
delivered or mailed to the owner, informing the owner of the designation, the
basis for the designation, the procedures for appealing the designation as set
forth in §
91.40, and the result of a failure to contest the designation as set forth in §
91.38. No person may own a dangerous dog in the city unless the dog is
registered and licensed with the city as such.
   (C)   Requirements for licensing a dangerous dog. The City Manager, or
designee, will, upon application by the owner, issue a certificate of
registration to the owner of a dangerous dog if the owner presents evidence
that:
      (1)   A proper enclosure exists for the dangerous animal;
      (2)   A warning sign provided by the city, to inform children that there
is a dangerous dog on the property, has been placed on the animal owner's
property. The warning symbol must be the uniform symbol provided by the
commissioner of public safety. The city may charge the registrant a reasonable
fee to cover its administrative costs and the cost of the warning symbol;
      (3)   The owner has procured a surety bond issued by a surety company
authorized to do business in Minnesota, in a form acceptable to the city in at
least the sum of $300,000 payable to any person injured by the animal or,
alternatively, the owner has in place a policy of insurance providing the same
protection; and
      (4)   The owner of a dangerous animal must have had an identification
microchip implanted in the dangerous animal, and the city has been provided
with the name of the microchip manufacturer and identification number of the
microchip must be provided to the animal control authority. If the microchip is
not implanted by the owner, it may be implanted by the animal control
authority. In either case, all costs related to purchase and implantation of
the microchip must be borne by the dog's owner.
   (D)   Dangerous dog designation review. Beginning six months after an animal
is declared dangerous; an owner may request annually that the animal control
authority review the designation. The owner must provide evidence that the
animal's behavior has changed due to the animal's age, neutering, environment,
completion of obedience training that includes modification of aggressive
behavior, or other factors. If the animal control authority finds sufficient
evidence that the animal's behavior has changed, the authority may amend the
dangerous dog designation to potentially dangerous dog.
   (E)   Regulation of dangerous dogs. So long as the dangerous dog assignment
is in effect upon the animal:
      (1)   An owner of a dangerous animal shall keep the animal, while on the
owner's property, in a proper enclosure. If the dangerous animal is outside the
proper enclosure, the animal must be muzzled and restrained by a substantial
chain or leash, which may not exceed six feet in length. The chain or leash
must be under the control of an individual 18 years of age or older.
      (2)   An owner of a dangerous animal must renew the registration of the
animal annually until it is deceased. Renewal of registration must include
proof of up-to-date rabies vaccinations.
      (3)   An owner of a dangerous animal must notify the city in writing of
the animal's death or its transfer to a new location within 30 days of death or
transfer, and must execute an affidavit of death or transfer as requested by
the city.
      (4)   An owner of a dangerous animal must have the animal sterilized at
the owner's expense. The owner must provide proof of sterilization of the
animal to the city. If the owner does not have the animal sterilized within 30
days of the dangerous animal determination, the animal control authority shall
seize the animal and have the animal sterilized at the owner's expense.
      (5)   The owner of a dangerous animal who rents property from another,
must notify the property owner, prior to signing the lease agreement and at the
time of any lease renewal that the person owns a dangerous animal that will
also reside at the property.
      (6)   A person that transfers a dangerous animal must notify the new
owner that the animal has been identified as dangerous, and must also notify
the city in writing, providing the new owner's name, address and telephone
number.
      (7)   The city shall seize a dangerous animal if, after 14 days after the
owner has notice that the animal is dangerous, the animal is not validly
registered as a dangerous animal or the owner has not secured the required
liability insurance or surety coverage. The city may seize a dangerous animal
if any other of the requirements contained in this division have not been met.
A seized animal may be reclaimed upon payment of impounding and confinement
costs and proof that the requirements of this section have been met. An animal
not reclaimed within 14 days will be destroyed, and the owner will be liable
for all costs incurred in confining and disposing of the animal. A person
claiming an interest in a seized animal may prevent disposition of the animal
by posting security in an amount sufficient to provide for the animal's actual
cost of care and keeping. The security must be posted within 14 days of the
seizure inclusive of the date of the seizure.
   (F)   Exemption. Animals may not be declared dangerous if the threat,
injury, or damage was sustained by a person:
      (1)   Who was committing, at the time, a willful trespass or other tort
upon the premises occupied by the owner of the animal;
      (2)   Who was provoking, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal or
who can be shown to have repeatedly, in the past, provoked, tormented, abused,
or assaulted the animal; or
      (3)   Who was committing or attempting to commit a crime.
   (G)   Registration fee. The annual fee to obtain a certificate of
registration for a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall be per fee
schedule.
   (H)   Potentially dangerous dogs.
      (1)   If a dog determined to meet the definition, per M.S. § 347.50, as
it may be amended from time to time, of a potentially dangerous dog repeats, at
any point following the determination, any of the criteria established to make
the determination, the dog shall be considered a dangerous dog.
      (2)   Potentially dangerous dog designation review. Beginning six months
after an animal is declared potentially dangerous; an owner may request
annually that the animal control authority review the designation. The owner
must provide evidence that the animal's behavior has changed due to the
animal's age, neutering, environment, completion of obedience training that
includes modification of aggressive behavior, or other factors. If the animal
control authority finds sufficient evidence that the animal's behavior has
changed, the authority may rescind the potentially dangerous dog designation.
(Prior Code, § 91.36) (Ord. 08-007, passed 12-8-2008; Ord. 2020-02, passed 9-8-
2020; Ord. 2025-04, passed 10-14-2025)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.33 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be a violation of this code for the dog or cat of any person who
owns, harbors, or keeps a dog or cat, to run at large. A person who owns,
harbors, or keeps a dog or cat which runs at large shall be guilty of a petty
misdemeanor. Dogs or cats on a leash and accompanied by a responsible person or
accompanied by and under the control and direction of a responsible person, so
as to be effectively restrained by command as by leash, shall be permitted in
streets or on public land unless the city has posted an area with signs reading
“Dogs or Cats Prohibited.”
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.34 DROPPINGS.
   It is the responsibility of the owner, keeper, or other person in control of
an animal to clean up any droppings of the animal and to dispose of the
droppings in a sanitary manner.
(Prior Code, § 91.38) (Ord. 08-007, passed 12-8-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.35 ENFORCEMENT AND IMPOUNDING.
   Police officers or others designated by the City Manager or designee will
enforce the provisions of this subchapter and the provisions of M.S. §§ 347.50
through 347.565, as they may be amended from time to time, incorporated herein.
A violation of the provisions of M.S. §§ 347.50 through 347.565, as they may be
amended from time to time, shall also be a violation of this subchapter. Any
person with authority to enforce this subchapter will impound animals kept or
running at large contrary to this subchapter, and any animal which is diseased,
vicious, rabid, or exposed to rabies may be impounded. If the animal cannot be
impounded without serious risk to the person attempting to impound the animal,
it may be killed immediately by a police officer or other person designated by
the City Manager or designee.
(Prior Code, § 91.39) (Ord. 08-007, passed 12-8-2008; Ord. 2020-02, passed 9-8-
2020)
§ 91.36 RECLAIMING ANIMALS.
   (A)   Notice. When an animal is impounded, the keeper of the pound will
provide the police with a description of the animal impounded within 24 hours
of the impoundment. The keeper must make a reasonable effort to determine
whether a license for the animal has been issued by the city or any adjoining
city, and to ascertain the name and address of the person to whom the license
was issued. If the license was issued during the preceding license year, then
before the animal may be disposed of, by sale or otherwise, the keeper of the
pound must give notice to the license holder not less than 24 hours before any
disposal of the animal. If the license holder gives notice to the keeper of
intent to reclaim the animal, the animal must be kept available for reclaiming
for 24 hours after receipt of that notice.
   (B)   Payment of fees. The city may employ or contract with a person or
organization for capturing and impounding animals not properly licensed,
collared, and tagged, and all other domesticated animals kept in violation of
this subchapter. All animals impounded will be kept with kind treatment and
sufficient food and water for their comfort for at least five regular business
days, unless sooner reclaimed by their owners. A dog or other domesticated
animal may be reclaimed upon payment by the license holder or owner of the
impounding fee set forth in
Chapter 33, plus the pound fee and cost of the food and care at the rates
established between the pound and the city, plus any medical costs reasonably
incurred while the animal was impounded. For each subsequent violation for the
same animal, the impounding fee will be double the amount of the previous
impounding fee. If an animal which is required to be licensed is unlicensed,
the regular license fee must be paid in addition to the foregoing amounts.
(Prior Code, § 91.40) (Ord. 08-007, passed 12-8-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.37 QUARANTINE.
   If a dog or other animal within the city bites any person or is reported as
diseased, the police may require that the animal be impounded at the designated
pound for observation for sufficient time to determine whether it is diseased.
The animal may not be killed or reclaimed and returned to the owner until
ordered by the police. Any animal impounded for having bitten a person, which
is subsequently released by the police, may be reclaimed by its owner upon
payment of the impounding fee, cost of food and care, and any medical costs
incurred while impounded.
(Prior Code, § 91.41) (Ord. 08-007, passed 12-8-2008)
§ 91.38 DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS.
   At the expiration of at least seven full calendar days, including five full
regular business days from the time any animal is impounded, except in the case
of an animal ordered held in quarantine for a longer period by the police, if
the animal has not been reclaimed and the fees paid under §
91.36(B), the keeper of the pound may cause the animal to be humanely killed.
Alternatively, the keeper may sell the animal, as abandoned and unclaimed by
the owner, to any person upon payment of a sum of money not less than the
license fee and not more than the amount the owner would have to pay to reclaim
the dog. Notwithstanding the five-day limitation, if an animal has not been
disposed of, it may be reclaimed upon payment of the amounts provided for in §
91.36(B). For purposes of this section and §
91.36, REGULAR BUSINESS DAY means a day on which the establishment having
custody of an animal is open to the public for not less than four consecutive
hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
(Prior Code, § 91.42) (Ord. 08-007, passed 12-8-2008)
§ 91.39 ACCOUNTING OF ANIMALS.
   The keeper of the place of impounding must keep an accurate account of all
animals impounded, and of all animals killed, sold, or released, together with
a record of all moneys received and costs expended. The information will be
reported at regular intervals to the city as required by the city.
(Prior Code, § 91.43) (Ord. 08-007, passed 12-8-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.40 APPEALS.
   Any owner who feels aggrieved by a dangerous dog notice or order of the
Chief of Police, or the Chief’s designee may request a hearing before the City
Council, which serves as the city's hearing officer, by filing an appeal in
writing with the Chief of Police within 14 days after receipt of the notice or
order. Upon the filing of such appeal, no further action shall be taken by the
city until the matter has been decided by the City Council and all appeals or
appeal opportunities have been exhausted. The owner may appear with or without
legal counsel and present evidence in opposition to the notice or order.
Following the appeals hearing, the City Council shall make a determination of
facts and shall, based upon such determination, affirm, repeal, or modify the
Police Chief’s notice or order. The City Council shall also establish a date
for compliance with the order as affirmed or modified, which date shall be not
less than ten days thereafter, in compliance with M.S. § 347.541, as it may be
amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 10-14-2025) (Prior Code, § 91.44)
§ 91.41 REPORT OF DOG BITE.
   Any person knowing of a human being bitten by a dog shall immediately notify
the Police Department, and the dog shall then be confined and kept under
observation for a period of ten days before being disposed of, if necessary.
(Prior Code, § 91.45) (Ord. 08-007, passed 12-8-2008)
   ANIMALS PROHIBITED AS NUISANCES.
§ 91.55 HABITUAL BARKING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor a dog which
habitually barks or cries. HABITUAL BARKING shall be defined as barking for
repeated intervals of at least five minutes with less than one minute of
interruption. The barking must also be audible off of the owner’s or
caretaker’s premises.
   (B)   The animal control officer or police officer shall not enter the
property of the owner of an animal described in this section unless the officer
has first obtained the permission of the owner to do so or has obtained a
warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction, as provided for in §
10.20, to search for and seize the animal.
(Prior Code, § 91.55) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.56 KEEPING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS.
   (A)   General prohibition.  Except as allowed for bees in division (B) of
this section, no person may keep farm animals or wild animals as defined in
this code, nor more than two dogs or three dogs allowed under §§
91.01 through
91.03, or fowl, within the city nearer than 500 feet to any human habitation or
platted land, without approval of the City Council.
   (B)   Keeping of bees. 
      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of this division is to establish certain
requirements for beekeeping within the city and to avoid issues that might
otherwise be associated with beekeeping in populated areas. Compliance with
this division shall not be a defense to a proceeding alleging that a given
colony constitutes a nuisance, but such compliance may be offered as evidence
of the beekeeper's efforts to abate any proven nuisance. Compliance with this
division shall not be a defense to a proceeding alleging that a given colony
violates applicable ordinances regarding public health, but such compliance may
be offered as evidence of the beekeeper’s compliance with acceptable standards
of practice among hobby beekeepers in the state.
      (2)   City Council approval required. No person may keep, harbor,
maintain or allow to be kept any hive or other facility for the housing of
honeybees on or in any parcel in the city without approval of the City Council.
If the applicant is a tenant, they must also provide proof of approval by the
property owner permitting the keeping of bees on the property.
      (3)   Training and education required. Beekeeping training and education
is required for beekeeper applicants prior to the approval of the City Council.
At the time of request, the beekeeper must submit a certificate of completion
of an approved honeybee-keeping course.
      (4)   Any person desiring keeping of honeybees shall make written
application to the City Manager or designee, accompanied by a site plan of the
real property upon which bees are to be kept, showing:
         (a)   A site plan of the parcel, showing the location and size of the
proposed apiary, setbacks from the apiary to property lines and surrounding
buildings, including houses and buildings on adjacent lots;
         (b)   Inclusion of and location of safety fencing, flyaway barriers
and water supply;
         (c)   Proof of the applicant having completed coursework on beekeeping
acceptable to the City Manager;
         (d)   Agreement that property may be inspected by the city at all
reasonable times;
         (e)   The property must be in compliance with all other applicable
city regulations in order to receive approval.
         (f)   If the applicant fails to maintain the required conditions set
forth herein after issuance of a beekeeping approval, the City Manager or their
designee may revoke the approval.
         (g)   The application materials shall include a statement that the
applicant will at all times keep the bees in accordance with the provisions of
this division and any additional restrictions, limitation conditions or
prohibitions specified in the permit as necessary to safeguard public health
and general welfare.
      (5)   Residence required. The beekeeper approved to maintain the apiary
must reside upon the parcel in which the apiary is located.
      (6)   Term. Permission for beekeeping will be valid as long as the
applicant continues to comply with the terms of this division. Any finding of
noncompliance, or lapse of continued use for more than 12 months, shall require
a new request prior to reestablishment of any beekeeping on the subject parcel.
      (7)   Limitations for allergies. The property must be in compliance with
all other applicable city regulations in order to receive approval and renewal.
To ensure that concerns over bee allergies are addressed, the city shall notify
property owners of any parcel adjoining or across any public right-of-way from
the applicant’s subject parcel of the date on which the City Council will
consider a beekeeping application. Responses from notified residents prior to
the Council meeting that a resident has a medically documented bee-sting
allergy will disqualify the application. The city shall keep a record of
beekeeping approval locations available for public review. Changes in occupancy
of neighboring properties that result in new residents with allergies shall not
disqualify an existing beekeeping approval, provided it continues to otherwise
remain in compliance with other requirements of this division.
      (8)   Approval non-transferable. Beekeeping approvals are non-
transferable and do not run with the land.
      (9)   Location.
         (a)   Approved beekeeping shall be allowed only on property zoned R-l,
Single-Family Residential.
         (b)   Hives must be located in the rear yard and must be located a
minimum of 15 feet from all property lines and 30 feet from any neighboring
building.
         (c)   When a proposed hive location is on a parcel abutting any parcel
zoned other than R-l, Single-Family Residential, the hive shall be placed on
the site in a location that maximizes the distance from the adjoining non-R-
1 property.
      (10)   Conditions for beekeeping consideration.
         (a)   No more than two colonies may be kept on the subject parcel at
the same time.
         (b)   For each colony permitted to be maintained in this division,
there may also be maintained upon the same apiary parcel, one nucleus colony in
a hive structure, not to exceed one standard, nine-and-five-eighths-inch-depth
box, a ten-frame hive body with a maximum of five supers.
         (c)   Honeybee colonies must be kept in hives with removable frames
that must be kept in sound and usable condition.
         (d)   Each colony on the apiary site must be provided with a
convenient source of water that must be located within ten feet of each active
colony.
         (e)   Materials from a hive, such as wax combs or other materials that
might encourage robbing by other bees, must be promptly disposed of in a sealed
container or placed within a building or other bee- and vermin-proof enclosure.
         (f)   Each beekeeper shall maintain their beekeeping equipment in good
condition, including keeping the hives painted if they have been painted but
are peeling or flaking, and securing unused equipment from weather, potential
theft or vandalism and occupancy by swarms. It shall not be a defense to this
division that a beekeeper’s unused equipment attracted a swarm and that the
beekeeper is not intentionally keeping bees.
         (g)   Hives will be continuously managed to provide adequate living
space for their respective honeybees in order to prevent swarming.
         (h)   In any instance in which a colony exhibits unusual aggressive
behavior, it is the duty of the beekeeper to promptly re-queen the colony.
         (i)   Flyway barrier.
            1.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, in each
instance where a colony is kept less than 25 feet from a property line of the
lot upon which the apiary is located, as measured from the nearest point on the
hive to the property line, the beekeeper shall establish and maintain a flyway
barrier at least six feet in height.
            2.   The flyway barrier may consist of a wall, fence, dense
vegetation or a combination thereof, such that bees will fly over rather than
through the material to reach the colony.
            3.   If a flyway barrier of dense vegetation is used, the initial
planting may be four feet in height, so long as the vegetation normally reaches
six feet in height or higher.
            4.   If a wall or fence flyway barrier is used, the materials must
be decay-resistant and maintained in good condition. A wall or fence flyway
barrier shall not exceed the maximum allowable fence height per § 150.087 of
the City Code.
            5.   The flyway barrier must continue parallel to the apiary lot
line for ten feet in either direction from the hive, or contain the hive or
hives in an enclosure at least six feet in height.
            6.   A flyway barrier is not required if the parcel adjoining the
apiary lot line is:
               a.   Undeveloped;
               b.   Zoned agricultural or industrial;
               c.   Outside of the city limits; or
               d.   A wildlife management area or naturalistic park land, with
no horse or foot trails located within 25 feet of the apiary.
If the adjoining property becomes developed, a flyway barrier must be erected
according to the specifications of this division. No allowance for a legal
nonconformity shall accrue under this division.
         (j)   Hives shall be continuously managed to provide adequate living
space for their resident honeybees in order to prevent swarming.
         (k)   Where a flyway barrier is required, the hive openings shall face
the flyway barrier.
      (11)   Inspections.
         (a)   As part of the approval, each beekeeper must allow an inspection
of the apiary site. The City Manager or their designee has the right to inspect
any apiary for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this division, upon
providing prior notice to the owner of the apiary parcel. In the case of a
complaint regarding the apiary, the apiary site may be inspected by the city
without prior notice.
         (b)   If an approved apiary site is found to be noncompliant with any
requirements of this division, a compliance order shall be issued by the City
Manager or their designee. The owner and/or operator of the apiary shall have
up to ten days to bring the apiary into compliance or risk the loss of their
approval.
         (c)   If the City Manager orders the revocation of an existing
beekeeping approval, a hearing before the City Council shall be scheduled as
follows:
            1.   Scheduling of hearing. If the city makes a determination that
it will be revoking an approval pursuant to this subchapter, the City Council
shall conduct a hearing on the matter. The hearing shall be scheduled at the
next regular City Council meeting following the date of the notice of intent to
revoke.
            2.   Hearing. At the hearing, the City Council shall hear all
relevant evidence and arguments, and shall review all testimony, documents and
other evidence submitted. The applicant shall have the opportunity to address
the City Council at the hearing.
            3.   Findings. After the hearing is concluded, the City Council
shall make findings on whether to uphold the order to revoke. The City Council
shall issue a written decision within 30 days following the date of the
hearing, and shall send a copy of its decision to the owner or operator by
mail.
      (12)   Removal or relocation.
         (a)   If any approved beekeeper serves the community by removing a
swarm or swarms of honeybees from locations where they are not desired, that
person will not be considered to be in violation of the colony density
restrictions of this division, if the following conditions are met:
            1.   The person temporarily houses the honeybees at an apiary site
of a beekeeper approved by the city;
            2.   The honeybees are not kept for more than 30 days; and
            3.   The site remains in compliance with the other provisions of
this division.
         (b)   Any resident who has lost their approval shall not be eligible
for a new approval.
         (c)   Any resident who voluntarily forfeits the approved colony may
reapply for a new approval in the future.
         (d)   Any resident who wishes to transport the approved colony must
first establish a new permission in whichever jurisdiction they plan to
relocate to if required in that jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 91.56) (Ord. 2022-07, passed 10-11-2022; Ord. 2024-02, passed 7-
9-2024; Ord. 2025-02, passed 4-22-2025)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.57 FEEDING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS.
   (A)   Feeding wild animals. No person shall intentionally feed wild animals
within the city. INTENTIONAL FEEDING means the provision of any grain, fruit,
vegetables, nuts, salt licks, or any other food that attracts wild animals.
Living food sources such as trees and other live vegetation shall not be
considered food for wild animals.
   (B)   Feeding songbirds. The feeding of songbirds is permitted under the
following conditions:
      (1)   Feeding is done from a bird feeder that is designed to prevent
other wild animals from feeding and is placed at least five feet above the
ground.
      (2)   The bird feeder does not become an attractive nuisance to other
wild animals.
      (3)   Songbird feeding occurs on private property owned or controlled by
the person responsible for the feeder.
   (C)   Exemptions.
      (1)   Specific to division (B)(1) above, persons that cannot physically
place materials five feet or higher from the ground, must place feeder at the
highest point physically possible and must comply with the other standards
contained in division (B) above.
      (2)   Snakes (less than four feet in length), gerbils, hamsters, guinea
pigs, mice, turtles, fish (not prohibited by State DNR), and birds (not
prohibited by State DNR) kept inside of a residence and within a restrictive
cage or habitat.
      (3)   Animal species otherwise allowed and/or licensed by the city.
      (4)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the employees or
agents of the city, county, the state, the federal government, or veterinarians
who in the course of their official duties have wild animals in their custody
or under their management.
(Prior Code, § 91.57) (Ord. 2022-07, passed 10-11-2022) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.58 INTERFERENCE WITH CITY PERSONNEL.
   No person may in any manner molest, hinder, or interfere with any person
employed by the city to capture and impound dogs or other animals while the
person is within the course and scope of employment.
(Ord. 2022-07, passed 10-11-2022) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 92: NUISANCES
Section
   
92.01   Tree diseases
   
92.02   Public nuisance
   
92.03   Public nuisances affecting health
   
92.04   Public nuisances affecting morals and decency
   
92.05   Public nuisances affecting peace and safety
   
92.06   Nuisance storage
   
92.07   Building maintenance and appearance
   
92.08   Duties of city officers
   
92.09   Abatement
   
92.10   Recovery of cost
   
92.11   Assessable current services
§ 92.01 TREE DISEASES.
   (A)   Trees constituting nuisance declared. The following are public
nuisances whenever they may be found within the city:
      (1)   Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected to any
degree with the Dutch Elm disease fungus Ceratocystis Ulmi (Buisman) Moreau or
which harbors any of the elm bark beetles Scolytus Multistriatus (Eichh.) or
Hylungopinus Rufipes (Marsh);
      (2)   Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including branches, stumps,
firewood, or other elm material from which the bark has not been removed and
burned or sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle insecticide;
      (3)   Any living or standing oak tree or part thereof infected to any
degree with the Oak Wilt fungus Ceratocystis fagacearum;
      (4)   Any dead oak tree or part thereof which in the opinion of the
designated officer constitutes a hazard, including, but not limited to, logs,
branches, stumps, roots, firewood, or other oak material which has not been
stripped of its bark and burned or sprayed with an effective fungicide; and
      (5)   Any other shade tree with an epidemic disease.
   (B)   Abatement of nuisance. It is unlawful for any person to permit any
public nuisance as defined in division (A) above to remain on any premises the
person owns or controls within the city. The nuisance may be abated as provided
in §§
92.08 and
92.09.
   (C)   Record of costs. The City Manager or designee shall keep a record of
the costs of abatement done under this section for all work done for which
assessments are to be made, stating and certifying the description of the land,
lots, parcels involved, and the amount chargeable to each.
   (D)   Unpaid charges. On or before September 1 of each year, the City
Manager or designee shall list the total unpaid charges for each abatement
against each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this
section. The City Council may then spread the charges or any portion thereof
against the property involved as a special assessment as authorized by M.S. §
429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, and other pertinent statutes
for certification to the County Auditor and collection the following year along
with the current taxes.
(Prior Code, § 92.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.02 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Whoever, by his or her act or failure to perform a legal duty, intentionally
does any of the following, is guilty of maintaining a public nuisance, which is
a misdemeanor:
   (A)   Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures,
or endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort, or repose of any considerable
number of members of the public;
   (B)   Interferes with, obstructs, or renders dangerous for passage any
public highway or right-of-way, or waters used by the public; or
   (C)   Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law or §§
92.03,
92.04, or
92.05, or any other part of this code to be a public nuisance and for which no
sentence is specifically provided.
(Prior Code, § 92.15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.03 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.
   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health:
   (A)   Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or vegetable
matter;
   (B)   All diseased animals running at large;
   (C)   All ponds or pools of stagnant water;
   (D)   Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours after
death;
   (E)   Accumulations of manure, refuse, other debris, or materials capable of
harboring rodents, which shall include the following undomesticated animals:
chipmunks, groundhogs/woodchucks, lemmings, mice, moles, pocket gophers, rats,
shrews, squirrels, and voles. This definition shall not be read to prohibit
intentional accumulations of vegetative materials that are designed and
maintained to provide natural food sources for wild birds, nor to prohibit
compost structures which are constructed and located in accordance with
applicable city code;
   (F)   Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent-free or fly-tight,
or which are so maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to emit foul and
disagreeable odors;
   (G)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake, canal or
body of water by sewage, industrial waste, or other substances;
   (H)   All noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation upon public or
private property;
   (I)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, and soot or cinders, in unreasonable
quantities;
   (J)   All public exposure of people having a contagious disease; and
   (K)   Any offensive trade or business, as defined by statute, not operating
under local license.
   (L)   It shall be unlawful to keep, park, store, or abandon any motor
vehicle which is not in operating condition, partially dismantled, used for
repair of parts or as a source of repair or replacement parts for other
vehicles, kept for scrapping, dismantling, or salvage of any kind, or which is
not properly licensed for operation with the state, pursuant to M.S. §
168B.011, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (M)   This section does not apply to a motor vehicle enclosed in a building
and/or kept out of view from any street, road, or alley, and which does not
foster complaint from a resident of the city. A privacy fence is permissible.
   (N)   Any motor vehicles described in this section constitute a hazard to
the health and welfare of the residents of the community in that the vehicles
can harbor noxious diseases, furnish a shelter and breeding place for vermin,
and present physical danger to the safety and well-being of children and
citizens; and vehicles containing fluids which, if released into the
environment, can and do cause significant health risks to the community.
(Prior Code, § 92.16) (Ord. 2024-01, passed 4-9-2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.04 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY.
   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public morals
and decency:
   (A)   All gambling devices, slot machines, and punch boards, except as
otherwise authorized by federal, state, or local law;
   (B)   Betting, bookmaking, and all apparatus used in those occupations;
   (C)   All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual
intercourse, gambling houses, houses of ill fame, and bawdy houses;
   (D)   All places where intoxicating liquor is manufactured or disposed of in
violation of law or where, in violation of law, people are permitted to resort
for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor, or where intoxicating liquor
is kept for sale or other disposition in violation of law, and all liquor and
other property used for maintaining that place; and
   (E)   Any vehicle used for the unlawful transportation of intoxicating
liquor, or for promiscuous sexual intercourse, or any other immoral or illegal
purpose.
(Prior Code, § 92.17) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.05 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.
   The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and
safety:
   (A)   All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks 24 hours after the
snow or other precipitation causing the condition has ceased to fall;
   (B)   All trees, hedges, billboards, or other obstructions which prevent
people from having a clear view of all traffic approaching an intersection;
   (C)   All wires and limbs of trees which are so close to the surface of a
sidewalk or street as to constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles;
   (D)   All obnoxious noises in violation of Minn. Rules Chapter 7030, as it
may be amended from time to time, which is hereby incorporated by reference
into this code;
   (E)   The discharging of the exhaust or permitting the discharging of the
exhaust of any stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat, motor
vehicle, motorcycle, all-terrain vehicle, snowmobile, or any recreational
device except through a muffler or other device that effectively prevents loud
or explosive noises therefrom and complies with all applicable state laws and
regulations;
   (F)    The using or operation, or permitting the using or operation, of any
radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, paging system, machine, or
other device for producing or reproduction of sound in a distinctly and loudly
audible manner so as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of any person
nearby. Operation of any device referred to above between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner so as to be plainly audible at the property line
of the structure or building in which it is located, or at a distance of 50
feet if the source is located outside a structure or building, shall be prima
facie evidence of violation of this section;
   (G)    No person shall participate in any party or other gathering of people
giving rise to noise, unreasonably disturbing the peace, quiet, or repose of
another person, which exceed 55 decibels when measured at the closest property
line from the property emitting the noise. When a police officer determines
that a gathering is creating such a noise disturbance, the officer may order
all persons present, other than the owner or tenant of the premises where the
disturbance is occurring, to disperse immediately. No person shall refuse to
leave after being ordered by a police officer to do so. Every owner or tenant
of the premises who has knowledge of the disturbance shall make every
reasonable effort to see that the disturbance is stopped;
   (H)   Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary public use of
streets, alleys, sidewalks, or public grounds except under conditions as are
permitted by this code or other applicable law;
   (I)   Radio aerials or television antennas erected or maintained in a
dangerous manner;
   (J)   Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use
of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather,
obstructing traffic, and the free use of the street or sidewalk;
   (K)   All hanging signs, awnings, and other similar structures over streets
and sidewalks, so situated so as to endanger public safety, or not constructed
and maintained as provided by ordinance;
   (L)   The allowing of rain water, ice, or snow to fall from any building or
structure upon any street or sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk;
   (M)   Any barbed wire fence less than six feet above the ground and within
three feet of a public sidewalk or way;
   (N)   All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so situated
or operated on private property as to attract the public;
   (O)   Waste water cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or other
public properties;
   (P)   Accumulations in the open of discarded or disused machinery, household
appliances, automobile bodies or other material in a manner conducive to the
harboring of rats, mice, snakes, or vermin, or the rank growth of vegetation
among the items so accumulated, or in a manner creating fire, health, or safety
hazards from accumulation;
   (Q)   Any well, hole, or similar excavation which is left uncovered or in
another condition as to constitute a hazard to any child or other person coming
on the premises where it is located;
   (R)   Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or a
public street drain, gutter, or ditch with trash of other materials;
   (S)   The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk, or other public
property of any glass, tacks, nails, bottles, or other substance which may
injure any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire when passing over the
substance;
   (T)   The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public right-of-way or on
adjacent private property;
   (U)   All other conditions or things which are likely to cause injury to the
person or property of anyone;
   (V)   (1) Noises prohibited.
         (a)   General prohibition. No person shall make or cause to be made
any distinctly and loudly audible noise that unreasonably annoys, disturbs,
injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, or welfare of
any person or precludes their enjoyment of property or affects their property’s
value. This general prohibition is not limited by the specific restrictions of
this section.
         (b)   Defective vehicles or loads. No person shall use any vehicle so
out of repair or so loaded as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding,
rattling, or other noise.
         (c)   Loading, unloading, unpacking. No person shall create loud or
excessive noise in loading, unloading, or unpacking any vehicle.
         (d)   Radios, phonographs, paging systems, and the like. No person
shall use or operate, or permit the use or operation of, any radio receiving
set, musical instrument, phonograph, paging system, machine, or other device
for the production or reproduction of sound in a distinct and loudly audible
manner as to unreasonably disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of any person
nearby. Operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine, or other
device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be
plainly audible at the property line of the structure or building in which it
is located, in the hallway or apartment adjacent, or at a level exceeding 55
decibels when measured at the closest property line from the property emitting
the noise, if the source is located outside a structure or building, shall be
prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
         (e)   Schools, churches, hospitals, and the like. No person shall
create any excessive noise on a street, alley, or public grounds adjacent to
any school, institution of learning, church, or hospital when the noise
unreasonably interferes with the working of the institution or disturbs or
unduly annoys its occupants or residents and when conspicuous signs indicate
the presence of the institution.
      (2)   Hourly restriction of certain operations.
         (a)   Domestic power equipment. No person shall operate a power lawn
mower, power hedge clipper, chain saw, mulcher, garden tiller, edger, drill, or
other similar domestic power maintenance equipment except between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any weekday or on any weekend or holiday. Snow
removal equipment is exempt from this provision.
         (b)   Refuse hauling. No person shall collect or remove garbage or
refuse in any residential district except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:
00 p.m. on any weekday or on any weekend or holiday.
         (c)   Construction activities. No person shall engage in or permit
construction activities involving the use of any kind of electric, diesel, or
gas-powered machine or other power equipment except between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00
p.m. on any weekend or holiday.
      (3)   Noise impact statements. The City Council may require any person
applying for a change in zoning classification or a permit or license for any
structure, operation, process, installation, or alteration, or project, that
may be considered a potential noise source to submit a noise impact statement
on a form prescribed by the City Council. It shall evaluate each statement and
take its evaluation into account in approving or disapproving the license or
permit applied for or the zoning change requested.
   (W)   Reflected glare or light from private exterior lighting exceeding one-
half footcandle as measured on the property line of the property where the
lighting is located when abutting any residential parcel, and one footcandle
when abutting any commercial or industrial parcel; and
   (X)   Reflected glare or light from private exterior lighting exceeding one-
half footcandle as measured on the property line of the property where the
lighting is located when abutting any residential parcel and one footcandle
when abutting any commercial or industrial parcel.
(Prior Code, § 92.18) (Ord. 2024-01, passed 4-9-2024; Ord. 2025-02, passed 4-
22-2025) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.06 NUISANCE STORAGE.
   (A)   Declaration of nuisance. The outside storage on residentially-zoned
property of materials, supplies, or equipment not customarily used for
residential purposes in violation of the requirements set forth below is
declared to be a public nuisance because it:
      (1)   Obstructs views on streets and private property;
      (2)   Creates cluttered and otherwise unsightly areas;
      (3)   Prevents the full use of residential streets for residential
parking;
      (4)   Introduces commercial advertising signs into areas where commercial
advertising signs are otherwise prohibited;
      (5)   Decreases adjoining landowners’ and occupants’ enjoyment of their
property and neighborhood; and
      (6)   Otherwise adversely affects property values and neighborhood
patterns.
   (B)   Unlawful storage.
      (1)   (a)   A person must not place, store, or allow the placement of any
nonpermanent structures or materials, unless expressly allowed by sections of
this code, outside continuously for longer than 24 hours in the front yard area
of residential property unless more than 100 feet back from the front property
line.
         (b)   In R-1 and R-1A Residential Districts, accessory recreational
uses, including appurtenant structures integral to the recreational use, may be
located in a front yard, provided that the following apply.
            1.   The use is temporary or seasonal in nature, and does not
include any permanent appurtenance, structure, or building.
            2.   The use does not create noise audible beyond the boundaries of
the subject property, nor utilize additional lighting, between the hours of 10:
00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
            3.   Any such appurtenance, structure, or building associated with
the recreational use shall be set back from the property lines and/or right-of-
way lines no less than five feet.
            4.   No appurtenance, structure, building, nor any light post or
other element, may exceed ten feet in height.
      (2)   A person must not place, store, or allow the placement or storage
of pipe, lumber, forms, steel, machinery, or similar materials, including, but
not exclusive to, materials used in connection with a business, outside on
residential property, unless shielded from public view by a fence.
      (3)   A person shall not use any vehicle, as defined in §
152.008, with the exception of an enclosed trailer, as a storage vessel for
common household materials.
(Prior Code, § 92.19) (Ord. 2024-01, passed 4-9-2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.07 BUILDING MAINTENANCE AND APPEARANCE.
   (A)   Declaration of nuisance. Buildings, fences, and other structures that
have been so poorly maintained that their physical condition and appearance
detract from the surrounding neighborhood are declared to be public nuisances
because they:
      (1)   Are unsightly;
      (2)   Decrease adjoining landowners and occupants’ enjoyment of their
property and neighborhood; and
      (3)   Adversely affect property values and neighborhood patterns.
   (B)   Standards. A building, fence, or other structure is a public nuisance
if it does not comply with the following requirements.
      (1)   No part of any exterior surface may have deterioration, holes,
breaks, gaps, or loose or rotting boards or timbers.
      (2)   Every exterior surface that has had a surface finish such as paint
applied must be maintained to avoid noticeable deterioration of the finish. No
wall or other exterior surface may have peeling, cracked, chipped, or otherwise
deteriorated surface finish on more than 20% of:
         (a)   Any one wall or other flat surface; or
         (b)   All door and window moldings, eaves, gutters, and similar
projections on any one side or surface.
      (3)   No glass, including windows and exterior light fixtures, may be
broken or cracked, and no screens may be torn or separated from moldings.
      (4)   Exterior doors and shutters must be hung properly and have an
operable mechanism to keep them securely shut or in place.
      (5)   Cornices, moldings, lintels, sills, bay or dormer windows, and
similar projections must be kept in good repair and free from cracks and
defects that make them hazardous or unsightly.
      (6)   Roof surfaces must be tight and have no defects that admit water.
All roof drainage systems must be secured and hung properly.
      (7)   Chimneys, antennas, air vents, and other similar projections must
be structurally sound and in good repair. These projections must be secured
properly, where applicable, to an exterior wall or exterior roof.
      (8)   Foundations must be structurally sound and in good repair.
(Prior Code, § 92.21) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.08 DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.
   For purposes of this section and §
92.09, the Police Department, or Sheriff, or person designated by the City
Council under §
10.20 if the city has at the time no Police Department, may enforce the
provisions relating to nuisances. Any peace officer or designated person shall
have the power to inspect private premises and take all reasonable precautions
to prevent the commission and maintenance of public nuisances. Except in
emergency situations of imminent danger to human life and safety, no police
officer or designated person shall enter private property for the purpose of
inspecting or preventing public nuisances without the permission of the owner,
resident, or other person in control of the property, unless the officer or
person designated has obtained a warrant or order from a court of competent
jurisdiction authorizing the entry, as provided in §
10.20.
(Prior Code, § 92.22)
§ 92.09 ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Notice. Written notice of violation; notice of the time, date, place,
and subject of any hearing before the City Council; notice of City Council
order; and notice of motion for summary enforcement hearing shall be given as
set forth in this section.
      (1)   Notice of violation. Written notice of violation shall be served by
a peace officer or designated person on the owner of record or occupant of the
premises either in person or by certified or registered mail. If the premises
is not occupied, the owner of record is unknown, or the owner of record or
occupant refuses to accept notice of violation, notice of violation shall be
served by posting it on the premises.
      (2)   Notice of City Council hearing. Written notice of any City Council
hearing to determine or abate a nuisance shall be served on the owner of record
and occupant of the premises either in person or by certified or registered
mail. If the premises is not occupied, the owner of record is unknown, or the
owner of record or occupant refuses to accept notice of the City Council
hearing, notice of City Council hearing shall be served by posting it on the
premises.
      (3)   Notice of City Council order. Except for those cases determined by
the city to require summary enforcement, written notice of any City Council
order shall be made as provided in M.S. § 463.17, as it may be amended from
time to time.
      (4)   Notice of motion for summary enforcement. Written notice of any
motion for summary enforcement shall be made as provided for in M.S. § 463.17,
as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Procedure. Whenever a peace officer or designated person determines
that a public nuisance is being maintained or exists on the premises in the
city, the officer or person designated shall notify in writing the owner of
record or occupant of the premises of such fact and order that the nuisance be
terminated or abated. The notice of violation shall specify the steps to be
taken to abate the nuisance and the time within which the nuisance is to be
abated. If the notice of violation is not complied with within the time
specified, the officer or designated person shall report that fact forthwith to
the City Council. Thereafter, the City Council may, after notice to the owner
or occupant and an opportunity to be heard, determine that the condition
identified in the notice of violation is a nuisance and further order that if
the nuisance is not abated within the time prescribed by the City Council, the
city may seek injunctive relief by serving a copy of the City Council order and
notice of motion for summary enforcement or obtain an administrative search and
seizure warrant and abate the nuisance.
   (C)   Emergency procedure; summary enforcement. In cases of emergency, where
delay in abatement required to complete the notice and procedure requirements
set forth in divisions (A) and (B) above will permit a continuing nuisance to
unreasonably endanger public health, safety, or welfare, the City Council may
order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance. To proceed with summary
enforcement, the officer or designated person shall determine that a public
nuisance exists or is being maintained on premises in the city and that delay
in abatement of the nuisance will unreasonably endanger public health, safety,
or welfare. The officer or designated person shall notify in writing the
occupant or owner of the premises of the nature of the nuisance and of the
city’s intention to seek summary enforcement and the time and place of the City
Council meeting to consider the question of summary enforcement. The City
Council shall determine whether or not the condition identified in the notice
to the owner or occupant is a nuisance, whether public health, safety, or
welfare will be unreasonably endangered by delay in abatement required to
complete the procedure set forth in division (A) above, and may order that the
nuisance be immediately terminated or abated. If the nuisance is not
immediately terminated or abated, the City Council may order summary
enforcement and abate the nuisance.
   (D)   Immediate abatement. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city,
without notice or other process, from immediately abating any condition which
poses an imminent and serious hazard to human life or safety.
(Prior Code, § 92.23)
§ 92.10 RECOVERY OF COST.
   (A)   Personal liability. The owner of premises on which a nuisance has been
abated by the city shall be personally liable for the cost to the city of the
abatement, including administrative costs. As soon as the work has been
completed and the cost determined, the City Manager or other official shall
prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner. Thereupon, the amount
shall be immediately due and payable at the office of the City Manager.
   (B)   Assessment. After notice and hearing as provided in M.S. § 429.061, as
it may be amended from time to time, if the nuisance is a public health or
safety hazard on private property, the accumulation of snow and ice on public
sidewalks, the growth of weeds on private property or outside the traveled
portion of streets, or unsound or insect-infected trees, the City Manager or
designee shall, on or before September 1 next following abatement of the
nuisance, list the total unpaid charges along with all other charges as well as
other charges for current services to be assessed under M.S. § 429.101, as it
may be amended from time to time, against each separate lot or parcel to which
the charges are attributable. The City Council may then spread the charges
against the property under that statute and other pertinent statutes for
certification to the County Auditor and collection along with current taxes the
following year or in annual installments, not exceeding ten, as the City
Council may determine in each case.
(Prior Code, § 92.24) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.11 ASSESSABLE CURRENT SERVICES.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CURRENT SERVICE. One or more of the following: snow, ice, or rubbish
removal from sidewalks; weed elimination from street grass plots adjacent to
sidewalks or from private property; removal or elimination of public health or
safety hazards from private property, excluding any hazardous building included
in M.S. §§ 463.15 through 463.26, as they may be amended from time to time;
installation or repair of water service lines; street sprinkling, street
flushing, light street oiling, or other dust treatment of streets; repair of
sidewalks and alleys; trimming and care of trees and removal of unsound and
insect-infected trees from the public streets or private property; and the
operation of a street lighting system.
   (B)   Snow, ice, dirt, and rubbish.
      (1)   Duty of owners and occupants. The owner and the occupant of any
property adjacent to a public sidewalk shall use diligence to keep the walk
safe for pedestrians. No owner or occupant shall allow snow, ice, dirt, or
rubbish to remain on the walk longer than 24 hours after its deposit thereon.
Failure to comply with this section shall constitute a violation.
      (2)   Removal by city. The City Manager or other person designated by the
City Council may cause removal from all public sidewalks all snow, ice, dirt,
and rubbish as soon as possible beginning 24 hours after any matter has been
deposited thereon or after the snow has ceased to fall. The City Manager or
other designated person shall keep a record showing the cost of removal
adjacent to each separate lot and parcel.
   (C)   Public health and safety hazards. When the city removes or eliminates
public health or safety hazards from private property under the following
provisions of this chapter, the administrative officer responsible for doing
the work shall keep a record of the cost of the removal or elimination against
each parcel of property affected and annually deliver that information to the
City Manager or designee.
   (D)   Installation and repair of water service lines. Whenever the city
installs or repairs water service lines serving private property under Title V,
the City Manager or designee shall keep a record of the total cost of the
installation or repair against the property.
   (E)   Repair of sidewalks and alleys.
      (1)   Duty of owner. The owner of any property within the city abutting a
public sidewalk or alley shall keep the sidewalk or alley in repair and safe
for pedestrians. Repairs shall be made in accordance with the standard
specifications approved by the City Council and on file in the office of the
City Manager or designee.
      (2)   Inspections; notice. The City Council, or its designee, shall make
inspections as are necessary to determine that public sidewalks and alleys
within the city are kept in repair and safe for pedestrians or vehicles. If it
is found that any sidewalk or alley abutting on private property is unsafe and
in need of repairs, the City Council shall cause a notice to be served, by
registered or certified mail or by personal service, upon the record owner of
the property, ordering the owner to have the sidewalk or alley repaired and
made safe within 30 days and stating that if the owner fails to do so, the city
will do so and that the expense thereof must be paid by the owner, and if
unpaid, it will be made a special assessment against the property concerned.
      (3)   Repair by city. If the sidewalk or alley is not repaired within 30
days after receipt of the notice, the City Manager or designee shall report the
facts to the City Council, and the City Council shall by resolution order the
work done by contract in accordance with law. No person shall enter private
property to repair a sidewalk, except with the permission of the owner or after
obtaining an administrative warrant. The City Manager or designee shall keep a
record of the total cost of the repair attributable to each lot or parcel of
property.
   (F)   Personal liability. The owner of property on which or adjacent to
which a current service has been performed shall be personally liable for the
cost of the service. As soon as the service has been completed and the cost
determined, the City Manager, or other designated official, shall prepare a
bill and mail it to the owner and thereupon, the amount shall be immediately
due and payable at the office of the City Manager.
   (G)   Damage to public property. Any person driving any vehicle, equipment,
object, or contrivance upon any street, road, highway, or structure shall be
liable for all damages which the surface or structure thereof may sustain as a
result of any illegal operation, or driving or moving of the vehicle,
equipment, or object or contrivance; or as a result of operating, driving, or
moving any vehicle, equipment, object, or contrivance weighing in excess of the
maximum weight permitted by statute or this code. When the driver is not the
owner of the vehicle, equipment, object, or contrivance, but is operating,
driving, or moving it with the express or implied permission of the owner, then
the owner and the driver shall be jointly and severally liable for any such
damage. Any person who willfully acts or fails to exercise due care and by that
act damages any public property shall be liable for the amount thereof, which
amount shall be collectable by action or as a lien under M.S. § 514.67, as it
may be amended from time to time.
   (H)   Assessment. On or before October 31 of each year, the City Clerk shall
list the total unpaid charges for each type of current service and charges
under this section against each separate lot or parcel to which they are
attributable under this section. The City Council may then spread the charges
against property benefitted as a special assessment under the authority of M.S.
§ 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, and other pertinent statutes
for certification to the County Auditor and collection along with current taxes
the following year or in annual installments, not exceeding ten, as the City
Council may determine in each case.
(Prior Code, § 92.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 93: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
93.01   Definition
   
93.02   Rules governing use
§ 93.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARKS. A park, bathing beach, or recreational area owned, leased, or used by
this city and designated by the City Council as a park.
(Prior Code, § 93.01)
§ 93.02 RULES GOVERNING USE.
   (A)   Application to all parks. The rules set forth in the divisions which
follow, in addition to all other applicable sections, will apply to all parks.
   (B)   Vehicle speed. No person shall operate a vehicle in any park at a
speed in excess of 15 mph or in a reckless or careless manner, nor shall any
person operate or leave standing a vehicle in any park except in areas
designated for driving and parking.
   (C)   Fires. No person shall start a fire in any park except in places
provided for those purposes, and charcoal is the only fuel permitted.
   (D)   Waste and rubbish. No person shall leave or throw waste materials,
debris, or rubbish upon the grounds or water areas of any park.
   (E)   Offensive conduct. No person shall deface, damage, or remove any
structure, tree, plant, soil, rock, or other property in any park without
permission from the City Manager or designee. Conduct prohibited by this
division (E) shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Affixing signs, posters, or advertisements to structures or
property;
      (2)   Damaging flowers, trees, or plants;
      (3)   Carrying off rocks or soil; and
      (4)   Knocking down or destroying signs, benches, fences, or other
property.
   (F)   Animals and birds. No person shall intentionally disturb, frighten, or
kill any birds or animals kept or found in any park.
   (G)   Swimming, bathing, or wading. No person shall swim, bathe, or wade in
any pond, lake, or watercourse except in areas designated for such purposes.
   (H)   Trespassing. No person shall trespass in any area of any park
protected by signs or enclosures giving notice that use of the area is
prohibited.
   (I)   Practice of sports. No person shall play or practice golf, football,
baseball, archery, or any other game or sport involving danger to the
participants or to others except in areas provided for the activity.
   (J)   Unattended animals. No dog or other animal shall be allowed to go
unattended without physical restraint in any park.
   (K)   Permits required. No person shall be permitted to sell any article or
service, give any performance or entertainment, or hold any dance, procession,
or public assembly without a permit granted by the City Council in the same
manner provided in division (N) below.
   (L)   Restricted hours. No person shall remain in or be present at any park,
except at lighted tennis courts, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.,
unless written permission is obtained from the City Manager or designee.
   (M)   Park facilities. All persons shall obey orders or directions of the
police or the park employees of this city concerning the manner in which park
facilities may be used.
   (N)   Liquor permits. No person shall possess or consume any spirituous,
vinous, malt, or fermented liquors, including 3.2% malt liquor, in any park at
any time, without first having received a permit granted by the City Council,
in accordance with the following procedures and conditions.
      (1)   Applications will be made in writing, at least two weeks prior to
the date for which the permit is to be issued, by a person 21 years of age or
older who is a resident of the city, or is employed by an employer located
within the city.
      (2)   The application will be accompanied by an application fee and
clean-up deposit in the amounts set forth in Chapter 33.
      (3)   In granting or denying the permit, the City Council will consider
the type and size of the group for which the permit is requested, the extent to
which the group involves city residents and their use of city park facilities,
the anticipated effect upon other users of the park and adjacent residential
properties, the likelihood of damage to park property and any other facts
relevant to the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the
city. The City Council reserves the right to deny any permit or to add
conditions to any permit which it grants.
      (4)   The permit will authorize consumption by the applicant and bona
fide members of the applicant’s group, as referred to in the application,
during specified hours on a specified date, of the beverages specified in the
permit. The permit will not authorize the sale or giving of any alcoholic
beverages to any person other than a bona fide member of the applicant’s group;
and the same shall be unlawful.
      (5)   The applicant will be responsible for the conduct of the group and
for the clean-up of any cans, bottles, or debris left by the group. The clean-
up deposit will be returned to the applicant only if the city is satisfied that
all cans, bottles, and other debris from the activities were properly disposed
of or removed.
      (6)   The use of the park facilities will be coordinated through the
Community Services Department of Independent School District No. 282.
      (7)   Any permit granted under this section will be subject to immediate
suspension or revocation for any false statement on the application, for
violation of this or any other code provision, or for other cause.
   (O)   Glass. No person shall possess or use any glass beverage container in
any park at any time.
(Prior Code, § 93.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 94: RIGHTS-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
Section
   
94.01   Findings and purpose
   
94.02   Election to manage public rights-of-way
   
94.03   Definitions
   
94.04   Administration
   
94.05   Utility Coordination Committee
   
94.06   Registration, bonding, and right-of-way occupancy
   
94.07   Right to occupancy of rights-of-way; payment of fees
   
94.08   Franchise; franchise supremacy
   
94.09   Registration information
   
94.10   Reporting obligations
   
94.11   Permit requirement
   
94.12   Permit applications
   
94.13   Issuance of permit; conditions
   
94.14   Permit fees
   
94.15   Right-of-way restoration
   
94.16   Joint applications
   
94.17   Supplemental applications
   
94.18   Other obligations
   
94.19   Denial or revocation of permit
   
94.20   Installation requirements
   
94.21   Inspection
   
94.22   Work done without a permit
   
94.23   Supplemental notification
   
94.24   Revocation of permits
   
94.25   Appeals
   
94.26   Mapping data
   
94.27   Location of equipment
   
94.28   Relocation of equipment
   
94.29   Pre-excavation equipment location
   
94.30   Damage to other equipment
   
94.31   Right-of-way vacation
   
94.32   Bus/transit benches in right-of-way
   
94.33   Indemnification and liability
   
94.34   Future uses
   
94.35   Abandoned and unusable equipment
   
94.36   Reservation of regulatory and police powers
   
94.37   Nonexclusive remedy
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   To provide for the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens, and to
ensure the integrity of its streets and the appropriate use of the rights-of-
way, the city strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state of good repair and
free from unnecessary encumbrances.
   (B)   Accordingly, the city hereby enacts this new chapter of this code
relating to right-of-way permits and administration. This chapter imposes
reasonable regulation on the placement and maintenance of facilities and
equipment currently within its rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some
future time. It is intended to complement the regulatory roles of state and
federal agencies. Under this chapter, persons excavating and obstructing the
rights-of-way will bear financial responsibility for their work. Finally, this
chapter provides for recovery of out-of-pocket and projected costs from persons
using the public rights-of-way.
   (C)   This chapter shall be interpreted consistently with 1997 Session Laws,
Chapter 123, substantially codified in M.S. §§ 237.16, 237.162, 237.163,
237.79, 237.81, and 238.086 (the “Act”) and 2017 Session Laws, Chapter 94
amending the Act and the other laws governing applicable rights of the city and
users of the right-of-way, as they may be amended from time to time. This
chapter shall also be interpreted consistent with Minn. Rules parts 7819.0050,
7819.9950, and Minn. Rules Chapter 7560 where possible. To the extent any
provision of this chapter cannot be interpreted consistently with the Minnesota
Rules, that interpretation most consistent with the Act and other applicable
statutory and case law is intended. This chapter shall not be interpreted to
limit the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general
ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
(Prior Code, § 96.01)
§ 94.02 ELECTION TO MANAGE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under state and federal
statutory, administrative, and common law, the city hereby elects, pursuant to
M.S. § 237.16, Subd. 2(b), as it may be amended from time to time, to manage
rights-of-way within its jurisdiction.
   (B)   Except as specifically authorized by this chapter, no person shall
deposit or permit to be deposited onto the traveled portion of any public
street or alley, leaves, grass, sand, or similar materials, nor shall any
person plow, shovel, or blow, or permit the plowing, shoveling, or blowing of
snow, onto the traveled portion of any public street or alley. This provision
shall not apply to any person who is in the process of constructing or
maintaining a yard or drive, provided that the materials are immediately
removed from the street. Nothing in this section is intended to exempt any
person from the requirement for permit under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 96.02) (Ord. 2022-07, passed 10-11-2022) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED FACILITY. A facility no longer in service or physically
disconnected from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other
facility, that is in use or still carries service. A facility is not abandoned
unless declared so by the right-of-way user.
   APPLICANT. Any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a right-
of-way.
   BUS/TRANSIT BENCH. A bench maintained on a publicly dedicated street or
right-of-way for the convenience and comfort of persons waiting for buses or
other vehicles.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. Those portions of the city known as St. Anthony Shopping
Center in the south end of the city and Silver Lake Village in the north end of
the city.
   CITY. The City of St. Anthony, Minnesota, its elected officials’ officers,
employees, agents, or any other commission, committee, or subdivision of the
city acting pursuant to lawfully delegated authority. See M.S. § 237.162, Subd.
2, as it may be amended from time to time.
   CITY COST. The actual costs incurred by the city for managing rights-of-way,
including, but not limited to, costs associated with registering of applicants;
issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way permit applications; revoking
right-of-way permits; inspecting job sites; creating and updating mapping
systems; determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration; restoring work
inadequately performed; maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user
equipment during right-of-way work; budget analysis; record keeping; legal
assistance; systems analysis; and performing all of the other tasks required by
this chapter, including other costs the city may incur in managing the
provisions of this character except as expressly prohibited by law.
   CITY INSPECTOR. Any person designated by the City Manager or designee to
carry out inspections related to the provisions of this chapter.
   COMMISSION. The State Public Utilities Commission.
   CONGESTED RIGHT-OF-WAY. A crowded condition in the subsurface of the public
right-of-way that occurs when the maximum lateral spacing between existing
underground facilities does not allow for construction of new underground
facilities without using hand digging to expose the existing lateral facilities
in conformance with M.S. § 216D.04, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to
time, over a continuous length in excess of 500 feet.
   CONSTRUCTION PERFORMANCE BOND. Any of the following forms of security
provided at permittee’s option:
      (1)   Individual project bond;
      (2)   Cash deposit;
      (3)   Security of a form listed or approved under M.S. § 15.73, Subd. 3,
as it may be amended from time to time;
      (4)   Letter of Credit, in a form acceptable to the city;
      (5)   Self-insurance, in a form acceptable to the city; and/or
      (6)   A blanket bond for projects within the city, or other form of
construction bond, for a time specified and in a form acceptable to the city.
   DEGRADATION. A decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused by
excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to
reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation
or disturbance did not occur.
   DEGRADATION COST. Subject to Minn. Rules part 7819.1100 means the cost to
achieve a level of restoration, as determined by the city at the time the
permit is issued, not to exceed the maximum restoration shown in plates one to
13, set forth in Minn. Rules parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950.
   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Public Works of the city.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Department of Public Works of the city, or her
or his designee.
   DELAY PENALTY. The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays in
right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration as established
by permit.
   EMERGENCY. A condition that:
      (1)   Poses a clear and immediate danger to life or health or of
significant loss of property; or
      (2)   Requires immediate repair or replacement in order to restore
service to a customer.
   EQUIPMENT. Any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain
facilities in any right-of-way.
   EXCAVATE. To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or
penetrate any part of right-of-way, except for horticultural practices of
penetrating the boulevard area to a depth of less than 12 inches.
   EXCAVATION PERMIT. The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be
obtained before a person may excavate in a right-of-way. An EXCAVATION PERMIT
allows the holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way as described in the
permit.
   EXCAVATION PERMIT FEE. Money paid to the city by an applicant to cover the
costs as provided in §
94.12.
   FACILITY or FACILITIES. Any tangible asset in the right-of-way required to
provide utility service, but shall not include boulevard plantings or gardens
planted or maintained in the right-of-way between a person’s property and the
street curb.
   FIVE-YEAR PROJECT PLAN. Shows projects adopted by the city for construction
within the next five years.
   HIGH-DENSITY CORRIDOR. A designated portion of the public right-of-way
within which telecommunications right-of-way users having multiple and
competing facilities may be required to build and install facilities in a
common conduit system or other common structure.
   HOLE. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length
less than the width of the pavement.
   IN. When used in conjunction with right-of-way, means over, above, in,
within, on, or under a right-of-way.
   LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE. The person or persons, or designee of the person or
persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make decisions for
that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this chapter.
   MANAGEMENT COSTS. The actual costs the city incurs in managing its rights-
of-way, including such costs, if incurred, as those associated with registering
applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way or small wireless
facility permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration projects;
maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user facilities during right-of-
way work; determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration; restoring work
inadequately performed after providing notice and the opportunity to correct
the work; and revoking right-of-way or small wireless facility permits.
MANAGEMENT COSTS do not include payment by a telecommunications right-of-way
user for the use of the right-of-way, unreasonable fees of a third-party
contractor used by the city including fees tied to or based on customer counts,
access lines, or revenues generated by the right-of-way or for the city, the
fees and cost of litigation relating to the interpretation of S.L. 1997,
Chapter 123, specifically M.S. §§ 237.162 or 237.163, as they may be amended
from time to time; or any ordinance enacted under those sections, or the city
fees and costs related to appeals taken pursuant to §
94.25.
   MAPPING DATA. Information indicating the horizontal and vertical location of
equipment and right-of-way management facilities, relative to the boundaries of
the right-of-way.
   OBSTRUCT. To place any tangible object in the right-of-way so as to hinder
free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.
   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT. The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be
obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of right-of-way by
placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way for the duration
specified therein.
   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE. Money paid to the city by a registrant to cover the
costs as provided in §
94.12.
   PATCH or PATCHING. A method of pavement replacement that is temporary in
nature. A PATCH consists of the compaction of the subbase and aggregate base,
and the replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement for a minimum of two
feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all directions. A PATCH is
considered full restoration only when the pavement is included in the city’s
five-year project plan.
   PAVEMENT. Any type of improved surface that is within the public right-of-
way and that is paved or otherwise constructed with bituminous, concrete, or
aggregate.
   PERFORMANCE AND RESTORATION BOND. A performance bond or letter of credit
posted to ensure the availability of sufficient funds to assure that all
obligations pursuant to this chapter, including, but not limited to, right-of-
way excavation and obstruction work, is timely and properly completed as
defined by the approved excavation and/or obstruction permit.
   PERMIT. Has the meaning given “right-of-way permit” in M.S. § 237.162, as it
may be amended from time to time.
   PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a right-of-
way has been granted by the city under this chapter.
   PERSON. Any natural or corporate person, business association, or other
business entity, including, but not limited to, partnership, sole
proprietorship, a political subdivision, a public or private agency of any
kind, utility, a successor or assign of any of the foregoing, or any other
legal entity which has or seeks to have equipment located in any right-of-way.
   PROBATION. The status of any person that has not complied with the
conditions of this chapter.
   PROBATION PERIOD. One year from the date that a person has been notified in
writing that they have been put on probation.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public
roadway, highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane, or public sidewalk in which
the city has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel
purposes and utility easements of the city. A RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include the
airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to cellular or other nonwire
telecommunications or broadcast service.
   REGISTRANT. Any person who has or seeks to have its equipment or facilities
located in any right-of-way, or in any way occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy
or use, the right-of-way or place its facilities or equipment in the right-of-
way.
   RESTORE or RESTORATION. The process by which an excavated right-of-way and
surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is returned to the same
condition and life expectancy that existed before excavation.
   RESTORATION COST. The amount of money paid to the city by a permittee to
achieve the right-of-way management level of restoration according to plates
one to 13 of State Public Utilities Commission rules.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT. Either the excavation permit or obstruction permit, or
both, depending on the context, required by this chapter.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY USER.
      (1) A telecommunications right-of-way user as defined by M.S. § 237.162,
Subd. 4, as it may be amended from time to time; or
      (2) A person owning or controlling a facility in the right-of-way that is
used or intended to be used for providing utility service, and who has a right
under law, franchise, or ordinance to use the public right-of-way.
   SERVICE or UTILITY SERVICE. Includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Those services provided by a public utility as defined in M.S. §
216B.02, Subds. 4 and 6, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (2)   Services of a telecommunications right-of-way user, including
transporting of voice or data information;
      (3)   Services of a cable communications systems as defined in M.S.
Chapter 238, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (4)   Natural gas or electric energy or telecommunications services
provided by the city;
      (5)   Services provided by a cooperative electric association organized
under M.S. Chapter 308A, as it may be amended from time to time; and
      (6)   Water, and sewer, including service laterals, steam, cooling, or
heating services.
   SERVICE LATERAL. An underground facility that is used to transmit,
distribute, or furnish gas, electricity, communications, or water from a common
source to an end-use customer. A SERVICE LATERAL is also an underground
facility that is used in the removal of waste water from a customer’s premises.
   STATE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION. An independent regulatory agency within
the state responsible for the oversight and regulation of public utilities,
including electric, natural gas, and telecommunications services.
   SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION. An application made to excavate or obstruct more
of the right-of-way than allowed in, or extend a permit that had already been
issued.
   TEMPORARY SURFACE. The compaction of subbase and aggregate base and
replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement only to the edges of the
excavation. It is temporary in nature except when the replacement is of
pavement included in the city’s two-year plan, in which case it is considered
full restoration.
   TRENCH. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length
equal to or greater than the width of the pavement.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHT-OF-WAY USER. A person owning or controlling a
facility in the right-of-way, or seeking to own or control the same, that is
used or intended to be used for transporting telecommunication or other voice
or data information. For purposes of this chapter, a cable communications
system defined and regulated under M.S. Chapter 238, as it may be amended from
time to time, and telecommunications activities related to providing natural
gas or electric energy services, a public utility as defined in M.S. § 216B.02,
as it may be amended from time to time, a municipality, a municipal gas or
power agency organized under M.S. Chapters 453 and 453A, as they may be amended
from time to time, or a cooperative electric association organized under M.S.
Chapter 308A, as it may be amended from time to time, are not
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHT-OF-WAY USERS for purposes of this chapter.
   UNUSABLE EQUIPMENT. Equipment located in the right-of-way which has remained
unused for one year and for which the registrant is unable to provide proof
that it has either a plan to begin using it within the next 12 months or a
potential purchaser or user of the equipment.
   USER FEE. The sum of money, payable to the city, by a person using or
occupying the right-of-way; provided, however, that the city may at its option
provide, at any time by ordinance or by amendment thereto, for a greater or
different fee applicable to all the persons in an amount and by a method of
determination as may be further provided in the ordinance or amendment thereto.
(Prior Code, § 96.03) (Ord. 2019-05, passed 4-9-2019; Ord. 2022-03, passed 5-
24-2022; Ord. 2022-07, passed 10-11-2022; Ord. 2023-01, passed 7-11-2023)
§ 94.04 ADMINISTRATION.
   The city may designate a principal city official responsible for the
administration of the rights-of-way, right-of-way permits, and the ordinances
related thereto. The city may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 96.04)
§ 94.05 UTILITY COORDINATION COMMITTEE.
   The city may create an Advisory Utility Coordination Committee.
Participation on the Committee is voluntary. It will be composed of any
registrants that wish to assist the city in obtaining information and, by
making recommendations regarding use of the right-of-way, and to improve the
process of performing construction work therein. The city may determine the
size of such committee and shall appoint members from a list of registrants
that have expressed a desire to assist the city.
(Prior Code, § 96.05)
§ 94.06 REGISTRATION, BONDING, AND RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Each person or service that occupies, uses, or seeks to occupy or use,
the right-of-way or any equipment located in the right-of-way, including by
lease, sublease, or assignment, or who has, or seeks to have, equipment located
in any right-of-way, must register with the city. Registration will consist of
providing application information and as required by the city, paying a
registration fee, and posting a performance and restoration bond. The
performance and restoration bond required in this section, and in §§
94.12,
94.15, and
94.34, shall be in an amount determined at the city’s sole discretion,
sufficient to serve as security for the full and complete performance of the
obligations under this chapter, including any costs, expenses, damages, or loss
the city pays or incurs because of any failure to comply with this chapter or
any other applicable laws, regulations, or standards. During periods of
construction, repair, or restoration of rights-of-way or equipment in rights-
of-way, the performance and restoration bond shall be in an amount sufficient
to cover 100% of the estimated cost of the work, as documented by the person
proposing to perform the work, or in the lesser amount as may be determined by
the city, taking into account the amount of equipment, in the right-of-way, the
location and method of installation of the equipment, the conflict or
interference of the equipment with the equipment of other persons, and the
purposes and policies of this section. Sixty days after completion of the work,
the right-of-way management performance and restoration bond may be reduced by
the sole determination of the city.
   (B)   No person may construct, install, repair, remove, relocate, or perform
any other work, except as permitted in division (C) below, on or use any
equipment or any part thereof located in any right-of-way without first being
registered with the city.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or amend the provisions of
a city ordinance permitting persons to plant or maintain boulevard plantings or
gardens or in the area of right-of-way between their property and the street
curb. Persons planting or maintaining boulevard plantings or gardens shall not
be deemed to use or occupy the right-of-way, and shall not be required to
obtain any permits or satisfy any other requirements for planting or
maintaining the boulevard plantings or gardens under this chapter. However,
excavations deeper than 12 inches are subject to the permit requirements of §
94.11 and nothing herein relieves a person from complying with the provisions
of the M.S. Chapter 216D, Gopher One Call Law, as it may be amended from time
to time.
(Prior Code, § 96.06) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.07 RIGHT TO OCCUPANCY OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY; PAYMENT OF FEES.
   (A)   Any person required to register under §
94.08, which occupies, uses, or places its equipment in the right-of-way, is
hereby granted a right to do so if and only so long as it timely pays all fees
as provided herein and complies with all other requirements of law. A permit
issued under this chapter does not authorize the collocation of a small
wireless facility or the installation or replacement of a wireless support
structure. To collocate a small wireless facility or install or replace a
wireless support structure in the public right-of-way, a person must obtain a
small wireless facility permit pursuant to §§
90.35 through
90.49.
   (B)   The grant of right in division (A) above is expressly conditioned on,
and is subject to, the police powers of the city, continuing compliance with
all provisions of law now or hereafter enacted, including this chapter as it
may be from time to time amended and, authorizations, whether from the city or
other body or authority.
(Prior Code, § 96.07) (Ord. 2019-05, passed 4-9-2019)
§ 94.08 FRANCHISE; FRANCHISE SUPREMACY.
   The city may, in addition to the requirements of this chapter, require any
person which has or seeks to have equipment located in any right-of-way to
obtain a franchise to the full extent permitted by law, now or hereafter
enacted. The terms of any franchise which are in direct conflict with any
provision of this chapter, whether granted prior or subsequent to enactment to
this chapter, shall control and supersede the conflicting terms of this
chapter, provided, however, that requirements relating to insurance, bonds,
penalties, security funds, letters of credit, indemnification, or any other
security in favor of the city may be cumulative in grantee. All other terms of
this chapter shall be fully applicable to all persons whether franchised or
not.
(Prior Code, § 96.08)
§ 94.09 REGISTRATION INFORMATION.
   (A)   Generally. The information provided to the city at the time of
registration shall include, but not to be limited to:
      (1)   Each registrant’s name, Gopher One Call registration certificate
number, address, and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile
numbers;
      (2)   The name, address, and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone
and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local representative or
designee shall be available at all times. Current information regarding how to
contact the local representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time
of registration; and
      (3)   A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
         (a)   Shall be on a form approved by the city;
         (b)   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the
registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, or a
form of self-insurance acceptable to the city;
         (c)   Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for
personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising
out of the use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the registrant, its
officers, agents, employees, and permittees, and placement and use of
facilities and equipment in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers,
agents, employees, and permittees, including, but not limited to, protection
against liability arising from completed operations, damage of underground
facilities, and collapse of property;
         (d)   Naming the city as an additional insured as to whom the
coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will
be provided as to all such coverages;
         (e)   Requiring that the city be notified 30 days in advance of
cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term;
         (f)   Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile
liability coverage, workers compensation, and umbrella coverage established by
the city in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the public and to carry
out the purposes and policies of this chapter;
         (g)   The city may require a copy of the actual insurance policies;
         (h)   Regardless of the type of business entity, a copy of the
insuring certificate is required to be filed, M.S. § 300.06, as it may be
amended from time to time, as recorded and certified to by the Secretary of
State; and
         (i)   A copy of the person’s order granting a certificate of authority
from the State Public Utilities Commission or other authorization or approval
from the applicable state or federal agency to lawfully operate, where the
person is lawfully required to have such authorization or approval from said
commission or other state or federal agency.
   (B)   Notice of changes. The registrant shall keep all of the information
listed above current at all times by providing to the city information of
changes within 15 days following the date on which the registrant has knowledge
of any change.
   (C)   Grant of right; payment of user fee.
      (1)   Any person required to register under this section, which furnishes
utility services or which occupies, uses, or places its equipment in the right-
of-way, is hereby granted a right to do so if and only so long as it pays the
user fees as provided herein in a timely manner and complies with all other
requirements of law. This legal entitlement shall not include use of the right-
of-way for purposes not in furtherance of furnishing utility services for which
additional authorization is required by this chapter or other state or federal
law, unless the person pays the user fee for the non-utility service use.
      (2)   The fee shall be paid to the city in substantially equal quarterly
installments, subject to adjustment and correction at the conclusion of the
calendar year. This fee shall be paid for all and any part of a calendar year,
prorated on a daily basis, during any time period in which the permit holder
uses or occupies the right-of-way to furnish utility service, or places,
maintains, or uses its wires, mains, pipes, or any other facilities or
equipment in the right-of-way.
      (3)   The granting of the right is expressly conditioned on, and is
subject to, continuing compliance with all provisions of law, including this
section.
   (D)   Franchise agreements; franchise payments. This section does not apply
to a person or business which uses and occupies the right-of-way for operating
its business when there is a preexisting franchise agreement between that
person or business and the city and franchise payments are made as agreed.
(Prior Code, § 96.09)
§ 94.10 REPORTING OBLIGATIONS.
   (A)   Operations.
      (1)   Each registrant shall at the time of registration and by December 1
of each year, file a construction and major maintenance plan with the city.
Registrants must use commercially reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for
all upcoming projects and include all the projects in a construction or major
maintenance plan. The plan shall be submitted using a format designated by the
city and shall contain the information determined by the city to be necessary
to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the frequency of excavations
and obstructions of rights-of-way.
      (2)   The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
         (a)   The specific locations and the estimated beginning and ending
dates of all projects to be commenced during the next calendar year (in this
chapter, a “next-year project”); and
         (b)   The tentative locations and beginning and ending dates for all
projects contemplated for the five years following the next calendar year (in
this chapter, a “five-year project”).
      (3)   The term PROJECT in this section shall include both next-year
projects and five-year projects.
      (4)   By January 1 of each year, the city will have available for
inspection in its offices a composite list of all projects of which it has been
informed in the annual plans. All registrants are responsible for keeping
themselves apprised of the current status of this list.
      (5)   Thereafter, by February 1, each registrant may change any project
in its list of next-year projects, and must notify the city and all other
registrants of all the changes in the list. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a
registrant may at any time join in a next-year project of another registrant
that was listed by the other registrant.
   (B)   Additional next-year projects. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city
may, for good cause shown, allow a registrant to submit additional next-year
projects. Good cause included, but is not limited to, the criteria set forth in
§
94.19 concerning the discretionary issuance of permits.
(Prior Code, § 96.10) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.11 PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Generally. Except as otherwise provided in this code, no person may
obstruct or excavate any right-of-way, or facilities in the right-of-way,
without first having obtained the appropriate right-of-way permit from the city
to do so.
   (B)   Excavation permit. An excavation permit is required to allow the
holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in the permit and/or
to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way
by placing equipment described therein, to the extent and for the duration
specified therein.
   (C)   Obstruction permit. An obstruction permit is required to allow the
holder to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of right-of-
way by placing equipment, vehicles, or other obstructions described therein on
the right-of-way for the duration specified therein.
   (D)   Permit extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-way
beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless the person makes a
supplementary application for another right-of-way permit before the expiration
of the initial permit, and a new permit extension is granted.
   (E)   Delay penalty. In accordance with Minn. Rules 7819.1000, subp. 3, and
notwithstanding division (B) above, the city shall establish and impose a delay
penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction,
patching, or restoration. The delay penalty shall be established from time to
time by City Council resolution.
   (F)   Permit display. Permits issued under this chapter shall be
conspicuously displayed at all times at the indicated work site and shall be
available for inspection by the City Inspector and authorized city personnel.
(Prior Code, § 96.11) (Ord. 2019-05, passed 4-9-2019) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.12 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Application for a permit is made to the city.
   (B)   Right-of-way permit applications shall contain, and will be considered
complete only upon compliance with, the requirements of the following
provisions:
      (1)   Registration with the city pursuant to this chapter;
      (2)   Submission of completed permit application form, including all
required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the
proposed project and the location of all existing and proposed equipment; and
      (3)   Payment of all money due to the city for:
         (a)   Permit fees, estimated restoration costs, and other management
costs;
         (b)   Prior obstructions or excavations;
         (c)   Any loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city as a result of
the applicant’s prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way or any
emergency action taken by the city;
         (d)   Franchise fees or other charges, if applicable; and
         (e)   Payment of disputed amounts due the city by posting or
depositing in an escrow account an amount equal to at least 110% of the amount
owing.
   (C)   When an excavation permit is requested for purposes of installing
additional equipment, and a performance and restoration bond which is in
existence is insufficient with respect to the additional equipment in the sole
determination of the city, the permit applicant may be required by the city to
post an additional performance and restoration bond in accordance with §
94.06.
(Prior Code, § 96.12)
§ 94.13 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   If the city determines that the applicant has satisfied the
requirements of this chapter, the city may issue a permit.
   (B)   The city may impose any reasonable conditions upon the insurance of a
permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder in order to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare, to ensure the structural integrity of the
right-of-way, to protect the property and safety of other users of the right-
of-way, to minimize the disruption and inconvenience to the traveling public,
and to otherwise efficiently manage use of the right-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 96.13) (Ord. 2019-05, passed 4-9-2019)
§ 94.14 PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Excavation permit fee. The excavation permit fee shall be imposed by
the city in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:
      (1)   The city cost;
      (2)   The degradation of the right-of-way that will result from the
excavation; and
      (3)   Restoration, if done or caused to be done by the city.
   (B)   Disruption fees. The city may establish and impose a disruption fee as
a penalty for unreasonable delays in excavations, obstructions, or restoration.
   (C)   Obstruction permit fee. The city shall impose an obstruction permit
fee in an amount sufficient to recover management costs.
   (D)   Payment of permit fees. No excavation permit or obstruction permit
shall be issued without payment of all fees required prior to the issuance of
the permit unless the applicant shall agree (in manner, amount, and substance
acceptable to the city) to pay the fees within 30 days of billing therefor. All
permit fees shall be doubled during a probationary period. Permit fees that
were paid for a permit which was revoked for a breach are not refundable. Any
refunded permit fees shall be less all city cost up to and including the date
of refund.
   (E)   Use of permit fees. All obstruction and excavation permit fees shall
be used solely for city management, construction, maintenance, and restoration
costs of the right-of-way.
   (F)   Application to franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise,
management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to the
franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise.
(Prior Code, § 96.14)
§ 94.15 RIGHT-OF-WAY RESTORATION.
   (A)   Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the
repair and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of extraordinary circumstances beyond the
control of the permit holder or when work was prohibited as unseasonable or
unreasonable under §
94.18. In addition to repairing its own work, the permit holder must restore
the general work area of the work, and the surrounding areas, including the
paving and its foundations, to the same condition that existed before the
commencement of the work and must inspect the area of work and use reasonable
care to maintain the same condition for 36 months thereafter.
   (B)   Repair and restoration. The permit holder shall repair its own work.
In addition, in its application for an excavation permit, the permit holder may
choose either to have the city restore the right-of-way or to restore the
right-of-way itself.
      (1)   City restoration. If the permit holder chooses to have the city
restore the right-of-way, the permit holder shall pay the costs thereof within
30 days of billing. If, during the 36 months following the restoration, the
pavement settles due to the permit holder’s improper backfilling, the permit
holder shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost for the
resultant degradation as well as for any and all additional city costs
associated therewith.
      (2)   Permit holder restoration. If the permit holder chooses at the time
of application for an excavation permit to restore the right-of-way itself, the
permit holder shall post an additional performance and restoration bond in an
amount determined by the city to be sufficient to cover the cost of restoring
the right-of-way to its pre-excavation condition. If, 36 months after
completion of the restoration of the right-of-way, the city determines that the
right-of-way has been properly restored, the surety on the performance and
restoration bond posted pursuant to this division (B)(2) shall be released.
   (C)   Standards. The permit holder shall perform the work according to the
standards and with the materials specified by the city. The city shall have the
authority to prescribe the manner and extent of the restoration, and may do so
in written procedures of general application or on a case-by-case basis. The
city, in exercising this authority, shall be guided but not limited by the
following standards and considerations:
      (1)   The number, size, depth, and duration of the excavations,
disruptions, or damage to the right-of-way;
      (2)   The traffic volume catted by the right-of-way; the character of the
neighborhood surrounding the right-of-way;
      (3)   The pre-excavation condition of the right-of-way; remaining life
expectancy of the right-of-way affected by the excavation;
      (4)   Whether the relative cost of the method of restoration to the
permit holder is in reasonable balance with the prevention of an accelerated
depreciation of the right-of-way that would otherwise result from the
excavation, disturbance, or damage to the right-of-way; and
      (5)   The likelihood that the particular method of restoration would be
effective in slowing the deprecation of the right-of-way that would otherwise
take place.
   (D)   Guarantees. By choosing to restore the right-of-way itself, the permit
holder guarantees its work and shall maintain it for 36 months following the
completion. During this 36-month period, it shall, upon notification from the
city, correct all restoration work to the extent necessary, using the method
required by the city. The work shall be completed within five calendar days of
the receipt of the notice from the city, not including days during which work
cannot be done because of extraordinary circumstances or days when work is
prohibited as unseasonable or unreasonable under §
94.18.
   (E)   Failure to restore. If the permit holder fails to restore the right-
of-way in the manner and to the condition required by the city, or fails to
satisfactorily and timely complete all repairs required by the city, the city
at its option may perform or cause to be performed the work. In that event, the
permit holder shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of
restoring the right-of-way. If the permit holder fails to pay as required, the
city may exercise its rights under the performance and restoration bond.
   (F)   Degradation fee in lieu of restoration. In lieu of right-of-way
restoration, a permit holder shall pay to the city a degradation fee to cover
city costs associated with a decrease in the useful life of a public right-of-
way caused by excavation and repairs. Payment of a degradation fee does not
relieve the permit holder of the obligation to make necessary right-of-way
repairs.
(Prior Code, § 96.15)
§ 94.16 JOINT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Joint application. Registrants may jointly make application for
permits to excavate or obstruct the right-of-way at the same place and time.
   (B)   With city projects. Registrants who join in and during a scheduled
obstruction or excavation performed by the city, whether or not it is a joint
application by two or more registrants or a single application, are not
required to pay the obstruction and degradation portions of the permit fee.
   (C)   Shared fees. Registrants who apply for permits for the same
obstruction or excavation, which is not performed by the city, may share in the
payment of the obstruction of excavation permit fee. Registrants must agree
among themselves as to the portion each will pay and indicate the same on their
applications.
(Prior Code, § 96.16)
§ 94.17 SUPPLEMENTAL APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Limitation on area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area
of the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permit holder may perform any
work outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any
permit holder which determines that an area greater than that specified in the
permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater area
make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees
necessitated thereby, and be granted a new permit or permit extension.
   (B)   Limitations on dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the
dates specified in the permit. No permit holder may begin its work before the
permit start date or, except as provided therein, continue working after the
end date. If the permit holder does not finish the work by the permit end date,
it must make application for a new permit for additional time it needs, and
receive the new permit or an extension of the old permit before working after
the end date of the previous permit. This supplementary application must be
done before the permit end date.
(Prior Code, § 96.17)
§ 94.18 OTHER OBLIGATIONS.
   (A)   Compliance with other laws. Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not
relieve the permit holder of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits,
licenses, franchises, or other authorizations and to pay all fees required by
the city, any other city, county, state, or federal rules, laws, or
regulations. A permit holder shall comply with all requirements of local,
state, and federal laws, including M.S. §§ 216D.01 through 216D.09, as they may
be amended from time to time. A permit holder shall perform all work in
conformance with all applicable codes and established rules and regulations,
and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to its
permit, regardless of who performed the work.
   (B)   Prohibited work. Except in the case of an emergency, and with the
approval of the city, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be
performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for
the work.
   (C)   Interference with right-of-way. A permit holder shall not so obstruct
a right-of-way that the natural free and clear passage of water through the
gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with. Private vehicles may not
be parked adjacent to a permit area. The loading or unloading of trucks
adjacent to a permit area is prohibited unless specifically authorized by the
permit.
(Prior Code, § 96.18) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.19 DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Reasons for denial. The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the
requirements and conditions of this chapter or if the city determines that the
denial is necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when
necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use.
   (B)   Procedural requirements. The denial or revocation of a permit must be
made in writing and must document the basis for the denial. The city must
notify the applicant or right-of-way user in writing within three business days
of the decision to deny or revoke a permit. If an application is denied, the
right-of-way user may address the reasons for denial identified by the city and
resubmit its application. If the application is resubmitted within 30 days of
receipt of the notice of denial, no additional application fee shall be
imposed. The city must approve or deny the resubmitted application within 30
days after submission. (See M.S. § 237.163, Subds. 4(c) and 4(f), as it may be
amended from time to time.)
   (C)   Mandatory denial. Except in the case of an emergency, no right-of-way
permit will be granted:
      (1)   To any person required by §
94.06 to be registered who has not done so;
      (2)   To any person required by §
94.10 to file an annual report but has failed to do so;
      (3)   For any next-year project not listed in the construction and major
maintenance plan required under §
94.08 unless the person used commercially reasonable efforts to anticipate and
plan for the project;
      (4)   For any project which requires the excavation of any portion of a
right-of-way which was constructed or reconstructed within the preceding five
years;
      (5)   To any person who has failed within the past three years to comply,
or is presently not in full compliance, with the requirements of the section;
      (6)   To any person as whom there exists grounds for the revocation of a
permit under §
94.24; and/or
      (7)   If, in the sole discretion of the city, the issuance of a permit
for the particular date and/or time would cause a conflict to interfere with an
exhibition, celebration, festival, or any other event. The city, in exercising
this discretion, shall be guided by the safety and convenience of ordinary
travel of the public over the right-of-way, and by considerations relating to
the public health, safety, and welfare.
   (D)   Permissive denial. The city may deny a permit in order to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare, to prevent interference with the safety and
convenience of ordinary travel over the right-of-way, or when necessary to
protect the right-of-way and its users. The city may consider one or more of
the following factors:
      (1)   The extent to which right-of-way space where the permit is sought
is available;
      (2)   The competing demands for the particular space in the right-of-way;
      (3)   The availability of other locations in the right-of-way or in other
rights-of-way equipment of the permit applicants;
      (4)   The applicability of ordinance or other regulations of the right-
of-way that affect location of equipment in the right-of-way;
      (5)   The degree of compliance of the applicant with the terms and
conditions of its franchise, if any, this chapter, and other applicable
ordinances and regulations;
      (6)   The degree of disruption to surrounding communities and businesses
that will result from the use of that part of the right-of-way;
      (7)   The condition and age of the right-of-way, and whether and when it
is scheduled for a total or partial reconstruction; and
      (8)   The balancing of the costs of disruption to the public and damage
to the right-of-way, against the benefits to that part of the public served by
the expansion into additional parts of the right-of-way.
   (E)   Discretionary issuance. Notwithstanding the provisions of divisions
(D)(3) and (D)(4) above, the city may issue a permit in any case where the
permit is necessary to prevent substantial economic hardship to a customer of
the permit applicant, or to allow the customer to materially improve its
utility service, or to allow a new economic development project; and where the
permit applicant did not have knowledge of the hardship, the plans for
improvement of service, or the development project when the applicant was
required to submit its lists of next-year projects.
   (F)   Permits for additional next-year projects. Notwithstanding the
provisions of division (D)(3) above, the city may issue a permit to a
registrant who was allowed under §
94.10 to submit an additional next-year project, or in the event the registrant
demonstrates that it is used commercially, reasonable efforts to anticipate and
plan for the project, the permit to be subject to all other conditions and
requirements of law, including the conditions as may be imposed under §
94.13.
(Prior Code, § 96.19)
§ 94.20 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
   In accordance with M.S. §§ 237.162, Subd. 8(3) and 237.163, Subd. 8, as they
may be amended from time to time; and other provisions of law, and until the
Public Utilities Commission adopts uniform statewide standards, the excavation,
restoration, and all other work performed in the right-of-way shall be done in
conformance with the standard specifications for street openings as promulgated
by the city and at a location as may be required by §
94.27. The city may enforce local standards prior to adoption of mandatory,
preemptive statewide standards pursuant to its inherent and historical police
power authority.
(Prior Code, § 96.20)
§ 94.21 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Notice of completion of work. When the work under any permit hereunder
is completed, the permit holder shall notify the city.
   (B)   Site inspection. The permit holder shall make the work-site available
to the City Building Official or designee and to all others as authorized by
law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon
completion of the work.
   (C)   Authority of City Inspector. At the time of inspection the City
Building Official or designee may order the immediate cessation of any work
which poses a serious threat to life, health, safety, or well-being of the
public. The City Building Official or designee may issue an order to the
registrant for any work which does not conform to the applicable standards,
conditions, or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the
violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten days after
issuance of the order, the registrant shall present proof to the city that the
violation has been corrected. If the proof has not been presented within the
required time, the city may revoke the permit pursuant to §
94.24.
(Prior Code, § 96.21)
§ 94.22 WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.
   (A)   Emergency situations.
      (1)   Each registrant shall immediately notify the city of the city’s
designee of any event regarding its equipment which it considers to be an
emergency. The registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in
order to respond to the emergency. Within two business days after the
occurrence of the emergency, the registrant shall apply for the necessary
permits, pay the fees associated therewith, and fulfill the rest of the
requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this chapter for
the actions it took in response to the emergency.
      (2)   In the event that the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding
a registrant’s equipment, the city may attempt to contact the local
representative of each registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the
emergency. In any event, the city may take whatever action it deems necessary
in order to respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the
registrant whose equipment occasioned the emergency.
   (B)   Non-emergency situations. Except in the case of an emergency, any
person who, without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or
evacuates a right-of-way, must subsequently obtain a permit, pay double the
normal fee for the permit, pay double all the other fees required by city
ordinance, necessary to correct any damage to the right-of-way and comply with
all the requirements of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 96.22)
§ 94.23 SUPPLEMENTAL NOTIFICATION.
   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or sooner
than the date given on the permit, the permit holder shall notify the city of
the accurate information as soon as this information is known.
(Prior Code, § 96.23)
§ 94.24 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Substantial breach. Registrants hold permits issued pursuant to this
code as a privilege and not as a right. The city reserves the right, as
provided herein and in accordance with M.S. § 237.163, Subd. 4, as it may be
amended from time to time, to revoke any right-of-way permit, without fee
refund, in the event of a substantial breach of the term and conditioned of any
statute, ordinance, rule, or regulation, or any condition of the permit. A
substantial breach by permit holder shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
      (1)   The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
      (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-
of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit
upon the city or its citizens;
      (3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a
right-of-way permit;
      (4)   The failure to maintain the required bonds and/or insurance;
      (5)   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner; or
      (6)   The failure to correct a condition indicated on an order issued
pursuant to §
94.21.
   (B)   Written notice of breach. If the city determines that the permit
holder has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any
statute, ordinance, rule, regulation, or any condition of the permit, the city
shall make a written demand upon the permit holder to remedy the violation. The
demand shall state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the
permit. Further, a substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city, at
the city’s discretion, to place additional or revised conditions on the permit.
   (C)   Response to notice of breach. Within 24 hours of receiving
notification of the breach, permit holder shall contact the city with a plan,
acceptable to the City Building Official or designee, for its correction. The
permit holder’s failure to so contact the City Building Official or designee,
the permit holder’s failure to submit an acceptable plan, or the permit
holder’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan shall be cause for
immediate revocation of the permit. Further, permit holder’s failure to so
contact the City Building Official or designee, or the permit holder’s failure
to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall automatically place the permit
holder on probation for one full year.
   (D)   Cause for probation. From time to time, the city may establish a list
of conditions of the permit which, if breached, will automatically place the
permit holder on probation for one full year, such as, but not limited to,
working out of the allotted time period or working on right-of-way outside of
the permit.
   (E)   Automatic revocation. If a permit holder, while on probation, commits
a breach as outlined above, permit holder’s permit will automatically be
revoked, and permit holder will not be allowed further permits for one full
year, except for emergency repairs.
   (F)   Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revoked, the permit holder
shall also reimburse the city for the city’s reasonable costs, including
restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorney’s fees
incurred in connection with the revocation.
(Prior Code, § 96.24)
§ 94.25 APPEALS.
   (A)   Appeal process. If an applicant has been denied registration of a
right-of-way permit, its right-of-way permit has been revoked, or believes that
the fees imposed on the user by the city do not conform to the requirements of
law, the applicant may have the denial, revocation, or fee imposition reviewed,
upon written request, by the City Council. The City Council shall act on a
timely written request at its next regularly scheduled meeting. A decision by
the City Council affirming the denial, revocation, or fee imposition must be in
writing and supported by written findings establishing the reasonableness of
the decision.
   (B)   Appeal costs. Each party to the arbitrators shall pay its own costs,
disbursements, and attorney fees.
(Prior Code, § 96.25)
§ 94.26 MAPPING DATA.
   (A)   Information required. Except as provided in division (B) below, each
registrant shall provide to the city information indicating the horizontal and
vertical location, relative to the boundaries of the right-of-way, of all
equipment which it owns or over which it has control and which is located in
any right-of-way (“mapping data”). Mapping data shall be provided with the
specificity and in the format requested by the city for inclusion in the
mapping system used by the city. Notwithstanding the foregoing, mapping data
shall be submitted by all registrants for all equipment which is to be
installed or constructed after the date of passage of this chapter at the time
any permits are sought under this chapter.
   (B)   Supplemental information. Within six months of the acquisition,
installation, of construction of additional equipment or any relocation,
abandonment, or disuse of excavating equipment, each registrant shall
supplement the mapping data required herein.
   (C)   Comprehensive equipment plans.
      (1)   Each registrant shall, within six months after the date of passage
of this chapter, submit a plan to the city specifying in detail the steps it
will take economically with the requirements of this chapter. This plan shall
provide for the submission of all mapping data for commercial and industrial
zoning districts within two years after the date of passage of this chapter,
and for the remainder of the city as early as may be reasonable and practical,
but not later than five years after the date of passage of this chapter for the
remainder of the city as early as may be reasonable and practical, but not
later than five years after the date of passage of this chapter.
      (2)   After six months after the passage of this chapter, a new
registrant, or a registrant which has not submitted a plan as required above,
shall submit complete and accurate mapping data for all its equipment at the
time any permits are sought under this chapter.
   (D)   Telecommunications equipment. Information on existing facilities and
equipment of telecommunications right-of-way users need only be supplied in the
form maintained by the telecommunications right-of-way user.
   (E)   Trade secret information. At the request of any registrant, any
information requested by the city, which qualifies as a “trade secret” under
M.S. § 13.37, Subd. 1(b), as it may be amended from time to time, shall be
treated as trade secret information as detailed therein. With respect to the
provision of mapping data, the city may consider unique circumstances from time
to time required to obtain mapping data.
(Prior Code, § 96.26)
§ 94.27 LOCATION OF EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Undergrounding. Unless otherwise permitted by an existing franchise or
M.S. § 216B.34, as it may be amended from time to time, or unless existing
above ground equipment is repaired or replaced, or unless infeasible such as in
the provision of electric service at certain voltages, new construction,
installation of new equipment, and the replacement of old equipment shall be
done underground or contained within buildings or other structures in
conformity with applicable codes unless otherwise agreed to by the city in
writing, and the agreement is reflected in applicable permits.
   (B)   Corridors. The city may assign specific corridors within the right-of-
way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of
equipment that is or, pursuant to current technology, the city expects will
someday be, located within the right-of-way. Excavation, obstruction, or other
permits issued by the city for good involving the installation or replacement
of equipment may designate the proper corridor for the equipment at issue, and
the equipment must be located accordingly.
   (C)   Moving of existing equipment to corridors. Any registrant whose
equipment is located, prior to enactment of this chapter, in the right-of-way
in a position at variance with corridors established by the city shall, no
later than at a time of the next reconstruction of excavation of the area where
its equipment is located, move that equipment to its assigned position within
the right-of-way, unless this requirement is waived by the city for good cause
shown, upon consideration of factors such as the remaining economic life of the
facilities, public safety, customer service needs, and headship to the
registrant.
   (D)   Nuisance. One year after the passage of this chapter, any equipment
found in a right-of-way that has not been registered shall be deemed to be a
nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in
equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance or taking
possession of the equipment and restoring the right-of-way to a usable
condition.
   (E)   Limitation of space. To protect health, safety, and welfare, the city
shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new additional
equipment within the right-of-way if there is insufficient space to accommodate
all of the requests of registrant or persons to occupy and use the right-of-
way. In making the decisions, the city shall strive to the extent possible to
accommodate all existing and potential users of the right-of-way, but shall be
guided primarily by considerations of public interest, the public’s needs for
the particular service, the condition of the right-of-way, the time of year
with respect to essential utilities, the protection of existing equipment in
the right-of-way, and future city plans for public improvements and development
projects which have been determined to be the public interest.
(Prior Code, § 96.27)
§ 94.28 RELOCATION OF EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   A registrant must promptly and at its own expense, with due regard for
seasonal working conditions, permanently remove and relocate its equipment and
facilities in the right-of-way whenever the city requests the removal and
relocation, and shall restore the right-of-way to the same condition it was in
prior to the removal or relocation. The city may make the requests in order to
prevent inference by the company’s equipment or facilities with a present or
future city use of the right-of-way; a public improvement undertaken by the
city; an economic development project in which the city has an interest or
investment; when the public health, safety, and welfare requires it; or when
necessary to prevent interference with the safety and convenience or ordinary
travel over the right-of-way.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the forgoing, a person shall not be required to remove
of relocate its equipment from any right-of-way which has been vacated in favor
of nongovernmental entity to the person therefor.
(Prior Code, § 96.28)
§ 94.29 PRE-EXCAVATION EQUIPMENT LOCATION.
   In addition to complying with the requirements of M.S. §§ 216D.01 through
216D.09, as they may be amended from time to time, before the start date of any
right-of-way excavation, each registrant who has equipment located in the area
to be excavated shall mark the horizontal and approximate vertical placement of
all the equipment. Any registrant whose equipment is less than 20 inches below
a concrete or asphalt surface shall notify and work closely with the excavation
contractor in an effort to establish the exact location of its equipment and
the best procedure for excavation.
(Prior Code, § 96.29)
§ 94.30 DAMAGE TO OTHER EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Maintenance work by city. When the city performs work in the right-of-
way and finds it necessary to maintain, support, or move a registrant’s
equipment in order to protect it, the city shall notify the local
representative as early as is reasonably possible. The costs associated
therewith will be billed to that registrant and must be paid within 30 days
from the date of billing.
   (B)   Responsibility of registrant. Each registrant shall be responsible for
the cost of repairing any equipment in the right-of-way which it or its
equipment damages. Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of
repairing any damage to the equipment of another registrant cause during the
city’s response to an emergency occasioned by that registrant’s equipment.
(Prior Code, § 96.30)
§ 94.31 RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.
   (A)   Reservation of right. If the city vacates a right-of-way which
contains the equipment of a registrant, and if the vacation does not require
the relocation of registrant or permit holder equipment, the city shall
reserve, to and for itself and all registrants having equipment in the vacated
right-of-way, the right to install, maintain, and operate any equipment in the
vacated right-of-way and to enter upon the right-of-way at any time for the
purpose of reconstructing, inspecting, maintaining, or repairing the same.
   (B)   Relocation of equipment. If the vacation requires the relocation of
the registrant or permit holder equipment and; if the vacation proceedings are
initiated by the registrant or permit holder, the registrant or permit holder
must pay the relocation costs; or if the vacation proceedings are initiated by
the city and the registrant or permit holder must pay the relocation costs
unless otherwise agreed to by the city and the registrant to permit holder; or
if the vacation proceeding are initiated by a person or persons other than the
registrant or permit holder, the person or persons must pay the relocation
costs.
(Prior Code, § 96.31)
§ 94.32 BUS/TRANSIT BENCHES IN RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the placing and
maintenance of bus/transit benches in public rights-of-way in order to control
location, appearance, proliferation, and traffic safety.
   (B)   License required. No bench may be placed or maintained in a public
right-of-way without securing a license from the City Manager, or designee
thereof, and the payment of an annual license fee as established in §
33.060.
   (C)   Application. Applications for licenses shall be made to the City
Manager or designee. The application shall contain the following:
      (1)   Scale drawing showing the size and location details of the bus/
transit bench relative to all other objects on the property including the
layout of applicable adjacent roadways, intersections, traffic signage,
sidewalks, trails, utility poles, fences, and other objects in the vicinity.
      (2)   Written consent of the road authority, as defined in M.S. § 160.02,
as it may be amended from time to time, if the city is not the road authority.
      (3)   Detailed plans and specifications of the proposed bench including
the general nature of the advertising matter, if any, to be posted thereon and
total surface area intended as signage not to exceed 12 square feet using the
front, or seating side surface only of the bench backrest.
      (4)   General liability certificate of insurance from an insurance
company rated “A” by A.M. Best Company and authorized to do business in the
state, naming the city as additional insured in the minimum amount of
$1,000,000 for any and all claims arising out of the use or existence of a bus/
transit bench. The certificate shall provide for automatic notification of the
city with a minimum 30-day advanced notice in the event of cancellation.
      (5)   An executed hold harmless agreement from the licensee, protecting
the city from any and all claims arising out of the use, existence, and
potential removal of the bus/transit bench.
   (D)   Bus/transit stops. A bench shall only be placed at a bus/transit stop
on an established bus route.
   (E)   Location. A bench shall be placed parallel to and no nearer than three
feet from the roadway curb or the edge of the roadway where no curb exists and
shall not obstruct a pathway.
   (F)   Number. No more than one bus/transit bench, located outside of a
shelter, may be placed at a single established bus/transit stop location.
   (G)   Proximity to other benches. No bus/transit bench may be placed within
300 feet of any other bench on the same side of the roadway from which service
is to be delivered.
   (H)   Materials. A bus/transit bench shall be constructed of durable
materials including, but not limited to, concrete, wood, plastic, or
combination thereof, with colors limited to whites, earth tones of subdued
greens, grays, browns, reddish-browns, and golds.
   (I)   Construction and size. The bus/transit bench shall be of sufficient
weight or shall be secured in a manner to minimize the potential of accidental
tipping or vandalism. No bus/transit bench shall be fastened, secured, or
anchored to any property of the city, county, or public utility. Size
limitations of bus/transit benches shall be:
      (1)   Height: 42 inches maximum;
      (2)   Width: 30 inches maximum; and
      (3)   Length: seven feet maximum.
   (J)   Structure maintenance. When directed by the Code Official, the
licensee shall, within 48 hours, remedy any report of refuse and litter issues.
Within 72 hours of a snow fall or other weather event, removal of ice and snow
in a manner such that each bench shall be fully accessible to and from any
sidewalk or roadway adjacent to the bus/transit bench shall be achieved.
Licensee shall inspect benches monthly for any grass or weeds in excess of six
inches, graffiti, damaged, or broken parts and shall remedy deficiencies within
48 hours after being discovered or reported.
   (K)   Revocation of license. The City Council may revoke a license for
failure to comply with the conditions of the license by three affirmative
votes.
   (L)   Removal. At the request of the city, a bench shall be removed within
30 days of notice, at the permittee’s sole expense, if:
      (1)   To permit right-of-way improvements or maintenance;
      (2)   The location of the bench is a safety hazard or if it interferes
with pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the right-of-way;
      (3)   If the bus stop location is removed from service; or
      (4)   The license issued by the city is allowed to expire or is revoked.
The licensee shall incur the cost of removal within 30 days of notice to
remove. Licensee shall make repairs to the vacated space within the right-of-
way to make it visibly consistent with the surrounding space. If licensee fails
to remove the bench within the prescribed time, the city shall remove
licensee’s bench and hold it at the City Public Works facility for no less than
30 days, after which time the bench may be disposed of. All costs for removal,
disposal, and remediation of ground shall be payable to city by licensee.
   (M)   Advertising matter. Advertising matter may be displayed only on the
front (roadway side) surface of the backrest of bus/transit bench and shall not
exceed 12 square feet in surface area. Advertisements for liquor or beer,
tobacco, political advertisements, obscene, immoral, or illegal matter is
prohibited on all transit bench signs. No advertising matter on any transit
bench may display the words “Stop,” “Look,” “Drive In,” “Danger” or any other
word, phrase, or symbol, reflective material, or illumination device, which
might interfere with, mislead, or distract traffic.
(Ord. 2022-07, passed 10-11-2022) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.33 INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.
   (A)   Limitation of liability. By reason of the acceptance of a registration
or a grant of the right-of-way permit, the city does not assume any liability;
for injuries to persons, damage to property, or loss of service claims by
parties other than the registrant or the city; or for claims or penalties of
any sort resulting from the installation, presence, maintenance, or operation
of equipment by registrants or activities of registrants.
   (B)   Indemnification. By registering with the city, a registrant agrees, or
by accepting a permit under this chapter, a permit holder is required to
defend, indemnify, and hold the city whole and harmless from all costs,
liabilities, and claims for damages of any kind arising out of the
construction, presence, installation, maintenance, repair, or operation of its
equipment, or out of any activity undertaken in or near a right-of-way, whether
or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or prohibited
by a right-of-way permit. It further agrees that it will not bring, nor cause
to be brought, any action, suit, or other proceeding claiming damages, or
seeking any other relief against the city for any claim nor for any award
arising out of the presence, installation, maintenance, or operation of its
equipment, or any activity undertaken in or near a right-of-way, whether or not
the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or prohibited by
right-of-way permit. The foregoing does not indemnify the city for its own
negligence except for the claims arising out of or alleging the city’s
negligence where the negligence arises out of or is primarily related to the
presence, installation, construction, operation, maintenance, or repair of the
equipment by the registrant or on the registrant’s behalf, including, but not
limited to, the insurance of permits and inspection of plans or work. This
section is not, as to third parties, a waiver of any defense or immunity
otherwise available to the registrant or to the city; and the registrant, in
defending any action on behalf of the city, shall be entitled to assert in any
action every defense or immunity that the city could assert on its own behalf.
(Prior Code, § 96.32)
§ 94.34 FUTURE USES.
   In placing any equipment, or allowing it to be placed, in the right-of-way,
the city is not liable for any damages caused thereby to any registrant’s
equipment which is already in place. No registrant is entitled to rely on the
provisions of this section, and no special duty is created as to registrant.
This section is enacted to protect the general health, welfare, and safety of
the public at large.
(Prior Code, § 96.33)
§ 94.35 ABANDONED AND UNUSABLE EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Discontinued operations. A registrant who has determined to
discontinue its operations with respect to any equipment in any right-of-way,
or segment or portion thereof, in the city must either:
      (1)   Provide information satisfactory to the city that the registrant’s
obligations for its equipment in the right-of-way under this chapter have been
lawfully assumed by either registrant; or
      (2)   Submit to the city a proposal and instruments for transferring
ownership of its equipment to the city. If a registrant proceeds under this
clause, the city may, at its option:
         (a)   Purchase the equipment;
         (b)   Require the registrant, at its own expense, to remove it; or
         (c)   Require the registrant to post an additional bond or an
increased bond amount sufficient to reimburse to city for reasonably
anticipated costs to be incurred in removing the equipment.
   (B)   Abandoned equipment. A registrant’s equipment that fails to comply
with division (C) below and which has remained unused for two years shall be
deemed to be abandoned. Abandoned equipment is deemed to be a nuisance. The
city may exercise any remedies or rights it has a law or in equity, including,
but not limited to:
      (1)   Abating the nuisance;
      (2)   Taking possession of the equipment and restoring it to a usable
condition;
      (3)   Requiring removal of the equipment by the registrant or by the
registrant’s surety; or
      (4)   Exercising its rights pursuant to the performance and restoration
bond.
   (C)   Removal. Any registrant who has unusable equipment in any right-of-way
shall remove it from that right-of-way during the next scheduled excavation,
unless this requirement is waived by the city.
(Prior Code, § 96.34)
§ 94.36 RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS.
   The city, by granting of a right-of way permit, or by registering a person
under this section, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or
lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter
vested in the city under the Constitution and statutes of the state to regulate
the use of the right-of-way by permit holder; and the permit holder by its
acceptance of a right-of-way permit or of registration under those ordinances
agrees that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or
otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to
the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof
by the city at any time. A permit holder or registrant is deemed to acknowledge
that its rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to
adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the
public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws and
ordinances enacted by the city pursuant to the powers. Any conflict between the
provisions of a registration or of a right-of-way permit and any other present
or future lawful exercise of the city’s regulatory or police powers shall be
resolved in favor of the latter.
(Prior Code, § 96.35)
§ 94.37 NONEXCLUSIVE REMEDY.
   The remedies provided in this chapter and other chapters in this code are
not exclusive or in lieu of other right and remedied that the city may have at
law or in equity. The city is hereby authorized to seek legal and equitable
relief for actual of threatened injury to the public rights-of-way, including
damages to the rights-of-way, whether or not caused by a violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter or other provisions of this code.
(Prior Code, § 96.37)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violation of §
94.02 shall constitute a petty misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 96.02) (Ord. 2022-07, passed 10-11-2022)
CHAPTER 95: STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
Section
Load Regulations and Restrictions
   
95.01   Restriction on loads
Obstructions in Public Ways
   
95.15   Obstructions prohibited
   
95.16   Removal of obstruction and expense
Sidewalks and Weed Control
   
95.30   Snow, ice, dirt, and rubbish removal
   
95.31   Repair of sidewalks
   
95.32   Weed control
   
95.33   Notice and compliance
   
95.34   Personal liability
   
95.35   Assessment
Trees and Shrubs on the Public Right-of-Way
   
95.50   Definition
   
95.51   Planting prohibited
   
95.52   Care and removal
   
95.53   Permit
Cross-reference:
   Excavation, see §§
150.045 through
150.052
   Injury to public property, see §
130.02
   Obstruction of public access, see § §
130.03
LOAD REGULATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS
§ 95.01 RESTRICTION ON LOADS.
   The City Manager or designee will, by written order pursuant to M.S. §
169.87, as it may be amended from time to time, prohibit the operation of
vehicles, or restrict the weight of vehicles, upon any city street which by
reason of deterioration, rain, snow, or other climactic conditions will be
seriously damaged or destroyed without those restrictions. The City Manager or
designee will have the street affected by the order posted with notice in the
manner provided in M.S. § 169.87, as it may be amended from time to time. It is
unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle or combination of vehicles on a
city street or highway contrary to the prohibition or restriction set forth in
the order and notice.
(Prior Code, § 94.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
OBSTRUCTIONS IN PUBLIC WAYS
§ 95.15 OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED.
   No person, except under a proper permit issued by the City Manager or
designee or otherwise permitted in this code, shall obstruct or encumber any
sidewalk, street, avenue, alley, lane, or other public way in the city with
yard clippings, leaves, stone, brick, sand, lumber, or other material or
property. Consistent with M.S. § 160.2715(a)(1), as it may be amended from time
to time, which advises that pushing/blowing snow from driveways and sidewalks
onto public roads may be punishable as a misdemeanor, no person shall plow,
shovel or blow or permit the plowing, shoveling or blowing of snow onto any
sidewalk, street, avenue, alley, lane, or other public way in the city.
(Prior Code, § 94.15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.16 REMOVAL OF OBSTRUCTION AND EXPENSE.
   When an obstruction is placed or left on a street or other public way
contrary to §
95.15, the city will notify the person who placed or left the obstruction and
the owner of the abutting property to immediately remove the same. If the
person fails or refuses to remove the obstruction within a reasonable time, it
may be removed by the city. The person responsible for the obstruction shall
reimburse the city for the cost of removal within ten days after receiving an
invoice from the city.
(Prior Code, § 94.16)
SIDEWALKS AND WEED CONTROL
§ 95.30 SNOW, ICE, DIRT, AND RUBBISH REMOVAL.
   The owner and the occupant of property adjacent to a public sidewalk must
use due diligence to keep the walk safe for pedestrians. No owner or occupant
may allow snow, ice, dirt, or rubbish to remain on the walk longer than 12
hours after it has been deposited.
(Prior Code, § 94.30) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.31 REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS.
   The owner of any property within the city abutting a public sidewalk is
required to promptly notify the city if the sidewalk is in need of repair and
is not safe for pedestrians.
(Prior Code, § 94.31) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.32 WEED CONTROL.
   Any weeds or grasses, whether noxious as defined by law or not, growing
outside the traveled portion of any city street or alley, or growing on private
property, exceeding the height of six inches or which are about to go to seed
must be cut or removed by the owner of the abutting property if within the city
right-of-way, and by the owner of the property upon which they are growing if
they are outside the right-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 94.32) (Ord. 2022-03, passed 5-24-2022) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.33 NOTICE AND COMPLIANCE.
   If conditions exist in violation of §§
95.30,
95.31, or
95.32, the city may order the owner or occupant to have the conditions
corrected by written notice to the occupant or to the owner at the address of
the taxpayer for the property as shown by the city’s records. The order will
require the conditions to be corrected within five days after receipt of the
notice, or in the case of sidewalk repairs within 30 days. The notice will
state that in case of noncompliance, the work will be done by the city at the
expense of the owner and that if unpaid, the charge for the work will be made a
special assessment against the owner’s property. If the owner or occupant fails
to comply with the notice within the required period, the city’s Public Works
Director may have the conditions corrected. The Public Works Director will keep
a record showing the cost of the work attributable to each separate lot and
parcel and will deliver the information to the City Manager or designee.
(Prior Code, § 94.33)
§ 95.34 PERSONAL LIABILITY.
   The owner of property on which or adjacent to which a service referred to in
§
95.33 has been performed shall be personally liable for the cost of the
service. As soon as the service has been completed and the cost determined, the
City Manager or designee will prepare a bill and mail it to the owner. The
amount billed is immediately due and payable at the office of the City Manager
or designee.
(Prior Code, § 94.34)
§ 95.35 ASSESSMENT.
   On or before September 1 of each year, the City Manager or designee is to
list all unpaid charges referred to in §
95.34 against each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable. The
City Council may then spread the charges against property benefitted as a
special assessment under M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to
time, and other pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor and
collection the following year along with current taxes.
(Prior Code, § 94.35)
TREES AND SHRUBS ON THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
§ 95.50 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area between the proposed or existing curb line and
the property line of land abutting on any city street.
(Prior Code, § 94.50)
§ 95.51 PLANTING PROHIBITED.
   No person may plant any tree or shrub on the public right-of-way without the
permit referred to in §
95.53.
(Prior Code, § 94.51) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.52 CARE AND REMOVAL.
   The owner of land abutting a public right-of-way is to perform all care and
maintenance of trees and shrubs on the abutting public right-of-way. The City
Manager or designee may order an abutting owner to trim or remove any tree or
shrub that is diseased, dangerous, a public nuisance, or planted contrary to
this subchapter. If the owner fails to comply with the order, the City Council
may order the work done and assess the cost of the work against the abutting
land in the same manner as other assessments for municipal improvements.
(Prior Code, § 94.52)
§ 95.53 PERMIT.
   The owner of property abutting on the public right-of-way may apply to the
Public Works Director for a permit to replace a tree or shrub removed under §
95.52. The Public Works Director may grant the permit only upon finding that
the proposed replacement tree or shrub does not interfere with traffic safety,
proposed or existing sidewalks, or proposed or existing utility easements.
Permits for replacement trees will permit only American Linden, Hackberry,
Basswood, Ash, Hard Maple, Red Maple, and Norway Maple varieties to be planted
on the public right-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 94.53)
CHAPTER 96: CEMETERIES
Section
   
96.01   Consent of City Council
   
96.02   Permits for interment
§ 96.01 CONSENT OF CITY COUNCIL.
   No new cemetery or place for burial of the dead may be established or set
apart within the city, and no existing cemetery may be enlarged or extended
without the consent of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 95.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.02 PERMITS FOR INTERMENT.
   No permit may be issued for the interment of any dead body, except in a
cemetery now existing or duly established with approval of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 95.02)
CHAPTER 97: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
General Provisions
   
97.01   Definitions
   
97.02   Fire Code
   
97.03   Division of Fire Prevention
   
97.04   Fire Marshal
   
97.05   Districts, routes, and fire lanes; establishment
   
97.06   Fire lanes
   
97.07   Parking near fire equipment
   
97.08   Protection of fire hoses
   
97.09   Interference with Fire Department duties
   
97.10   Address numbers required on buildings
   
97.11   Patios and balconies
   
97.12   Permits required
   
97.13   Appeals
   
97.14   Fire protection equipment; monitoring
Open Burning
   
97.25   Prohibited
   
97.26   Definitions
   
97.27   Exemptions
   
97.28   Permit required
   
97.29   Prohibited materials
   
97.30   Permit procedures
   
97.31   Permit; denial
   
97.32   Permit holder; responsibilities
   
97.33   Revocation of permit
   
97.34   Burning ban or air quality alert
   
97.35   Burners; use prohibited
   
97.36   Recreational fires
   
97.37   State administrative rules adopted
 
   
97.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 97.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter and the Fire Code hereby established, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
   BUREAU. The City Bureau of Fire Prevention.
   CHIEF OF THE BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION. The City Fire Marshal.
   CENTRAL STATION SERVICE. An approved monitoring company for the processing
of alarms related to fire protection features of a location.
   CODE. The Fire Prevention Code of the city, which includes the MSFC and any
amendments and modifications contained in this subchapter.
   CORPORATE COUNSEL. The City Attorney.
   FIRE CHIEF. The Chief of the Fire Department of the city.
   FIRE CODE. The Fire Code of the city, which includes the MSFC and any
amendments and modifications contained in this subchapter.
   FIRE INSPECTORS. Members of the Fire Department, with proper training,
designated by the Fire Marshal to conduct inspections related to the MSFC.
   FIRE LANE. A road or other passageway developed to allow the passage of fire
apparatus. A FIRE LANE is not necessarily intended for vehicular traffic other
than fire apparatus.
   FIRE MARSHAL. Head of the Fire Prevention Division.
   FIRE PREVENTION DIVISION. The division of the Fire Department responsible
for public education, fire prevention, fire investigation, and Fire Code
compliance.
   MSFC. The Minnesota State Fire Code as adopted pursuant to M.S. § 299F.011,
as it may be amended from time to time, and as modified by Minn. Rules Chapter
7511, and as modified by the city.
(Prior Code, § 97.01) (Ord. 08-001, passed 4-8-2008)
§ 97.02 FIRE CODE.
   (A)   Adoption. The MSFC, except as hereinafter modified or changed, is
adopted as the city’s Fire Code and shall be applicable within the city.
      (1)   Failure to comply. Any person who fails to obtain a permit required
per MSFC, or any person who fails to obtain a permit as required by the
Building Code or any person who shall continue any work after having been
served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fee as
set forth by the fee structure adopted by the city and contained in Chapter 33
of this code.
      (2)   Work Commencing before permit issuance. If work for which a permit
is required by the MSFC code has been commenced without first obtaining a
permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for
the work. An investigation fee established by municipality shall be collected
and is in addition to the required permit fees, but it may but exceed the
permit fee.
      (3)   MSFC § 202 C. CAMPFIRE shall have the meaning of a RECREATIONAL
FIRE as defined in MSFC.
      (4)   Clear space around hydrants. MSFC is amended to read:
      Clear space around hydrants. A three-foot (0.914 meters) clear space
shall be maintained around the circumference of fire hydrants and a three-foot
vertical clearance above the highest portion of the hydrants shall be
maintained except as otherwise required or approved.
      (5)   Access. Immediate access to Fire Department connections shall be
maintained at all times and without obstruction by fences, bushes, trees,
walls, or any other object for a minimum of three feet (0.914 meters) in all
directions except as otherwise required or approved.
      (6)   Appendices. The following appendices to the MSFC are hereby
incorporated as may be amended as part of the Fire Code of the city:
         (a)   Appendix B Fire Flow Requirements for Buildings;
         (b)   Appendix C Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution;
         (c)   Appendix D Fire Apparatus Access Roads; and
         (d)   Appendix O Fires or Barbecues on Balconies or Patios. The
exception to § 1.2 is deleted.
   (B)   Copies on file. Copies of the MSFC are on file with the Division of
Fire Prevention and are available for public inspection.
(Prior Code, § 97.02) (Ord. 08-001, passed 4-8-2008) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.03 DIVISION OF FIRE PREVENTION.
   The Code will be enforced by the Division of Fire Prevention under the
supervision of the Fire Marshal.
(Prior Code, § 97.03) (Ord. 08-001, passed 4-8-2008)
§ 97.04 FIRE MARSHAL.
   (A)   Office of Fire Marshal. There is hereby established as part of the
Fire Department, the office of Fire Marshal, which will be operated under the
supervision of the Fire Chief.
   (B)   Members. The Fire Chief will designate one qualified member of the
city’s firefighters as Fire Marshal. The Fire Chief may assign members of the
Fire Department to the Bureau as “Inspectors,” as the Chief deems necessary to
assist in carrying out the duties of the Office of Fire Marshal.
   (C)   Duties. The Fire Marshal will be responsible for enforcement of the
Code.
   (D)   Reports. The City Fire Marshal will submit a written report to the
City Manager or designee in March of each year. The report must contain all
proceedings undertaken by the Office of Fire Marshal under the Code during the
preceding calendar year. This report may include any statistics as the Fire
Chief desires.
(Prior Code, § 97.04) (Ord. 08-001, passed 4-8-2008)
§ 97.05 DISTRICTS, ROUTES, AND FIRE LANES; ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   Flammable liquids. The limits referred to in the MSFC in which storage
of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited, will include
those areas of Zones R and R/O.
   (B)   Routes for vehicles transporting explosives. The routes referred to in
the MSFC for vehicles transporting explosives and blasting agents, are hereby
established as follows:
      (1)   Hennepin County Highway 88;
      (2)   County Road C, east of Hennepin County Highway 88; and
      (3)   Anthony Lane.
   (C)   Routes for vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals. Motor vehicle
routes for vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals or dangerous articles, as
described in the MSFC, are hereby established as follows:
      (1)   Hennepin County Highway 88;
      (2)   County Road C, east of Hennepin County Highway 88; and
      (3)   Anthony Lane.
(Prior Code, § 97.05) (Ord. 08-001, passed 4-8-2008)
§ 97.06 FIRE LANES.
   (A)   Orders establishing. The Fire Marshal may order the establishment of
fire lanes on public or private property as may be necessary for travel of fire
equipment and access to fire protection devices or buildings. When a fire lane
has been ordered to be established, it shall be marked by a sign and painting
of curbs and roadways according to the Minnesota Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices and as approved by the Fire Marshal bearing the words “No
Parking - Fire Lane”. If there is a curb in the fire lane, it must be painted
yellow. The Fire Marshal may require the fire lane to be outlined in yellow on
the pavement. When the fire lane is on public property or a public right-of-
way, the sign or signs will be erected by the city. When the fire lane is on
private property, the sign or signs will be erected by the owner at the owner’s
expense as directed by the Fire Chief. The signs must be erected within 30 days
after notice of the order.
   (B)   Obstruction; impoundment. No person may leave a vehicle or other
object unattended or otherwise occupy or obstruct a fire lane. When any motor
vehicle or other object occupies or obstructs any duly designated fire lane in
a manner inconsistent with the land’s intended use for fire protection
purposes, or prevents access to any fire hydrant or fire protection device in
the normal and usual manner by fire protection personnel and equipment, the
Fire Marshal or Police Department personnel may order the impoundment of the
vehicle or other object. No vehicle impounded pursuant to the provisions of
this section may be released until a release is obtained from the Police
Department and all towing and storing charges have been paid.
(Prior Code, § 97.06) (Ord. 08-001, passed 4-8-2008) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.07 PARKING NEAR FIRE EQUIPMENT.
   No person may park any vehicle or place any material or other obstruction
within 20 feet of the entrance to any fire station or within ten feet of any
fire hydrant or fire protection device. Nor may any person park any vehicle
within 300 feet of a place where a fire requiring fire fighting by the Fire
Department is in progress.
(Prior Code, § 97.07) (Ord. 08-001, passed 4-8-2008) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.08 PROTECTION OF FIRE HOSES.
   No person may drive any vehicle over a fire hose, except upon specific
orders from a member of the Police or Fire Departments of the city, and then
only with due caution.
(Prior Code, § 97.08) (Ord. 08-001, passed 4-8-2008) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.09 INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE DEPARTMENT DUTIES.
   No unauthorized person may ride upon, race with, trail, or follow within 300
feet of, any apparatus belonging to the Fire Department when the apparatus is
actively responding to an emergency call.
(Prior Code, § 97.09) (Ord. 08-001, passed 4-8-2008) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.10 ADDRESS NUMBERS REQUIRED ON BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Each owner of a one or two-family dwelling in the city must post the
correct street or avenue number of the building in a conspicuous place both on
the front and rear of the building in accordance with this section.
      (1)   House numbers must be in Arabic numerals, and of a color
contrasting to the building.
      (2)   Each numeral may be no less than four inches (102 mm) in height and
no less than three-quarter inch in stroke width. Buildings more than 70 feet
from the street shall have numerals no less than five inches in height.
      (3)   A rear building posting will not be required unless an alley or
other public access exists to the rear of the lot or parcel on which the
building is located.
      (4)   Front numerals must be posted on the building surface nearest the
street or avenue nearest the front of the building. These numerals must be at a
height and position so that the numerals can be easily read by a person of
normal vision while seated in an emergency vehicle located in the street.
      (5)   Rear numerals must be posted on the building surface nearest the
alley or other rear public access. The numerals must be at a height and
position such that the numerals can be easily read by a person of normal vision
while seated in an emergency vehicle located in the alley or other rear access.
   (B)   New and existing buildings not classified in division (A) above shall
have approved address numbers, building numbers, or approved building
identification placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from
the street or road fronting the property.
      (1)   These numbers shall contrast with their background.
      (2)   Each numeral may be no less than four inches (102 mm) in height and
no less than three-quarter inch in stroke width. Buildings more than 70 feet
from the street shall have numerals no less than five inches in height.
      (3)   These numerals must be at a height and position so that the
numerals can be easily read by a person of normal vision while seated in an
emergency vehicle located in the street.
      (4)   The placement and size of the numerals or sign must be approved by
the Fire Marshal.
(Prior Code, § 97.10) (Ord. 08-001, passed 4-8-2008; Ord. 2022-03, passed 5-24-
2022) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.11 PATIOS AND BALCONIES.
   (A)   Open flame prohibited. In any structure containing three or more
dwelling units, no person shall kindle, maintain, or cause any fire or open
flame on any balcony above ground level, or on any ground floor patio within 15
feet (4,572 mm) of the structure.
   (B)   Fuel storage prohibited. No person shall store or use any fuel,
barbeque, torch, or other similar heating or lighting chemical in the locations
designed in division (A) above.
(Prior Code, § 97.11) (Ord. 08-001, passed 4-8-2008) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.12 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   No person may, without first making application for (on forms provided from
the city) and obtaining a permit, maintain, store, or handle materials or
conduct, process, or install equipment when a permit is required by the MSFC
for any such activity. A fee, periodically determined by resolution of the City
Council, must be paid for each permit in accordance with the conditions set
forth in the MSFC. All permits may be issued for a period of up to one year,
but may be renewed if the applicant meets the requirements of the MSFC. The
office of Fire Marshal may revoke a permit or approval issued if any violation
of the Code is found upon inspection, or if there has been any false statement
or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which
the permit or approval was granted.
(Prior Code, § 97.12) (Ord. 08-001, passed 4-8-2008) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.13 APPEALS.
   If the Fire Marshal disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit
applied for, or revokes a permit, or when it is claimed that the provisions of
any part of the Code do not apply, or that the true intent and meaning of the
Code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the person or persons
aggrieved may appeal the decision of the Fire Marshal to the City Council
within 30 days after the date of the decision.
(Prior Code, § 97.13) (Ord. 08-001, passed 4-8-2008)
§ 97.14 FIRE PROTECTION EQUIPMENT; MONITORING.
   Fire alarm systems and bells controlling the water supply and water-flow
switches on automatic sprinkler systems shall be electronically monitored by an
approved central station service in accordance to this section.
   (A)   Application of requirements. This section shall apply to the
following:
      (1)   New fire alarm systems;
      (2)   Existing fire alarm systems when upgrades or expanded;
      (3)   New sprinkler systems with 20 or more sprinkler heads;
      (4)   Existing sprinkler systems with 100 or more sprinkler heads; and
      (5)   Existing sprinkler systems when upgraded or expanded by five
sprinkler heads or more and the number of sprinkler heads following upgrade or
expansion is 20 or more.
   (B)   Distinctive signals. General fire alarms, bells monitoring, water
flow, trouble and supervisory signals shall be distinctively different and
shall be automatically transmitted to an approved central station in accordance
with National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standard 72.
   (C)   Certificate required. An Underwriter’s Laboratory (UL) 72 “Central
Station Fire Alarm System Certificate” shall be required for all electrically
monitored fire alarm and sprinkler systems and communicators.
   (D)   Public utilities accepted. This section does not apply to underground
key or hub valves in the roadway boxes provided by the city.
(Prior Code, § 97.14) (Ord. 08-001, passed 4-8-2008) Penalty, see §
97.99
OPEN BURNING
§ 97.25 PROHIBITED.
   Except as otherwise permitted by this subchapter, all open burning is
prohibited in the city.
(Prior Code, § 97.30) (Ord. 08-001, passed 4-8-2008) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.26 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BURNER. A firebox, barrel, or similar container used for an outdoor fire,
but not including grills or barbecues used principally for the cooking of food.
   BURNING PERMIT. A permit issued by the Fire Chief, or his or her designee,
authorizing fires exempted from the general provisions hereof and setting the
conditions therefor.
   CAMPFIRE. Shall have the same meaning as RECREATIONAL FIRE.
   OPEN FIRE or OPEN BURNING. A fire in matter, whether concentrated or
dispersed, which is not contained within a fully enclosed firebox, structure,
or vehicle, from which the products of combustion are emitted directly to the
open atmosphere without passing through a stack, duct, or chimney.
   OPEN FLAME. Any candle, torch, burner, or other device which, when used,
produces a visible flame capable of igniting ordinary combustible material.
   PERSON. Any natural person acting either personally or in any representative
capacity, a corporation, a firm, a co-partnership, or an association of any
nature or kind.
   RECREATIONAL FIRE. An outdoor fire, burning materials, described elsewhere
in this code, where the fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator,
outdoor fireplace, portable outdoor fireplace, barbeque grill, or barbeque pit
and has a total area of three feet or less in diameter and two feet or less in
height for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking, warmth, or similar
purposes.
   STARTER FUELS. Dry, untreated, unpainted wood or charcoal fire starter.
Paraffin candles and alcohols are permitted as starter fuels and as aids to
ignition only. Propane gas torches or other clean gas burning devices causing
minimal pollution must be used to start an open fire.
   WOOD. Dry, clean fuel such as twigs, branches, limbs, presto logs, charcoal,
cord wood, or untreated dimensional lumber. WOOD does not include wood that is
green, leaves or needles, rotten, wet, oil soaked, or treated with paint, glue,
or preservatives. Clean pallets may be used for recreation fires when cut into
three foot smaller lengths.
(Prior Code, § 97.31) (Ord. 08-001, passed 4-8-2001)
§ 97.27 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following types of open burning shall be exempted from the prohibition
of §
97.25:
   (A)   Recreational fires or camp fires subject to the provisions of §
97.36;
   (B)   Fires purposely set under the supervision of the Fire Department for
instruction and training; and
   (C)   Fires for which a burning permit has been obtained.
(Prior Code, § 97.32) (Ord. 08-001, passed 4-8-2001)
§ 97.28 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Except for permits issued by the State Department of Natural Resources for
fire training, the Fire Chief, or designee, may issue a burning permit for any
of the following reasons:
   (A)   Fire set for the elimination of fire hazard which cannot be abated by
any other practical means;
   (B)   Fires purposely set for forest and game management purposes when no
other alternative methods are practical; and
   (C)   Ground thawing for utility repair and construction.
(Prior Code, § 97.33) (Ord. 08-001, passed 4-8-2001)
§ 97.29 PROHIBITED MATERIALS.
   (A)   No permit may be issued for the open burning of oils, petro fuels,
rubber, plastics, chemically treated materials, or other materials which
produce excessive or noxious smoke, such as tires, railroad ties, treated,
painted, or glued wood, composite shingles, tarpaper, insulation, composition
board, sheetrock, wiring paint or paint fillers, or similar materials.
   (B)   No permit shall be issued for the open burning of hazardous waste or
salvage operations, solid waste generated from an industrial or manufacturing
process, or from a service or commercial establishment, or building material
generated from demolition of commercial or industrial structures, or discarded
material resulting from the handling, processing, storage, preparation,
serving, or consumption of food.
(Prior Code, § 97.34) (Ord. 08-001, passed 4-8-2001)
§ 97.30 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Application for a burning permit shall be submitted to the Fire Chief
on a form prescribed by the city.
   (B)   The Fire Chief, or designee, shall review the application to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this section and any applicable state laws
and/or regulations.
   (C)   The Fire Chief, or designee, may inspect the proposed burn site on
such occasions and at such time as is deemed necessary to adequately review the
application. Submission of the application shall constitute authorization for
the Fire Chief, or designee, to enter the premises for this purpose.
   (D)   Within five business days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and federal
legal holidays, after the receipt of the application, the Fire Chief, or
designee, shall either grant or deny the application.
(Prior Code, § 97.35) (Ord. 08-001, passed 4-8-2001)
§ 97.31 PERMIT; DENIAL.
   (A)   Application for a burning permit may be denied for any of the
following reasons:
      (1)   The proposed fire or burn site does not meet the requirements of
this section;
      (2)   The Fire Chief, or designee, determines that there is a practical
alternative method of disposal of the material;
      (3)   The Fire Chief, or designee, determines that the fire would result
in pollution or nuisance conditions;
      (4)   The Fire Chief, or designee, determines that the burn cannot be
safely conducted and no plan has been submitted to adequately address the
safety concerns; or
      (5)   The location of the burning shall not be within 600 feet of an
occupied residence other than those located on the property on which the
burning is conducted.
   (B)   The denial of any application shall be in writing and shall state the
reasons for the denial.
   (C)   Any person aggrieved by the denial of a burning permit may appeal that
decision to the City Council by submitting a written request or appeal to the
Fire Chief within ten days after the date of the denial. The Fire Chief shall
submit the appeal request to the City Manager or designee for placement on the
next available City Council agenda.
(Prior Code, § 97.36) (Ord. 08-001, passed 4-8-2001)
§ 97.32 PERMIT HOLDER; RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The holder of any permit shall be responsible for the following:
   (A)   Have a valid permit in possession at the burn site at all times during
the burn;
   (B)   Prior to starting burn, confirming that no burning ban is in effect or
the forecasted air quality index will be greater than 50.
      (1)   No burn shall occur when wind speed is in excess of 20 mph.
      (2)   No burn shall occur when wind gust is in excess of 20 mph.
   (C)   Constant attendance by the permit holder or competent representative
during a burning event;
   (D)   Availability at the burn site of appropriate communication and fire
suppression equipment as required by the permit or any fire safety plan
approved by the city as part of the permit process;
   (E)   Not allowing the fire to smolder;
   (F)   Being sure that the fire is completely extinguished before the permit
holder or representative leaves the site; and
   (G)   All costs incurred as a result of the burn including, but not limited
to, fire suppression, administrative fees, property damage, and personal
injury.
(Prior Code, § 97.37) (Ord. 08-001, passed 4-8-2001) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.33 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   An officer of the State Department of Natural Resources, the Fire Chief, the
Assistant Fire Chief, or the Fire Marshal may revoke any burning permit for
appropriate reason including, but not limited to:
   (A)   A fire hazard exists or develops during the course of the burn;
   (B)   Pollution or nuisance conditions develop during the course of the
burn;
   (C)   The fire smolders with no flame present; or
   (D)   Any of the conditions of the permit are violated during the course of
the burn.
(Prior Code, § 97.38) (Ord. 08-001, passed 4-8-2001)
§ 97.34 BURNING BAN OR AIR QUALITY ALERT.
   No recreational fire, camp fire, or open burning will be permitted when the
city or the State Department of Natural Resources has officially declared a
burning ban or restrictions due to potential hazardous fire conditions or when
the Pollution Control Agency has forecast an air quality index greater than 50.
(Prior Code, § 97.39) (Ord. 08-001, passed 4-8-2001) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.35 BURNERS; USE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Prohibition. No person shall use a burner within the city.
   (B)   Exception. The use of “chimneas” and manufactured fire pits is allowed
when used in accordance with §§
97.32 and
97.36.
(Prior Code, § 97.40) (Ord. 08-001, passed 4-8-2001) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.36 RECREATIONAL FIRES.
   A permit is required. Recreational fires require a permit, and must comply
with the following requirements:
   (A)   Burning shall occur between 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on Sundays,
Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays.
   (B)   Burning shall occur between 9:00 a.m. and midnight on Fridays and
Saturdays.
   (C)   Burning may occur between 9:00 a.m. and midnight when the following
day is a federal holiday.
   (D)   Fires established at ground level shall not exceed three feet in
diameter and a flame height of three feet from the adjacent ground level; fires
established within a portable fireplace shall not exceed a flame height of two
feet above the lower pan of the device.
   (E)   The only materials permitted in a recreational fire are wood from
trees, small branches, brush, or charcoal. Treated lumber materials,
construction debris, garbage, plastic materials, or waste materials are not
allowed to be burned in recreational fires.
   (F)   The fire is ignited with an approved fire starter.
   (G)   The fire is constantly attended by a person knowledgeable in the use
of fire extinguishing equipment and an attendant supervises the fire until the
fire has been totally extinguished.
   (H)   Fire-extinguishing equipment, such as buckets, shovels or garden
hoses, are readily available.
   (I)   Any conditions that could cause a fire to spread within 25 feet of a
structure shall be removed or eliminated prior to ignition.
   (J)   Outdoor barbecue pits shall be constructed of concrete or approved
noncombustible walls, roofs or other combustible material.
   (K)   Recreational fires must be immediately extinguished if they pose a
fire safety risk, if they are not in compliance with the above, or when
directed to do so by the fire City Manager, or designee.
   (L)   Statutes or administrative rules or regulations of the state and codes
and ordinances adopted by reference and may change from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 97.41) (Ord. 08-001, passed 4-8-2001; Ord. 2025-02, passed 4-22-
2025) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.37 STATE ADMINISTRATIVE RULES ADOPTED.
   M.S. §§ 88.01 through 88.22, 88.75, and 88.76 are hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this section as if fully set forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 97.42) (Ord. 08-001, passed 4-8-2001)
§ 97.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   A person who violates the provisions of the State Fire Code or §§
97.01 through
97.14 after being given written notice shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each
day’s violation after notice thereof shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 97.02) (Ord. 08-001, passed 4-8-2008)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
      
111.   LICENSING; GENERALLY
      
112.   DWELLINGS AND BUILDINGS
      
113.   SECONDHAND DEALERS AND PAWNBROKERS
      
114.   AMUSEMENTS AND LEISURE
      
115.   VENDORS
      
116.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
117.   CANNABIS
CHAPTER 110: SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
   
110.01   City Council findings
   
110.02   Standards for sexually-oriented businesses
§ 110.01 CITY COUNCIL FINDINGS.
   (A)   The City Council has reviewed various reports regarding sexually-
oriented businesses and has considered studies done in other cities, ordinances
of other cities, court cases regarding sexually-oriented businesses, and other
materials pertaining to adult uses and sexually-oriented businesses. In
particular, the City Council has reviewed materials related to the adverse
secondary characteristics related to adult uses and sexually-oriented
businesses. The City Council has reviewed evidence taken from the City of
Minneapolis, where studies have shown a strong correlation between sexually-
explicit businesses and increased crime rates, and from the City of Saint Paul,
where studies have suggested such a correlation as well as a possible
correlation between sexually-oriented businesses and depressed property values.
The City Council has also relied upon evidence taken from reported court cases
involving other municipalities which are smaller suburban cities in the state
and in other states. The City Council believes that the experiences of the
cities of Minneapolis and Saint Paul are relevant to the city because of their
close proximity, and that the smaller cities involved in cases from the state
and other states are similar in their position as relatively small suburbs to
major metropolitan areas.
   (B)   After careful consideration of these materials and other materials,
including the Report of the Attorney General’s Working Group on the Regulation
of Sexually-Oriented Businesses (State Attorney General’s Office, June 6,
1989), and in order to prevent the problems that cities around the nation have
encountered with the unregulated location of adult uses and sexually-oriented
businesses in their communities, the City Council has arrived at the following
findings and conclusions.
      (1)   The City Council finds that sexually-oriented businesses have
adverse secondary characteristics, particularly when they may be accessible to
minors or are located near residential properties or schools, churches,
temples, synagogues, day-care centers, libraries, recreational areas and parks,
and the businesses can exert a dehumanizing influence on persons attending or
using the properties.
      (2)   Sexually-oriented businesses can contribute to an increase in
criminal activity in the area in which the businesses are located.
      (3)   Sexually-oriented businesses can significantly contribute to the
deterioration of residential neighborhoods and can impair the character and
quality of the residential housing in the area in which the businesses are
located, thereby exacerbating the shortage of affordable and habitable housing
for city residents.
      (4)   The concentration of sexually-oriented businesses in one area can
have a substantially detrimental effect on the area in which the businesses are
concentrated and on the overall quality of urban life. A cycle of decay can
result from the influx and concentration of sexually-oriented businesses. The
presence of the businesses is perceived by others as an indication that the
area is deteriorating and the result can be very detrimental. In many cases,
other businesses move out of the vicinity and residents flee from the area.
Declining real estate values, which can result from the concentration of the
businesses, erode the city’s tax base and contribute to overall urban blight.
      (5)   The regulation of the location and operation of sexually-oriented
businesses is warranted to prevent the adverse secondary effects of the
businesses on the city’s crime rate, its retail trade, its property values, and
in general, the quality of the city’s neighborhoods, commercial, and industrial
districts, and urban life.
(Prior Code, § 110.01)
§ 110.02 STANDARDS FOR SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Generally. The following standards shall apply to all sexually-
oriented businesses in any district or location within the city.
   (B)   Specifically.
      (1)   No sexually-oriented business shall be located closer than 400 feet
from any other sexually-oriented business, or closer than 400 feet from any
daycare facility, church, temple, synagogue, school, library, or publicly-owned
park, playground, or other recreational facilities, or any facility selling
intoxicating liquor, as defined in M.S. § 340A.101, as it may be amended from
time to time. Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objections, from the nearest point of the actual
premises of the sexually-oriented business or other facility.
      (2)   No sexually-oriented business shall be located closer than 400 feet
from any property in the R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, R-4, R/O, or PUD District, or any
residentially-zoned property in any city adjoining the city. Measurements shall
be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures objects,
from the nearest point of the actual business premises of the sexually-oriented
business to the nearest boundary of the other district.
      (3)   No sexually-oriented business shall be located outside the
Commercial District.
(Prior Code, § 110.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 111: LICENSING; GENERALLY
Section
   
111.01   Licensing requirements
   
111.02   Application
   
111.03   Fees, bond, insurance, and deposits
   
111.04   No partial fees
   
111.05   Issuance
   
111.06   Contents of license
   
111.07   License period
   
111.08   Duplicates
   
111.09   Rebates
   
111.10   Duties of licensee
   
111.11   Change of location
   
111.12   Sealing of machines
   
111.13   Revocation or suspension
   
111.14   Hearing
§ 111.01 LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this business regulations title, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
      LICENSE. Includes permits.
      LICENSEE. Includes permittees.
   (B)   Compliance required. It is unlawful for any person, either directly or
indirectly, to engage in any business, or to use in connection with a business
any vehicle, premises, machine, or device for which a license is required under
this chapter or any other law without first obtaining the applicable license
and keeping it in effect at all times.
   (C)   Doing business. For the purpose of this chapter, a person is deemed to
be engaged in a business for which a license is required when the person does
one act of selling or offering for sale any goods or service for which a
license is required, or soliciting the business, or using any vehicle or
premises in the city for the purposes.
   (D)   Agents responsible. The agents or other representatives of persons
doing business in the city are personally responsible for the compliance with
this chapter by their principals and the businesses they represent.
   (E)   Separate licenses for branches. A license must be obtained for each
branch location of a business, except that warehouses and distributing plants
will not be deemed separate branches.
   (F)   Deliveries only. A license is not required for mere delivery of
property purchased from a place of business outside the city.
(Prior Code, § 111.001) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.02 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application form. Applications for licenses and any renewals are to be
filed with the City Manager or designee upon forms provided by the City Manager
or designee. The application must contain all information required under the
applicable section of this code and any other information required by the
application form, and the following:
      (1)   Name and address of applicant;
      (2)   Purpose for which license is desired;
      (3)   The place within the city where the business will be conducted; and
      (4)   The length of time the license is to cover.
   (B)   Signatures. All questions on the application form must be answered,
and all required information must be furnished. Any application by an
individual business owner must be signed by the owner; by a partnership must be
signed by one of the partners; by a corporation must be signed by an
appropriate officer of the corporation.
   (C)   License background checks.
      (1)   Purpose. The purpose and intent of this section is to establish
what will allow law enforcement access to the state’s computerized criminal
history information for specified noncriminal purposes of licensing background
checks.
      (2)   Criminal history license background investigations.
         (a)   The City Police Department is hereby required, as the exclusive
entity within the city, to do a criminal history background investigation on
the applicants for the following licenses within the city:
            1.   Fireworks dealer;
            2.   Liquor licensing;
            3.   Pawnbrokers;
            4.   Peddlers and solicitors;
            5.   Physical culture and health insurance services and clubs;
            6.   Secondhand dealers; and
            7.   Any other licenses the city deems appropriate.
         (b)   In conducting the criminal history background investigation in
order to screen license applicants, the Police Department is authorized to
access data maintained in the State Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions
computerized criminal history information system in accordance with BCA policy.
Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Police
Department under the care and custody of the chief law enforcement official, or
his or her designee. A summary of the results of the computerized criminal
history may be released by the Police Department to the licensing authority,
including the City Manager or designee, or other city staff involved in the
license approval process.
      (3)   Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must
authorize the Police Department by written consent to undertake the
investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provision of M.S.
§ 364.09, as it may be amended from time to time, the city will not reject an
applicant for a license on the basis of the applicant’s prior conviction unless
the crime is directly related to the license sought and the conviction is for a
felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the city
rejects the applicants request on this basis, the city shall notify the
applicant in writing of the following:
         (a)   The grounds and reason for the denial;
         (b)   The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in
M.S. § 364.06, as it may be amended from time to time;
         (c)   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for the license; and
         (d)   All competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon
reapplication.
(Prior Code, § 111.002) (Ord. 2012-08, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 111.03 FEES, BOND, INSURANCE, AND DEPOSITS.
   The applicant must pay the full amount of the fee required by this chapter
and must file any bond, insurance policy, certificate, state license, or other
document required for the license. The applicant must also make any damage
deposit, clean-up deposit, or security deposit required by the city.
(Prior Code, § 111.003)
§ 111.04 NO PARTIAL FEES.
   All fees must be paid in the full amount, and no reduction will be made
because part of a license year has elapsed prior to the date the license is
issued.
(Prior Code, § 111.004)
§ 111.05 ISSUANCE.
   Upon compliance with all applicable requirements of this code, the City
Manager or designee will issue a license in accordance with this code. The City
Council may revoke a license at any time, for cause, following a hearing
conducted under §
111.14.
(Prior Code, § 111.005)
§ 111.06 CONTENTS OF LICENSE.
   Each license will state the following:
   (A)   Name of the licensee and any other name under which the business is to
be conducted;
   (B)   Name and address of each business licensed;
   (C)   Amount of the license fee;
   (D)   Dates of issuance and expiration of the license; and
   (E)   Any other information as the City Manager or designee or City Council
may determine.
(Prior Code, § 111.006)
§ 111.07 LICENSE PERIOD.
   A license will be valid for no more than one year and will terminate on the
March 15 next following the date of issuance, unless a different termination
date is specifically stated in this code. If a license is not renewed on or
before March 15 of a given year, then the license will expire and terminate on
March 15 of that year.
(Prior Code, § 111.007)
§ 111.08 DUPLICATES.
   A duplicate license certificate or tag may be issued by the City Manager or
designee to replace any license certificate or tag previously issued which has
been lost, stolen, defaced, or destroyed, upon certification of the fact by the
licensee and payment of a replacement fee of $5 or the other amount as may be
specified in Chapter 33.
(Prior Code, § 111.008)
§ 111.09 REBATES.
   No rebate or refund of any fee or part of a fee will be made by reason of
non-use of a license, or by reason of a change in location or business
rendering the use of the license ineffective. The City Manager or designee may
refund a fee collected in error, or in cases where the application is denied.
(Prior Code, § 111.009)
§ 111.10 DUTIES OF LICENSEE.
   (A)   Conditions of license. As a condition to the continuation of rights
granted to a licensee under any license issued by the city, the licensee will
have the duties set forth in this section.
   (B)   City inspections. A licensee must permit all reasonable inspections of
the licensee’s business and examinations of the licensee’s books and records by
city officials and any other officials authorized by law.
   (C)   Compliance. The licensee must ascertain and at all times comply with
all applicable provisions of this code and any other laws, rules, or
regulations applicable to the business.
   (D)   Cease business. The licensee must refrain from operating the licensed
business after expiration of the license and during any revocation or
suspension of the license.
   (E)   License displayed. The license and any other identification required
by this code must be kept on display in a conspicuous place on the licensed
premises and vehicles.
   (F)   Not transferable. A licensee may not loan, sell, give, or assign a
license to any other person, or allow any other person to use, display, or
possess a license issued to the licensee.
   (G)   Real estate taxes. A licensee must pay, prior to the date a penalty
attaches for nonpayment, all special assessments and real and personal property
taxes levied against real and personal property owned by the licensee and used
in the licensed business.
(Prior Code, § 111.010) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.11 CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   The location of licensed premises cannot be changed without the prior
approval of the city.
(Prior Code, § 111.011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.12 SEALING OF MACHINES.
   Any vending machine, pinball machine, or amusement device which is defective
or unsafe, or has no license insignia affixed, or is not currently licensed,
may be sealed with tape or wire by the city to prevent its continued use. It is
unlawful for any person to remove or deface such a seal except under direction
of the city. No person may use any machine or device on which a seal has been
affixed under this section.
(Prior Code, § 111.012) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.13 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   If the City Manager or other city official responsible for enforcement
determines that a licensee has failed to comply with the license or this code,
the City Manager or designee will give the licensee written notice of the
violation by mail or hand delivery to the address stated on the license
application. If the licensee cannot be found, the notice may be posted on the
licensed premises. The notice will require correction of the violation within a
reasonable time as stated in the notice. If the violation is not corrected
within the stated time, the license will automatically terminate unless a
hearing is requested by the licensee by written notice mailed or delivered to
the City Manager or designee prior to expiration of the time period stated in
the notice to the licensee.
(Prior Code, § 111.013)
§ 111.14 HEARING.
   If a hearing is requested by a licensee in the manner required under §
111.13, the City Manager or designee will set a time for the hearing to be held
not less than ten days and not more than 20 days after the request. At the
hearing, the City Council will hear all testimony offered by the licensee, and
inform the licensee of the basis for the notice of violation. After completion
of the hearing, the City Council will determine whether to suspend, terminate,
or continue the license.
(Prior Code, § 111.014)
CHAPTER 112: DWELLINGS AND BUILDINGS
Section
Licensing of Multiple Dwellings
   
112.01   Purpose
   
112.02   Intention; uniform standards
   
112.03   Definitions
   
112.04   License required
   
112.05   Application
   
112.06   Application execution
   
112.07   Issuance and term
   
112.08   Renewal
   
112.09   License fees
   
112.10   License posting
   
112.11   Maintenance standards
   
112.12   Plumbing facilities
   
112.13   Garbage disposal
   
112.14   Light, ventilation, and heating
   
112.15   Building condition
   
112.16   Yards, open space, and parking
   
112.17   Safety from fire
   
112.18   Inspections and investigations
Security Alarms
   
112.30   Purpose and scope
   
112.31   Definitions
   
112.32   Alarm requirements and prohibitions
   
112.33   License required
   
112.34   Application and issuance
   
112.35   Fees
   
112.36   Suspension and revocation of licensees
   
112.37   Confidentiality
Contractors
   
112.50   Definition
   
112.51   License required
   
112.52   Types of work covered
   
112.53   Applications
   
112.54   Bond and insurance
   
112.55   Right to perform
   
112.56   Provisions
 
   
112.99   Penalty
LICENSING OF MULTIPLE DWELLINGS
§ 112.01 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this subchapter to protect the health, safety, and
welfare of citizens of the city who have as their place of abode a living unit
in a multiple dwelling.
(Prior Code, § 111.185)
§ 112.02 INTENTION; UNIFORM STANDARDS.
   It is the intention of this subchapter that a mode of protecting and
regulating the living conditions of citizens residing in multiple dwellings in
the city be established, and that uniform standards be established for all
multiple dwellings in the city.
(Prior Code, § 111.186)
§ 112.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MULTIPLE DWELLING. A building with two or more living units in common
ownership, one or more of which is rented or available for rent, but excluding
hotels, motels, hospitals, nursing homes, and homes for the aged.
   OPERATE. To charge rent or other consideration for the use of a unit in a
multiple dwelling.
   UNIT. A room or group of rooms in a multiple dwelling used or intended to be
used as a residence by an individual, family, or other group maintaining a
common household.
(Prior Code, § 111.187)
§ 112.04 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person may own or operate a multiple dwelling in the city without the
owner of the multiple dwelling first having obtained a license in accordance
with this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 111.188) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.05 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application by owner or purchaser. Applications for licenses must be
made in writing to the City Manager or designee by the owner of the multiple
dwelling on forms provided by the city. The purchaser of a multiple dwelling
may apply as the “owner;” provided, however, that any license issued pursuant
to an application by a purchaser shall be contingent upon closing the purchase
and upon the applicant becoming the owner.
   (B)   Content of application. Applications will include, but not be limited
to, the following information:
      (1)   Name and address of owner;
      (2)   Name and address of a person residing or having a business office
in Hennepin or Ramsey County, and appointed by the owner as an agent for
purposes of notices under this subchapter and for service of process upon the
owner;
      (3)   Name and address of any managing operator or agent;
      (4)   Name and address of all partners if the applicant is a partnership;
      (5)   Name and address of all officers and members of the Board of
Directors if the applicant is a corporation;
      (6)   Name and address of the contract for deed vendor if the multiple
dwelling is owned under a contract for deed;
      (7)   Address of the multiple dwelling;
      (8)   Number and kind of units;
      (9)   Height of the multiple dwelling in stories; and
      (10)   Exterior finish of building.
(Prior Code, § 111.189)
§ 112.06 APPLICATION EXECUTION.
   The application shall be subscribed and sworn to by the owner, and shall be
signed by the owner if a natural person, an officer if a corporation, or a
partner if a partnership. The owner’s signature on the application will
constitute a consent by the owner to be bound by notices sent to the person
referred to in §
112.05(B)(2), and appointment of that person as the owner’s agent for service
of process.
(Prior Code, § 111.190)
§ 112.07 ISSUANCE AND TERM.
   Upon approval by the City Council, the City Manager or designee will issue a
license to the owner of the multiple dwelling. A license is personal to the
owner of a specified multiple dwelling. No license may be transferred to a
purchaser of a multiple dwelling or to any other person or entity. If a
multiple dwelling is sold, the purchaser may not own or operate the multiple
dwelling without first obtaining the license provided for in this subchapter. A
license will be valid for one year from the date issued, and will terminate on
a date one year after the date of issuance unless renewed in accordance with
this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 111.191)
§ 112.08 RENEWAL.
   Applications for renewal of a license for a multiple dwelling must be made
in writing to the City Manager or designee on forms provided by the city.
Applications for renewal are to contain the same information as applications
for licenses, but may be signed by an agent or manager on behalf of the owner
if there has been no change in the information contained in the most recent
application on file.
(Prior Code, § 111.192)
§ 112.09 LICENSE FEES.
   License fees for initial applications and renewals will be in the amounts
set forth in
Chapter 33.
(Prior Code, § 111.193)
§ 112.10 LICENSE POSTING.
   Every licensee of a multiple dwelling must post the current annual license
issued by the City Manager or designee in a frame with a glass covering in a
conspicuous location in a public corridor, hallway, or lobby of the multiple
dwelling for which it is issued.
(Prior Code, § 111.194) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.11 MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.
   The owner of a multiple dwelling and any manager, operator, or owner’s agent
must maintain the multiple dwelling according to the standards set forth in
this subchapter, in addition to any other requirements of the laws of the
state, the ordinances of the city, or any special permits issued by the city.
(Prior Code, § 111.195) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.12 PLUMBING FACILITIES.
   Each unit must have at least one toilet, one bathtub or shower stall, and
one kitchen sink or wash basin. All plumbing facilities within a unit must be
kept in good working condition and properly connected to a water supply and
sewage system. All plumbing facilities serving more than one unit must be
maintained in the same manner.
(Prior Code, § 111.196)
§ 112.13 GARBAGE DISPOSAL.
   Every multiple dwelling shall have and maintain in sanitary condition
adequate facilities to accommodate the disposal of rubbish, garbage, refuse,
and recyclables needs of the occupants/tenants of the units. The facilities
shall be made of metal or other suitable material, which is rodent-proof, fire
resistive, and waterproof. The owner of the multiple dwelling property is
responsible for the removal of rubbish no less frequently than once a week and
for recyclables no less frequently than once a month. (Prior Code, § 111.197)
(Ord 2022-03, passed 5-24-2022) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.14 LIGHT, VENTILATION, AND HEATING.
   Every multiple dwelling must provide adequate ventilation in accordance with
applicable building codes. Each room in a unit used for sleeping, eating, or
cooking must have at least one electrical outlet. Every unit must have heating
facilities capable of providing temperature control of not less than 68EF at a
distance 18 inches above the floor level under ordinary winter conditions in
each room used for sleeping, eating, or cooking. The owner and any agent
operating a multiple dwelling is responsible for ensuring that the required
light, ventilation, and heating facilities are properly installed, safely
maintained, and in good working condition, and must provide and maintain in
good working condition a lighting system which will provide two footcandles of
light in every public hallway and stairway.
(Prior Code, § 111.198) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.15 BUILDING CONDITION.
   Each multiple dwelling is to be maintained so that the interior,
foundations, exterior walls, and roofs are reasonably weathertight, watertight,
and rodent-proof, and so that the multiple dwelling is kept in a clean, safe,
and sanitary condition.
(Prior Code, § 111.199) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.16 YARDS, OPEN SPACE, AND PARKING.
   Each multiple dwelling is to be maintained so that the yards, open spaces,
and parking facilities are kept in a clean, safe, and sanitary condition.
Except for paved areas existing on October 15, 1985, and hard surfacing
subsequently approved by the city, yards and open spaces must be covered with
grass or other suitable ground cover so as to avoid drainage and soil erosion
problems. Adequate lighting facilities must be provided and operated between
the hours of sunset and sunrise. Snow plowing or snow shoveling must be done
regularly to maintain all sidewalks, driveways, and parking areas in a safe and
passable condition.
(Prior Code, § 111.200) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.17 SAFETY FROM FIRE.
   All multiple dwellings must comply with applicable provisions of the Fire
Code of the city. All fire lanes established by the city on the property must
be kept open.
(Prior Code, § 111.201) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.18 INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   Manager and inspector authorization. The City Manager or designees are
authorized to make inspections reasonably necessary for the enforcement of this
subchapter.
   (B)   Police and health authorization. All police officers or sanitarians
may inspect a multiple dwelling when requested to do so by the City Manager or
designee.
   (C)   Authority to enter. All persons authorized to inspect have the
authority to enter, at reasonable times, any multiple dwelling licensed
pursuant to this subchapter.
   (D)   Notification of violations. Persons inspecting a multiple dwelling
must notify the licensee of all violations, if any, by written notice. The
notice will direct compliance in not less than 15 days, unless extended by the
City Manager or designee for good cause.
(Prior Code, § 111.202) (Ord. 2025-02, passed 4-22-2025)
SECURITY ALARMS
§ 112.30 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   This subchapter is intended to protect the public safety and to avoid misuse
and careless or negligent operation of certain security alarms.
(Prior Code, § 111.150)
§ 112.31 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM. A mechanical, electrical, or electronic device designed to detect
unauthorized entry, but excluding such a device affixed to a motor vehicle.
   ALARM AGENT. A person employed by or contracting with an alarm business,
either directly or indirectly, whose duties include selling, maintaining,
leasing, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, or installing any
alarm.
   ALARM BUSINESS. Any person engaged in selling, leasing, maintaining,
servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, installing, or monitoring
any alarm for another person for compensation.
   ALARM USER. A person in control of any building, structure, or facility
wherein an alarm is maintained.
   AUDIBLE ALARM. A device designed for the detection of unauthorized entry at
a building by an audible signal at the building.
   AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE. A device connected with a telephone line and
designed or programmed to automatically select a predetermined telephone number
and transmit a message or signal indicating the need for emergency police
assistance.
   FALSE ALARM. An alarm signal when a response by police is not in fact
required, but excluding an alarm caused by storm or other conditions beyond the
reasonable control of the alarm and alarm user.
   PROPRIETOR ALARM. An alarm which is not serviced by an alarm business.
   SUBSCRIBER. A person contracting with a business for the leasing, servicing,
or maintenance of an alarm.
(Prior Code, § 111.151)
§ 112.32 ALARM REQUIREMENTS AND PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Alarm standards. The Chief of Police may recommend to the City Council
minimum standards for the construction, maintenance, inspection, and approval
of alarms. The standards will become effective upon adoption by City Council
resolution, and thereafter all alarms must meet or exceed the standards before
being licensed.
   (B)   False alarm reports required. A report must be filed with the Chief of
Police by the alarm user within ten working days after any false alarm
transmitted to the Police Department. The report must contain information
specified by the Chief of Police.
   (C)   Audible alarm requirements. Audible alarms must meet the following
requirements.
      (1)   An audible alarm user must post a notice, containing the name and
telephone number of persons to be notified for repairs or service to the alarm
during any hour of the day or night that the alarm may be activated. This
information may alternatively be on file with the Police Department. The notice
must be posted at the main entrance to the building or near the alarm in a
position legible from ground level.
      (2)   No audible alarm may have a signal similar to police or fire
sirens.
      (3)   Audible alarms must have an automatic shut-off to silence the alarm
within a period not to exceed 20 minutes.
   (D)   Automatic dialing device. No person may install, use, or maintain an
automatic dialing device.
   (E)   Alarm agent. No person may act as an alarm agent unless employed by a
licensed alarm business.
(Prior Code, § 111.152) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.33 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Alarm business. No person may own or operate an alarm business without
the license required under this subchapter.
   (B)   Alarm users. No person may install or use an alarm without the license
required under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 111.153) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.34 APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Issuing authority. Licenses under this subchapter will be issued by
the City Manager or designee after approval by the approving authority.
   (B)   Approving authority. The approving authority must be the Chief of
Police for all alarm users.
   (C)   Applications. Applications for licenses must be filed with the City
Manager or designee on forms provided by the City Manager or designee. The
application must include the following:
      (1)   Name and address of applicant and telephone number of the premises
in which the alarm is installed;
      (2)   Name and address of maker, owner, lessor, or other person
responsible for the installation, maintenance, or operation of the alarm;
      (3)   Type, make, and location of each alarm; and
      (4)   Any other pertinent information as may be from time to time
required by the city.
   (D)   Investigations. The Police Department will review the application of
an alarm user, and investigate the alarms to be licensed by the alarm user and
their locations.
(Prior Code, § 111.154)
§ 112.35 FEES.
   (A)   Alarm business license. The annual license fee stated in Chapter 33 is
due and payable on July 1 of each year for each alarm business. The license fee
will not be prorated.
   (B)   Alarm user. The annual license fee stated in Chapter 33 is due and
payable on July 1 of each year by each alarm user. License fees will be
prorated on a monthly basis. When the annual permit is not paid to the city in
accordance to the annual fee stated in Chapter 33, the annual fee will be added
to the alarm user’s utility bill.
   (C)   Fee exemptions. The United States Government, the state, the Counties
of Hennepin and Ramsey, the city, or any departments thereof, are exempt from
the fee requirements of division (B) above.
   (D)   Responses to false alarms.
      (1)   Fees for false alarms must be paid to the city by the alarm user in
accordance with this section. If fee is not paid to the city in accordance with
this section, the fee will be added to the alarm user’s utility bill by the
City Finance Director. No fee will be charged for a response to a false alarm
where not more than two false alarms occur within a 12-month period.
      (2)   The sum of $75 must be paid to the city by the alarm user for each
false alarm response after the second response within a 12-month period. This
fee increases by $25 for each subsequent alarm thereafter in the same period.
(Prior Code, § 111.155)
§ 112.36 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
   (A)   Basis for suspension and revocation. The city may revoke or suspend a
license for any one or more of the following reasons:
      (1)   Violation of this subchapter;
      (2)   The actions of the licensee or the licensee’s alarm agent are
contrary to the public safety or general welfare;
      (3)   False alarms in excess of three in a six-month period are the
result of the failure to take necessary corrective action prescribed by the
Chief of Police; and/or
      (4)   Six or more false alarms in a six-month period.
   (B)   Disconnection of alarms. Upon suspension or revocation of an alarm
user’s license, the Chief of Police may order disconnection of the alarms
unless the premises are required by law to have the alarms.
(Prior Code, § 111.156)
§ 112.37 CONFIDENTIALITY.
   (A)   Submitted information confidential. All information submitted under
this subchapter is confidential and exempt from discovery.
   (B)   Statistics. Subject to the requirements of confidentiality, the City
Manager or a designated representative may develop, maintain, and publish
statistics pertaining to this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 111.157)
CONTRACTORS
§ 112.50 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTRACTOR. A person who performs for another person for a contract price, a
fee, or other consideration any work for which a building permit is required
under the provisions of this code.
(Prior Code, § 111.230)
§ 112.51 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person may perform work in the city as a contractor involved in building
construction, alterations, or remodeling or any other work for which a building
permit is required by this code or the State Building Code, without a license
issued pursuant to M.S. §§ 326B.091 through 326B.998, as they may be amended
from time to time, or a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter for the type of work in question. If the contractor has a state
license and no city license is required, the city will verify the state
license.
(Prior Code, § 111.231) (Ord. 2022-03, passed 5-24-2022) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.52 TYPES OF WORK COVERED.
   Licenses are required for, but not limited to, each of the below-named
trades and construction work:
   (A)   General contractors, including erection, alteration, or repair of
buildings;
   (B)   Masonry, cement work, cement block work, block laying, or brick work;
   (C)   Roofing;
   (D)   Plastering, stucco work, and sheet rock taping;
   (E)   Excavations, including excavations for footings, basements, and
grading of lots;
   (F)   Moving and wrecking of buildings;
   (G)   Blacktopping of driveways, parking lots, and similar surfaces; and
   (H)   Sign erection, construction, and repairs, including billboards and
electrical signs.
(Prior Code, § 111.232)
§ 112.53 APPLICATIONS.
   If the contractor does not have the required state license, applications for
a city license under this subchapter must be submitted to the City Manager or
designee and include evidence of competency as may be required by the City
Council.
   (A)   Evidence of qualification. Evidence of qualifications established
before any agency of the state will be prima facie evidence of competency under
this subchapter.
   (B)   Proof of state license. Whenever an agency of the state imposes
licensing or registration requirements for any trade licensed under this
subchapter, proof of satisfaction of all state requirements must be provided.
(Prior Code, § 111.233)
§ 112.54 BOND AND INSURANCE.
   Upon approval of the license application and prior to the issuance of a city
license, any applicant who does not have the required state license must file:
   (A)   A bond in the amount of $2,000 conditioned upon compliance with all
provisions of this code and the State Building Code regulating or governing
construction work;
   (B)   A certificate of public liability insurance in the amount of $100,000
per person and $300,000 per accident for death or bodily injury, and $50,000
for property damage; and
   (C)   Proof of worker’s compensation insurance as required by law.
(Prior Code, § 111.234)
§ 112.55 RIGHT TO PERFORM.
   A city license granted to a general contractor includes the right to perform
all of the work included in a general contract. The license includes any or all
persons performing the work which is classified and listed, providing that each
person performing the work is in the regular employ of the general contractor
and is qualified under state law and the provisions of this subchapter to
perform the work. The general contractor is responsible for all of the work so
performed. Subcontractors on any work are required to comply with this
subchapter for that subcontractor’s particular type of work.
(Prior Code, § 111.235)
§ 112.56 PROVISIONS.
   Unlicensed employees under the supervision of a licensee may be engaged by a
licensed contractor, but this provision will not be construed as exempting the
employees from licensing or registration requirements imposed by state law.
(Prior Code, § 111.236)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
CHAPTER 113: SECONDHAND DEALERS AND PAWNBROKERS
Section
Secondhand Dealers
   
113.01   Findings and purpose statement
   
113.02   Definitions
   
113.03   License required
   
113.04   Exceptions
   
113.05   Application content
   
113.06   Application execution
   
113.07   Application verification
   
113.08   Application consideration
   
113.09   Renewal application
   
113.10   Fees
   
113.11   Persons ineligible for a license
   
113.12   Bond required
   
113.13   Records required
   
113.14   Daily reports to police
   
113.15   Receipt required
   
113.16   Payment by check only
   
113.17   Holding period
   
113.18   Police order to hold property
   
113.19   Inspection of forms
   
113.20   Label required
   
113.21   Prohibited acts
   
113.22   General license restrictions
   
113.23   Suspension or revocation of license
Pawnbrokers
   
113.35   Findings and purpose statement
   
113.36   Definitions
   
113.37   License required
   
113.38   Application content
   
113.39   Application execution
   
113.40   Application verification
   
113.41   Application consideration
   
113.42   Renewal application
   
113.43   Fees
   
113.44   Bond required
   
113.45   Persons ineligible for a license
   
113.46   General license restrictions
   
113.47   Restricted transactions
   
113.48   Inspection by police
   
113.49   Conduct of persons on licensed premises
   
113.50   Restrictions regarding license transfer
   
113.51   Suspension or revocation of license
 
   
113.99   Penalty
SECONDHAND DEALERS
§ 113.01 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE STATEMENT.
   The City Council finds that secondhand dealers may knowingly or unknowingly
be a conduit for the sale or purchase of stolen property; secondhand dealers
should be regulated by requiring a license issued by the city; and licenses for
should be denied, suspended, or revoked when the conduct of the business
presents a threat to the peace, health, or safety of the people of the city.
The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the peace, health, and safety
of citizens of the city by regulating secondhand dealers.
(Prior Code, § 111.250)
§ 113.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUCTION HOUSE DEALER. Any secondhand dealer where some, or all, of the
secondhand merchandise is offered for sale for the highest bid or offer
tendered. If the sale is conducted by means of an auction, the auctioneer must
be properly licensed and bonded in accordance with applicable laws.
   BILLABLE TRANSACTION. Every reportable transaction conducted by a secondhand
dealer, regardless of the number of items received in that transaction.
   BUSINESS MANAGER. A person(s) designated by the licensee to operate a
business in the licensee’s absence. A licensee must designate a manager to
operate the licensed business if the licensee does not personally provide on-
site supervisory services at the business at least 64 hours per month.
   CITY. The City of St. Anthony, Minnesota.
   CONSIGNMENT. A written agreement between a licensee and a seller that
enables the licensee to take temporary possession of secondhand property, owned
by the seller, for the purpose of offering it for sale to the public. An
agreement shall state the terms under which the seller will be compensated, and
the amount of that compensation.
   DEALER. Any natural person, partnership, or corporation, either as principal
or agent, or employee thereof, licensed under this subchapter.
   PRECIOUS GEM. Any gem that is valued for its character, rarity, beauty, or
quality, including diamonds, rubies, emeralds, sapphires, or pearls, or any
other precious gems or stones, whether as a separate item or in combination as
a piece of jewelry or other crafted item.
   PRECIOUS METALS. Gold, silver, platinum, and sterling silver, whether as a
separate item or in combination as a piece of jewelry or other crafted item,
except items plated with precious metal(s) and the plating equals less than 1%
of the item’s total weight.
   RECEIVE. To purchase, accept for sale on consignment, broker, or receive in
trade for an item of equal or lesser value, any tangible personal property
previously owned, used, rented, or leased.
   RECORDABLE TRANSACTION. Every transaction conducted by a secondhand dealer
in which merchandise defined in §
113.13 is received, offered for sale, or intended for sale, whether inside or
outside the city.
   REPORTABLE TRANSACTION. Every transaction conducted by a secondhand dealer,
inside the city, in which merchandise defined in §
113.14 is received, and for which a daily report to the Police Department is
required.
   SECONDHAND DEALER. Any natural person, partnership, or corporation, either
as principal or agent or employee thereof, whose regular business includes
selling or receiving tangible personal properties, excluding motor vehicles,
previously owned, used, rented, or leased. The term SECONDHAND DEALER shall
include auction house dealers.
   UNIQUE IDENTIFIER. A serial number, identification number, model number,
owner applied identifier or engraving, “operation ID” number or symbol, or
other unique marking.
(Prior Code, § 111.251)
§ 113.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business of secondhand dealer without a
secondhand dealer license. No secondhand dealer license may be transferred to a
different location or a different person. Licenses shall be conspicuously
displayed. Issuance of a license under this subchapter shall not relieve the
dealer from obtaining any other licenses required to conduct business at the
same or any other locations. Persons engaged in the business of a secondhand
dealer on the effective date of this subchapter must receive a license within
60 days or cease doing business.
(Prior Code, § 111.252) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.04 EXCEPTIONS.
   The following transactions shall not require a license under this
subchapter:
   (A)   The sale of secondhand goods at events commonly known as GARAGE SALES,
YARD SALES, or ESTATE SALES where all of the following are present:
      (1)   The sale is held on property occupied as a dwelling by the seller
or owned, rented, or leased by a charitable or political organization;
      (2)   The occupant owns the items offered for sale and that none of the
items offered for sale shall have been purchased for resale or received on
consignment for purpose of resale;
      (3)   The owner of the property conducts the sale and receives all
proceeds from the sale;
      (4)   No sale exceeds a period of 72 consecutive hours; and
      (5)   No more than four sales are held in any 12-month period at any
residential dwelling.
   (B)   The sale or receipt of secondhand books, magazines, post cards,
postage stamps, philatelic material, video recordings (including digital video
discs and video tapes), and audio recordings (including compact discs, long-
play albums, and cassette tapes);
   (C)   The sale or receipt of used merchandise donated to recognized
nonprofit organizations and for which no compensation is paid; and
   (D)   Transactions conducted by a pawnbroker licensed under §§
113.35 through
113.51.
(Prior Code, § 111.253)
§ 113.05 APPLICATION CONTENT.
   In addition to any information that may be required by the county pursuant
to M.S. § 471.924, as it may be amended from time to time, every application
for a license under this subchapter shall be made on a form supplied by the
city and shall contain the following information.
   (A)   If the applicant is a natural person:
      (1)   The name, place, and date of birth, street resident address, and
telephone number of the applicant;
      (2)   Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States or a
resident alien;
      (3)   Whether the applicant has ever used or has been known by a name
other than the applicant’s name, and if so, the name or names used and
information concerning dates and places where used;
      (4)   The name of the business if it is to be conducted under a
designation, name, or style other than the name of the applicant and a
certified copy of the certificate as required by M.S. § 333.01, as it may be
amended from time to time;
      (5)   The street addresses at which the applicant has lived during the
preceding five years;
      (6)   The type, name, and location of every business or occupation in
which the applicant has been engaged during the preceding five years and the
name(s) and address(es) of the applicant’s employer(s) and partner(s), if any,
for the preceding five years;
      (7)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, crime,
or violation of any ordinance other than a traffic ordinance. If so, the
applicant shall furnish information as to the time, place, and offense for
which convictions were had;
      (8)   The physical description of the applicant; and
      (9)   If the applicant is married:
         (a)   The name, place, and date of birth, and street address of the
applicant’s current spouse;
         (b)   The type, name, and location of every business or occupation in
which the applicant’s current spouse has been engaged during the preceding five
years;
         (c)   The names and addresses of the employers or partners of the
applicant’s current spouse for the preceding five years; and
         (d)   Whether the applicant’s current spouse has ever been convicted
of any felony, crime, or violation of any ordinance other than a traffic
ordinance. If so, the applicant shall furnish information as to the time,
place, and offense for which convictions were had.
   (B)   If the applicant is a partnership:
      (1)   The name(s) and address(es) of all general and limited partners and
all information concerning each general partner required in division (A) above;
      (2)   The name(s) of managing partner(s) and the interest of each partner
in the secondhand goods business; and
      (3)   A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted with
the application. If the partnership is required to file a certificate as to a
trade name pursuant to M.S. § 333.01, as it may be amended from time to time, a
certified copy of the certificate shall be attached to the application.
   (C)   If the applicant is a corporation or other organization:
      (1)   The name of the corporation or business form, and if incorporated,
the state of incorporation;
      (2)   A true copy of the certificate of incorporation, articles of
incorporation or association agreement, and bylaws shall be attached to the
application. If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a certificate of
authority as required by M.S. § 303.06, as it may be amended from time to time,
shall be attached;
      (3)   The name of the manager(s), proprietor(s), or other agent(s) in
charge of the business and all information concerning each manager, proprietor,
or agent required in division (A) above; and
      (4)   A list of all persons who control or own an interest in excess of
5% in the organization or business form or who are officers of the corporation
or business form and all information concerning the persons required in
division (A) above.
   (D)   For all applicants:
      (1)   Whether the applicant holds a current secondhand dealers or
pawnbrokers license from any other governmental unit and whether the applicant
is licensed under M.S. § 471.924, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (2)   Whether the applicant has previously been denied, or had revoked or
suspended, a secondhand dealers license from this or any other governmental
unit;
      (3)   The names, street resident addresses, business addresses, and
telephone numbers of three individuals who are of good moral character and who
are not related to the applicant or not holding any ownership in the premises
or business, who may be referred to as to the applicant’s and or manager’s
character;
      (4)   The location of the business premises;
      (5)   The legal description of the premises to be licensed;
      (6)   The location at which the applicant’s business records are
maintained;
      (7)   If the applicant does not own the licensed premises, a true and
complete copy of the executed lease;
      (8)   Whether all real estate and personal property taxes that are due
and payable for the premises to be licensed have been paid, and if not paid,
the years and amounts that are unpaid;
      (9)   Whenever the application is for premises either planned or under
construction, or undergoing substantial alteration, the application shall be
accompanied by a set of preliminary plans showing the design of the proposed
premises to be licensed. If the plans or design are on file with the City
Building/Inspections Department, no plans need be submitted with application;
      (10)   The applicant’s hours of operation, on-site management, and
parking facilities;
      (11)   An executed data practices advisory and consent form authorizing
the release of criminal history information; and
      (12)   Any other information as the City Council may require.
   (E)   When a dealer places a manager in charge of a business, or if the
named manager(s) in charge of a licensed business changes, the dealer must
complete and submit the appropriate application prior to the effective date or
the change. The manager shall be subject to the investigation required by this
subchapter, and to the investigation fee required by Chapter 33, which shall be
paid in advance. The designation of a new manager shall not cause the license
to become invalid before a decision is rendered, provided proper notice and
application are made by the applicant. A proposed new manager shall be referred
to as the interim manager. In the event an interim manager is rejected, the
licensee shall designate another interim manager and make the required
application within 15 days of the decision. If a proposed manager is rejected,
the decision may be appealed to the City Council by filing a written notice of
appeal with the City Manager or designee within ten days after being notified
of the rejection.
(Prior Code, § 111.254)
§ 113.06 APPLICATION EXECUTION.
   All applications for a license under this subchapter shall be signed and
sworn to. If the application is that of a natural person, it shall be signed
and sworn to by the person; if that of a corporation, by an officer thereof; if
that of a partnership, by one of the general partners; and if that of an
unincorporated association, by the manager or managing officer thereof. Any
falsification on a license application shall result in the denial of a license.
(Prior Code, § 111.255)
§ 113.07 APPLICATION VERIFICATION.
   All applications will require criminal history data as described in §
111.02(C). Within 30 days after receipt of the completed application and the
criminal history background has been completed, the Police Department will make
a written report and recommendation to the City Council as to the issuance or
non-issuance of the license.
(Prior Code, § 111.256) (Ord. 2009-008, passed 6-23-2009; Ord. 10-23-2012,
passed - -)
§ 113.08 APPLICATION CONSIDERATION.
   (A)   The City Council shall conduct a hearing on the license application
within 30 days following receipt of the Police Department’s report and
recommendation regarding the application. At least ten days in advance of the
City Council hearing on an application, the city shall cause notice of the
hearing to be published in the official newspaper of the city, setting forth
the day, time, and place of the hearing; the name of the applicant; the
premises where the business is to be conducted; and the type of license which
is sought. The hearing shall also be preceded by ten days’ mailed notice to all
owners of property located within 500 feet of the boundaries of the property
where the business is to be conducted. At the hearing, opportunity shall be
given to any person to be heard for or against the granting of the license.
Additional hearings on the application may be held if the City Council deems
additional hearings necessary. After the hearing or hearings on the
application, the City Council may, in its discretion, grant or deny the
application within 30 days after the close of the hearing.
   (B)   If an application is granted for a location where a building is under
construction or not ready for occupancy, the license shall not be delivered to
the licensee until a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the licensed
premises.
(Prior Code, § 111.257)
§ 113.09 RENEWAL APPLICATION.
   (A)   All licenses issued under this subchapter shall be effective from the
date of approval by the City Council. All licenses expire at midnight on
December 31 of each year. An application for the renewal of an existing license
shall be made prior to the expiration date of the license and shall be made in
the form as the city requires. The application shall state that the information
in the prior application remains true and correct, except as otherwise
indicated. If, in the judgment of the City Council, good and sufficient cause
is shown by the applicant for the applicant’s failure to submit a renewal
application before the expiration of the existing license, the City Council
may, if the other provisions of this subchapter are complied with, grant the
renewal application.
   (B)   A license under this subchapter may not be renewed:
      (1)   If the City Council determines that the licensee has failed to
comply with the provisions of this subchapter in preceding license years;
      (2)   If the licensee or, if the licensee does not manage the
establishment, the manager of the licensed premises, is not a resident of the
state on the date the renewal takes effect;
      (3)   If in the case of a partnership, the managing partner or other
person who manages the establishment is not a resident of the state on the date
the renewal takes effect; or
      (4)   If in the case of a corporation, or other organization, the
manager, a proprietor, or agent in charge of the establishment is not a
resident of the state on the date the renewal takes effect.
   (C)   The time for establishing residence in the state may for good cause be
extended by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 111.258)
§ 113.10 FEES.
   (A)   Investigation fee. An applicant for any license under this subchapter
shall pay the city in advance at the time an original application is submitted,
a nonrefundable investigation fee to cover the costs involved in verifying the
license application and to cover the expense of any investigation needed to
assure compliance with this subchapter. The investigation fee is set forth in
Chapter 33.
   (B)   License fee.
      (1)   The annual license fee is set forth in
Chapter 33. The license fee shall be paid annually, to be determined pro-rata
from the date of issuance of the license.
      (2)   The annual license fee shall be paid in full before the license is
effective.
      (3)   When the license is for premises where the building is not ready
for occupancy, the time fixed for computation of the license fee for the
initial license period shall be 90 days after approval of the license by the
City Council or upon the date the building is ready for occupancy, whichever is
sooner.
      (4)   When a new license application is submitted as a result of
incorporation by an existing licensee and the ownership, control, and interest
in the license are unchanged, no additional fee shall be required.
   (C)   Billable transaction fees. Licensees shall pay a monthly transaction
fee on all billable transactions. The fee shall be due and payable within 30
days. Failure to timely pay the billable transaction fee shall constitute a
violation of this subchapter. The billable transaction license fee shall
reflect the cost of processing transactions and other related regulatory
expenses as determined by the City Council, and shall be reviewed and adjusted,
if necessary, every 12 months. Dealers shall be notified in writing 30 days
before any adjustment is implemented. The initial billable transaction fee for
billable transaction shall be $1.75 per electronic transaction, regardless of
the number of items in that transaction, and $2.75 per manual transaction.
(Prior Code, § 111.259)
§ 113.11 PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR A LICENSE.
   (A)   No license under this subchapter shall be issued to an applicant who
is a natural person if:
      (1)   The applicant is a minor at the time the application is filed;
      (2)   The applicant has been convicted of any crime directly related to
the occupation licensed as prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 2, as it may be
amended from time to time, and has not shown competent evidence of sufficient
rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of a pawnbroker as
prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (3)   The proposed use does not comply with
Chapter 154;
      (4)   The proposed use does not comply with any health, building,
building maintenance, or other provisions of the city code or state law;
      (5)   The owner of the premises licensed or to be licensed would not
qualify for a license under the terms of this chapter;
      (6)   The applicant has failed to comply with one or more provisions of
this subchapter;
      (7)   The applicant is not a citizen of the United States or a resident
alien, or upon whom it is impractical or impossible to conduct a background or
financial investigation due to the unavailability of information;
      (8)   The applicant has committed fraud, misrepresentation, or bribery in
securing a license;
      (9)   The applicant has committed fraud, misrepresentation, or made false
statements in the application and investigation for the applicant’s business;
      (10)   Business practices, or conduct, deemed by the city to be contrary
to the best interests or safety of the public; or
      (11)   The applicant has violated within the preceding five years, of any
law relating to theft, damage or trespass to property, sale of a controlled
substance, or operation of a business.
   (B)   No license under this subchapter shall be issued to an applicant that
is a partnership if:
      (1)   Any general partner or managing partner of the applicant is a minor
at the time the application is filed;
      (2)   Any general partner or managing partner of the applicant has been
convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation licensed as
prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 2, as it may be amended from time to time,
and has not shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present
fitness to perform the duties of a pawnbroker as prescribed by M.S. § 364.03,
Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (3)   The proposed use does not comply with
Chapter 154;
      (4)   The proposed use does not comply with any health, building,
building maintenance, or other provisions of the city code or state law;
      (5)   The owner of the premises licensed or to be licensed would not
qualify for a license under the terms of this chapter;
      (6)   The applicant has failed to comply with one or more provisions of
this subchapter;
      (7)   Any general partner or managing partner of the applicant is not a
citizen of the United States or a resident alien, or upon whom it is
impractical or impossible to conduct a background or financial investigation
due to the unavailability of information;
      (8)   Any general partner or managing partner of the applicant has
committed fraud, misrepresentation, or bribery in securing a license;
      (9)   Any general partner or managing partner of the applicant has
committed fraud, misrepresentation, or made false statements in the application
and investigation for the applicant’s business;
      (10)   Business practices, or conduct, deemed by the city to be contrary
to the best interests or safety of the public; or
      (11)   Any general partner or managing partner of the applicant has
violated within the preceding five years, of any law relating to theft, damage
or trespass to property, sale of a controlled substance, or operation of a
business.
   (C)   No license under this subchapter shall be issued to an applicant that
is a corporation or other organization if:
      (1)   Any manager, proprietor, or agent in charge of the business to be
licensed is a minor at the time the application is filed;
      (2)   Any manager, proprietor, or agent in charge of the business has
been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation licensed as
prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 2, as it may be amended from time to time,
and has not shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present
fitness to perform the duties of a pawnbroker as prescribed by M.S. § 364.03,
Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (3)   The proposed use does not comply with Chapter 154;
      (4)   The proposed use does not comply with any health, building,
building maintenance, or other provisions of the city code or state law;
      (5)   The owner of the premises licensed or to be licensed would not
qualify for a license under the terms of this chapter;
      (6)   The applicant has failed to comply with one or more provisions of
this subchapter;
      (7)   Any manager, proprietor, or agent in charge of the business is not
a citizen of the United States or a resident alien, or upon whom it is
impractical or impossible to conduct a background or financial investigation
due to the unavailability of information;
      (8)   Any manager, proprietor, or agent in charge of the business has
committed fraud, misrepresentation, or bribery in securing a license;
      (9)   Any manager, proprietor, or agent in charge of the business has
committed fraud, misrepresentation, or made false statements in the application
and investigation for the applicant’s business;
      (10)   Business practices, or conduct, deemed by the city to be contrary
to the best interests, or safety, of the public; or
      (11)   Any manager, proprietor, or agent in charge of the business has
violated within the preceding five years, of any law relating to theft, damage
or trespass to property, sale of a controlled substance, or operation of a
business.
(Prior Code, § 111.260)
§ 113.12 BOND REQUIRED.
   At the time of filing an application for a license, the applicant shall file
a bond in the amount of $5,000 with the city. The bond, with a duly licensed
surety company as surety thereon, must be approved as to form by the City
Attorney. The bond must be conditioned that the licensee shall observe all
ordinances of the city and all laws in regulation to the business of secondhand
dealers, and that the licensee will account for and deliver to any person
legally entitled thereto any articles which may have come into the possession
of the licensee as a secondhand dealer, or in lieu thereof, the licensee shall
pay the person or persons the reasonable value thereof. The bond shall contain
a provision that it may not be cancelled without 30-day advance written notice
to the city.
(Prior Code, § 111.261)
§ 113.13 RECORDS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Exempt transactions. The following items, when received by a dealer,
are exempt from recording and reporting requirements in this subchapter,
regardless of the purchase price paid by the dealer, asking price if consigned
or brokered, or value attributed to it if accepted in trade:
      (1)   The receipt of new or used merchandise from a merchant,
manufacturer, or wholesaler having an established permanent place of business,
and the retail sale of the merchandise, provided the secondhand dealer must
maintain a record of all the transactions which describes each item, and must
identify the items in a manner which relates them to that transaction record.
Any identification code used by the dealer must be provided to the Chief of
Police, or the Chief’s designee, upon request;
      (2)   The sale or receipt of secondhand household kitchen and laundry
appliances;
      (3)   The sale or receipt of secondhand furniture, excluding audio,
video, and other electronic devices;
      (4)   The sale or receipt of secondhand cookware, glassware, and eating
utensils that do not contain precious metals;
      (5)   The sale or receipt of secondhand clothing and shoes; and
      (6)   The sale or receipt of secondhand infant’s, toddler’s or children’s
clothing, appliances, furniture, or safety devices.
   (B)   Recordable transactions. Every dealer, at the time of receipt of any
item which has a unique identifier, or is or contains precious metals or gems,
regardless of the purchase price, asking price if consigned or brokered, or
value attributed to it if accepted in trade, or any other item for which the
dealer paid $15 or more, by check or other consideration, or which the dealer
intends to offer for sale, or broker, for $30 or more, and which is not
exempted in division (A) above, shall immediately and legibly record, using the
English language, in ink or other indelible medium in a book, on forms, or in a
computerized record approved by the Chief of Police, or the Chief’s designee,
the following information:
      (1)   A complete and accurate description of each item, including, but
not limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number, model
number, brand name, or other identifying mark on such an item;
      (2)   The purchase price, asking price if consigned, or value attributed
to item if accepted in trade, for each item received;
      (3)   Date and time the dealer received the item of property;
      (4)   Full name, residence address, residence telephone number, date of
birth, and accurate description of the person from whom the item of property
was received, including: sex, height, weight, race, color of eyes, and color of
hair;
      (5)   The identification number and state of issue from any of the
following forms of identification presented by the seller:
         (a)   Current valid state driver’s license;
         (b)   Current valid state identification card; and/or
         (c)   Current valid photo driver’s license or photo identification
card issued by another state or province of Canada.
      (6)   The signature of the person identified in the transaction.
   (C)   Inspection of records. The records must at all reasonable times be
open to inspection by the Police Department or Department of Licenses and
Consumer Services. Records of all transactions shall be retained for at least
three years from the date of transaction.
(Prior Code, § 111.262)
§ 113.14 DAILY REPORTS TO POLICE.
   (A)   Reportable transactions. Except for items received through
consignment, or for which payment in full is made with a credit or voucher
redeemable for merchandise from the dealer, every dealer shall report daily, to
the Police Department, any recordable transaction in which one or more of the
following items is received, regardless of the purchase price, asking price if
consigned or brokered, or value attributed to it if accepted in trade:
      (1)   Any item with a unique identifier;
      (2)   Items containing precious metals;
      (3)   Items containing precious gems;
      (4)   Any of the following items for which the dealer paid $25 or more,
in cash or other consideration, or which the dealer intends to offer for sale,
or broker, for $50 or more:
         (a)   Electronic audio equipment;
         (b)   Electronic video equipment;
         (c)   Musical instruments;
         (d)   Photographic and optical equipment;
         (e)   Electronic office equipment;
         (f)   Computers, monitors, printers, scanners, and computer hardware;
         (g)   Cellular telephones and pagers;
         (h)   Outboard motors, inboard drives, and powered golf carts;
         (i)   Electric and gas powered yard or garden equipment and tools;
         (j)   Electric, pneumatic, or hydraulic powered construction or
mechanic’s equipment or tools; and/or
         (k)   Other items that are commonly considered “collectibles.”
      (5)   Sporting equipment for which the secondhand dealer paid $100 or
more, in cash or other consideration, or which the secondhand dealer intends to
offer for sale, or broker, for $200 or more;
      (6)   Architectural elements, lighting fixtures or lamps, limited to
those which the secondhand dealer paid $150 or more, in cash or other
consideration, or which the secondhand dealer intends to offer for sale, or
broker, for $300 or more; and/or
      (7)   Artist signed or artist attributed works of art, other than
architectural elements, lighting fixtures or lamps, limited to those for which
the secondhand dealer paid $250 or more, in cash or other consideration, or
which the secondhand dealer intends to offer for sale, or broker, for $500 or
more.
   (B)   Method. Dealers must provide to the Police Department the information
required in §
113.13(B), in writing, on forms approved by the Chief of Police, or the Chief’s
designee, for all reportable transactions. The dealer must display a sign of
sufficient size, and in a conspicuous place in the premises, so as to inform
all patrons that transactions are reported to the Police Department daily.
Dealers must submit every reportable transaction to the Police Department daily
in the following manner.
      (1)   Dealers must provide to the Police Department the information
required in §
113.13(B), for all reportable transactions, by transferring it from their
computer to the Police Department via modem. All required records must be
transmitted completely and accurately after the close of business each day in
accordance with standards and procedures established by the city using a dial-
callback protocol or other procedures that address security concerns of the
dealers and the city.
      (2)   If the dealer who has consistently reported via modem is unable to
successfully transfer the required reports by modem, the dealer must provide
the Police Department printed copies of all reportable transactions for that
date by 12:00 p.m. the next business day.
(Prior Code, § 111.263) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.15 RECEIPT REQUIRED.
   Every dealer must provide a receipt, upon request, to any person from whom
they received goods for which a record was required in §
113.13, and must maintain a duplicate of that receipt for three years. The
receipt must include sufficient information to enable the Police Department to
identify the transaction, and every item related to it, in the dealer’s
records.
(Prior Code, § 111.264) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.16 PAYMENT BY CHECK ONLY.
   When a dealer buys or otherwise receives an item, payment shall be made by
check only, made payable to a named payee who is the actual and identified
seller.
(Prior Code, § 111.265) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.17 HOLDING PERIOD.
   Any item received by a dealer, for which a report to the police is required
in §
113.14, shall not be sold or otherwise transferred for 30 days after the date
the Police Department receives the report, except as provided in §
113.22. Items may not be altered, modified, or changed in any way during the
holding period.
(Prior Code, § 111.266) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.18 POLICE ORDER TO HOLD PROPERTY.
   (A)   Investigative hold. Whenever a law enforcement official from any
agency notifies a dealer not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or
removed from the premises. The investigative hold shall be confirmed in writing
by the originating agency within 72 hours and will remain in effect for 15 days
from the date of initial notification, or until the investigative order is
canceled, or until an order to hold/confiscate is issued, pursuant to division
(B) below, whichever comes first.
   (B)   Order to hold. Whenever the Chief of Police, or the Chief’s designee,
notifies a dealer not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or removed
from the licensed premises until authorized to be released by the Chief of
Police, or the Chief’s designee. The order to hold shall expire 90 days from
the date it is placed unless the Chief of Police, or the Chief’s designee,
determines the hold is still necessary and notifies the dealer in writing.
   (C)   Order to confiscate.
      (1)   If an item is identified as stolen or evidence in a criminal case,
the Chief of Police, or the Chief’s designee, may:
         (a)   Physically confiscate and remove it from the dealer’s premises,
pursuant to a written order from the Chief of Police, or the Chief’s designee;
or
         (b)   Place the item on hold or extend the hold as provided in
division (B) above, and leave it in the dealer’s premises.
      (2)   When an item is confiscated, the person doing so shall provide
identification upon request of the dealer, and shall provide the dealer the
name and phone number of the confiscating agency and investigator, and the case
number related to the confiscation. When an order to hold/confiscate is no
longer necessary, the Chief of Police, or the Chief’s designee, shall so notify
the dealer.
(Prior Code, § 111.267)
§ 113.19 INSPECTION OF FORMS.
   The licensee must allow the Chief of Police, or the Chief’s designee, to
enter the premises where the licensed business is located or business records
are maintained, including all off-site storage facilities as authorized in §
113.22, during normal business hours, except in an emergency, for the purpose
of inspecting the premises and inspecting the items, wares, and merchandise,
and records therein to verify compliance with this subchapter or other
applicable laws.
(Prior Code, § 111.268) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.20 LABEL REQUIRED.
   Dealers must attach a label to every item, for which a report to the Police
Department is required in §
113.14, at the time it is received in inventory. Permanently recorded on this
label must be the number or name that identifies the transaction in the
dealer’s records, the name of the item, and the date the item can be sold.
Labels shall not be re-used.
(Prior Code, § 111.269) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.21 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   The following acts are prohibited under this subchapter.
   (A)   No person under the age of 18 years may sell or consign, or attempt to
sell or consign, any goods with any dealer, nor may any dealer receive any
goods from a person under the age of 18 years.
   (B)   No dealer may receive any goods from a person of unsound mind or an
intoxicated person.
   (C)   No dealer may receive any goods unless the seller presents one of the
following forms of identification:
      (1)   Current valid state driver’s license;
      (2)   Current valid state identification card; or
      (3)   Current valid photo driver’s license or photo identification card
issued by another state or province of Canada.
   (D)   No dealer may receive any item of property that possesses an altered
or obliterated serial number or “operation identification” number, or any item
of property that has had its serial number removed.
(Prior Code, § 111.270) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.22 GENERAL LICENSE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Firearms and weapons. A secondhand dealer shall not receive, display,
or sell any merchandise consisting of a revolver, pistol, shotgun, automatic
rifle, semiautomatic military-style assault weapon (as defined by M.S. §
624.712, as it may be amended from time to time), switchblade knife, or other
similar weapons or firearms.
   (B)   Responsibility of licensee. A licensee under this subchapter shall be
responsible for the conduct of the business being operated and shall maintain
conditions of order. The conduct of agents or employees of a licensee, engaged
in performance of duties for the licensee, shall be deemed the conduct of the
licensee.
   (C)   Gambling. No licensee under this subchapter may keep, possess, or
operate, or permit the keeping, possession, or operation on the licensed
premises of dice, slot machines, roulette wheels, punchboards, blackjack
tables, or pinball machines which return coins or slugs, chips, or tokens of
any kind, which are redeemable in merchandise or cash. No gambling equipment
authorized under M.S. Chapter 349, as it may be amended from time to time, may
be kept or operated, and no raffles may be conducted on the licensed premises
and/or adjoining rooms. The purchase of lottery tickets may take place on the
licensed premises as authorized by the director of the lottery pursuant to M.S.
Chapter 349A, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (D)   Penalty for property owner. It is unlawful for any person who owns or
controls real property to knowingly permit it to be used for the sale of
secondhand goods without a license.
   (E)   Premises. All property held for sale must be stored in an enclosed
facility and may not be stored outside of the premises. The Chief of Police, or
the Chief’s designee, may, however, upon written request, approve an off-site
locked and secured storage facility. The dealer shall permit immediate
inspection of the facility by the Chief of Police, or the Chief’s designee, at
any time during business hours. All provisions of this subchapter regarding
record keeping and reporting apply to the facility and its contents. All
property shall be stored in compliance with zoning and/or fire regulations and
in an orderly manner. The premises shall also be equipped with an operational
security alarm.
(Prior Code, § 111.271) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.23 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The City Council may suspend or revoke a license issued under this
subchapter upon a finding of a violation of:
      (1)   Any of the provisions of this subchapter;
      (2)   Any state statute regulating secondhand dealers;
      (3)   Any crime directly related to the occupation licensed as prescribed
by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 2, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (4)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or bribery in renewing a license;
      (5)   Business practices, or conduct, deemed by the city to be contrary
to the best interests or safety of the public; or
      (6)   Any law relating to theft, damage, or trespass to property, sale of
a controlled substance, or operation of a business.
   (B)   A revocation or suspension by the City Council shall be preceded by
written notice to the licensee and a public hearing. The written notice shall
give at least ten days’ notice of the time and place of the hearing and shall
state the nature of the charges against the secondhand dealer. The notice may
be served upon the secondhand dealer personally or by United States mail
addressed to the most recent address of the business in the license
application.
(Prior Code, § 111.272)
PAWNBROKERS
§ 113.35 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE STATEMENT.
   (A)   Findings. The City Council makes the following findings regarding the
need to regulate pawnbrokers operating within the city.
      (1)   Pawnbrokers provide an opportunity for the commission of crime and
the concealment of crime, because pawnshops have the ability to receive and
transfer stolen property easily and quickly.
      (2)   The pawn industry has outgrown the city’s current ability to
effectively and efficiently identify criminal activity related to pawnbrokers
and pawn businesses. The adoption of an Automated Pawn System (APS) will allow
law enforcement officials to timely collect and share pawn transaction
information more efficiently.
      (3)   Consumer protection regulation of pawn transactions is warranted in
light of the potential for abuse.
   (B)   Purpose statement. The City Council enacts this subchapter of the city
code in order to further the following objectives:
      (1)   The prevention of pawnshops from being used as facilities for the
commission of crime;
      (2)   The identification of criminal activities through timely collection
and sharing of pawn transaction information;
      (3)   The promulgation of consumer protection standards to be adhered to
by the pawn industry; and
      (4)   The protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare of
the citizens of the city.
(Prior Code, § 111.285)
§ 113.36 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCEPTABLE IDENTIFICATION. Acceptable forms of identification are a current
valid state driver’s license, a current valid state identification card, a
current valid photo driver’s license or identification card issued by another
state or province of Canada, or current passport.
   BILLABLE TRANSACTIONS. Every reportable transaction conducted by a
pawnbroker, except renewals, redemptions, extensions, or confiscations of items
previously reported and continuously in the licensee’s possession is a billable
transaction. Any fee for billable transactions shall reflect the cost of
processing transactions and other related regulatory expenses as determined by
the City Council pursuant to §
113.43.
   CITY. The City of St. Anthony, Minnesota.
   CONSIGNMENT. A written agreement between a licensee and a seller that
enables the licensee to take temporary possession of secondhand property, owned
by the seller, for the purpose of offering it for sale to the public. An
agreement shall state the terms under which the seller will be compensated, and
the amount of that compensation.
   LICENSEE. The person, corporation, partnership, or association to whom a
license is issued under this subchapter, including any agents or employees of
the person, corporation, partnership, or association.
   MINOR. Any natural person under the age of 18 years.
   PAWNBROKER. Any natural person, partnership, or corporation, either as
principal, or agent or employee thereof, who loans money on deposit or pledge
of personal property, or other valuable thing, or who deals in the purchasing
of personal property, or other valuable thing, on condition of selling the same
back again at a stipulated price, or who loans money secured by chattel
mortgage on personal property, taking possession of the property or any part
thereof so mortgaged. To the extent that a pawnbroker’s business includes
buying personal property previously used, rented, or leased, or selling it on
consignment, the provisions of this subchapter shall be applicable. Any bank,
savings and loan association, or credit union shall not be deemed a PAWNBROKER
for purposes of this subchapter.
   PAWNSHOP. Any business or establishment used or operated by a pawnbroker.
   PERSON. Any one or more natural persons; a partnership, including a limited
partnership; a corporation, including a foreign, domestic, or nonprofit
corporation; a trust; a political subdivision of the state; or any other
business organization.
   REPORTABLE TRANSACTION. Every transaction conducted by a pawnbroker in which
merchandise is received through a pawn, purchase, consignment, or trade, or in
which a pawn is renewed, extended, redeemed, or voided, or for which a unique
transaction number or identifier is generated by their point of sale software,
or when an item is confiscated by a law enforcement agency, is a REPORTABLE
TRANSACTION, except:
      (1)   The bulk purchase or consignment of new or used merchandise from a
merchant, manufacturer, or wholesaler having an established permanent place of
business, and the retail sale of the merchandise, provided the pawnbroker must
maintain a record of the purchase or consignment which describes each item, and
must mark each item in a manner which relates it to that transaction record;
and/or
      (2)   Retail and wholesale sales of merchandise originally received by
pawn or purchase, and for which all applicable hold and/or redemption periods
have expired.
   UNIQUE IDENTIFIER. A serial number, identification number, model number,
owner applied identifier or engraving, “operation identification” number or
symbol, or other unique marking.
(Prior Code, § 111.286)
§ 113.37 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall exercise, carry on, or be engaged in the trade or business
of pawnbroker within the city unless the person is currently licensed under
this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 111.287) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.38 APPLICATION CONTENT.
   In addition to any information that may be required by the county pursuant
to M.S. § 471.924, as it may be amended from time to time, every application
for a license under this subchapter shall be made on a form supplied by the
city and shall contain the following information:
   (A)   If the applicant is a natural person:
      (1)   The name, place, and date of birth, street resident address, and
telephone number of the applicant;
      (2)   Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States or a
resident alien;
      (3)   Whether the applicant has ever used or has been known by a name
other than the applicant’s name, and if so, the name or names used and
information concerning dates and places where used;
      (4)   The name of the business if it is to be conducted under a
designation, name, or style other than the name of the applicant and a
certified copy of the certificate as required by M.S. § 333.01, as it may be
amended from time to time;
      (5)   The street addresses at which the applicant has lived during the
preceding five years;
      (6)   The type, name, and location of every business or occupation in
which the applicant has been engaged during the preceding five years and the
name(s) and address(es) of the applicant’s employer(s) and partner(s), if any,
for the preceding five years;
      (7)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, crime,
or violation of any ordinance other than a traffic ordinance. If so, the
applicant shall furnish information as to the time, place, and offense for
which convictions were had;
      (8)   The physical description of the applicant; and
      (9)   If the applicant is married:
         (a)   The name, place and date of birth, and street address of the
applicant’s current spouse;
         (b)   The type, name, and location of every business or occupation in
which the applicant’s current spouse has been engaged during the preceding five
years;
         (c)   The names and addresses of the employers or partners of the
applicant’s current spouse for the preceding five years; and
         (d)   Whether the applicant’s current spouse has ever been convicted
of any felony, crime, or violation of any ordinance other than a traffic
ordinance. If so, the applicant shall furnish information as to the time,
place, and offense for which convictions were had.
   (B)   If the applicant is a partnership:
      (1)   The name(s) and address(es) of all general and limited partners and
all information concerning each general partner required in division (A) above;
      (2)   The name(s) of managing partner(s) and the interest of each partner
in the pawnbroker business; and
      (3)   A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted with
the application. If the partnership is required to file a certificate as to a
trade name pursuant to M.S. § 333.01, as it may be amended from time to time, a
certified copy of the certificate shall be attached to the application.
   (C)   If the applicant is a corporation or other organization:
      (1)   The name of the corporation or business form, and if incorporated,
the state of incorporation;
      (2)   A true copy of the certificate of incorporation, articles of
incorporation, or association agreement, and bylaws shall be attached to the
application. If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a certificate of
authority as required by M.S. § 303.06, as it may be amended from time to time,
shall be attached;
      (3)   The name of the manager(s), proprietor(s), or other agent(s) in
charge of the business and all information concerning each manager, proprietor,
or agent required in division (A) above; and
      (4)   A list of all persons who control or own an interest in excess of
5% in the organization or business form or who are officers of the corporation
or business form and all information concerning the persons required in
division (A) above.
   (D)   For all applicants:
      (1)   Whether the applicant holds a current pawnbroker license from any
other governmental unit and whether the applicant is licensed under M.S. §
471.924, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (2)   Whether the applicant has previously been denied, or had revoked or
suspended, a pawnbroker license from this or any other governmental unit;
      (3)   The names, street resident addresses, business addresses, and
telephone numbers of three individuals who are of good moral character and who
are not related to the applicant or not holding any ownership in the premises
or business, who may be referred to as to the applicant’s and/or manager’s
character;
      (4)   The location of the business premises;
      (5)   The legal description of the premises to be licensed;
      (6)   The location at which the applicant’s business records are
maintained;
      (7)   If the applicant does not own the licensed premises, a true and
complete copy of the executed lease;
      (8)   Whether all real estate and personal property taxes that are due
and payable for the premises to be licensed have been paid, and if not paid,
the years and amounts that are unpaid;
      (9)   Whenever the application is for premises either planned or under
construction, or undergoing substantial alteration, the application shall be
accompanied by a set of preliminary plans showing the design of the proposed
premises to be licensed. If the plans or design are on file with the City
Building/Inspections Department, no plans need be submitted with the
application;
      (10)   The applicant’s hours of operation, on-site management, and
parking facilities;
      (11)   An executed data practices advisory and consent form authorizing
the release of criminal history information; and
      (12)   Any other information as the City Council may require.
   (E)   When a dealer places a manager in charge of a business, or if the
named manager(s) in charge of a licensed business changes, the dealer must
complete and submit the appropriate application prior to the effective date or
the change. The manager shall be subject to the investigation required by this
subchapter, and to the investigation fee required by Chapter 33, which shall be
paid in advance. The designation of a new manager shall not cause the license
to become invalid before a decision is rendered, provided proper notice and
application are made by the applicant. A proposed new manager shall be referred
to as the interim manager. In the event an interim manager is rejected, the
licensee shall designate another interim manager and make the required
application within 15 days of the decision. If a proposed manager is rejected,
the decision may be appealed to the City Council by filing a written notice of
appeal with the City Manager or designee within ten days after being notified
of the rejection.
(Prior Code, § 111.288)
§ 113.39 APPLICATION EXECUTION.
   All applications for a license under this subchapter shall be signed and
sworn to. If the application is that of a natural person, it shall be signed
and sworn to by the person; if that of a corporation, by an officer thereof; if
that of a partnership, by one of the general partners; and if that of an
unincorporated association, by the manager or managing officer thereof. Any
falsification on a license application shall result in the denial of a license.
(Prior Code, § 111.289)
§ 113.40 APPLICATION VERIFICATION.
   All applications shall be referred to the Police Department for verification
and investigation of the facts set forth in the application as described in §
111.02(C). Within 60 days after receipt of a complete application, the Police
Department shall make a written report and recommendation to the City Council
as to issuance or non-issuance of the license.
(Prior Code, § 111.290) (Ord. 2009-008, passed 6-23-2009; Ord. 2012-08, passed
10-23-2012)
§ 113.41 APPLICATION CONSIDERATION.
   (A)   The City Council shall conduct a hearing on the license application
within 30 days following receipt of the Police Department’s report and
recommendation regarding the application. At least ten days in advance of the
City Council hearing on an application, the city shall cause notice of the
hearing to be published in the official newspaper of the city, setting forth
the day, time, and place of the hearing; the name of the applicant; the
premises where the business is to be conducted; and the type of license which
is sought. The hearing shall also be preceded by ten-day mailed notice to all
owners of property located within 500 feet of the boundaries of the property
where the business is to be conducted. At the hearing, opportunity shall be
given to any person to be heard for or against the granting of the license.
Additional hearings on the application may be held if the City Council deems
additional hearings necessary. After the hearing or hearings on the
application, the City Council may, in its discretion, grant or deny the
application within 30 days after the close of the hearing.
   (B)   If an application is granted for a location where a building is under
construction or not ready for occupancy, the license shall not be delivered to
the licensee until a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the licensed
premises.
(Prior Code, § 111.291)
§ 113.42 RENEWAL APPLICATION.
   (A)   All licenses issued under this subchapter shall be effective from the
date of approval by the City Council. All licenses expire at midnight on
December 31 of each year. An application for the renewal of an existing license
shall be made prior to the expiration date of the license and shall be made in
the form as the city requires. The application shall state that the information
in the prior application remains true and correct, except as otherwise
indicated. If, in the judgment of the City Council, good and sufficient cause
is shown by the applicant for the applicant’s failure to submit a renewal
application before the expiration of the existing license, the City Council
may, if the other provisions of this subchapter are complied with, grant the
renewal application.
   (B)   A license under this subchapter may not be renewed:
      (1)   If the City Council determines that the licensee has failed to
comply with the provisions of this subchapter in preceding license years;
      (2)   If the licensee or, if the licensee does not manage the
establishment, the manager of the licensed premises is not a resident of the
state on the date the renewal takes effect;
      (3)   If in the case of a partnership, the managing partner or other
person who manages the establishment is not a resident of the state on the date
the renewal takes effect; or
      (4)   If in the case of a corporation or other organization, the manager,
a proprietor, or agent in charge of the establishment is not a resident of the
state on the date the renewal takes effect.
   (C)   The time for establishing residence in the state may for good cause be
extended by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 111.292)
§ 113.43 FEES.
   (A)   Investigation fee. An applicant for any license under this subchapter
shall pay the city in advance at the time an original application is submitted,
a nonrefundable investigation fee to cover the costs involved in verifying the
license application and to cover the expense of any investigation needed to
assure compliance with this subchapter. The investigation fee is set forth in
Chapter 33.
   (B)   License fee.
      (1)   The annual license fee is set forth in
Chapter 33. The license fee shall be paid annually, to be determined pro-rata
from the date of issuance of the license.
      (2)   The annual license fee shall be paid in full before the license is
effective.
      (3)   When the license is for premises where the building is not ready
for occupancy, the time fixed for computation of the license fee for the
initial license period shall be 90 days after approval of the license by the
City Council or upon the date the building is ready for occupancy, whichever is
sooner.
      (4)   When a new license application is submitted as a result of
incorporation by an existing licensee and the ownership, control, and interest
in the license are unchanged, no additional fee shall be required.
   (C)   Billable transaction fees. Licensees shall pay a monthly transaction
fee on all billable transactions. The fee shall be due and payable within 30
days. Failure to timely pay the billable transaction fee shall constitute a
violation of this subchapter. The billable transaction license fee shall
reflect the cost of processing transactions and other related regulatory
expenses as determined by the City Council, and shall be reviewed and adjusted,
if necessary, every six months. Licensees shall be notified in writing 30 days
before any adjustment is implemented. The initial billable transaction fee for
billable transaction shall be $1.75 per electronic transaction, regardless of
the number of items in that transaction, and $2.75 per manual transaction.
(Prior Code, § 111.293)
§ 113.44 BOND REQUIRED.
   At the time of filing an application for a license, the applicant shall file
a bond in the amount of $5,000 with the city. The bond, with a duly licensed
surety company as surety thereon, must be approved as to form by the City
Attorney. The bond must be conditioned that the licensee shall observe all
ordinances of the city and all laws in regulation to the business of
pawnbroker, and that the licensee will account for and deliver to any person
legally entitled thereto any articles which may have come into the possession
of the licensee as pawnbroker, or in lieu thereof the licensee shall pay the
person or persons the reasonable value thereof. The bond shall contain a
provision that it may not be cancelled without 30-day advance written notice to
the licensing authority.
(Prior Code, § 111.294)
§ 113.45 PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR A LICENSE.
   (A)   No license under this subchapter shall be issued to an applicant who
is a natural person if:
      (1)   The applicant is a minor at the time the application is filed;
      (2)   The applicant has been convicted of any crime directly related to
the occupation licensed as prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 2, as it may be
amended from time to time, and has not shown competent evidence of sufficient
rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of a pawnbroker as
prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (3)   The proposed use does not comply with
Chapter 154;
      (4)   The proposed use does not comply with any health, building,
building maintenance, or other provisions of the city code or state law;
      (5)   The owner of the premises licensed or to be licensed would not
qualify for a license under the terms of this chapter;
      (6)   The applicant has failed to comply with one or more provisions of
this subchapter;
      (7)   The applicant is not a citizen of the United States or a resident
alien, or upon whom it is impractical or impossible to conduct a background or
financial investigation due to the unavailability of information;
      (8)   The applicant has committed fraud, misrepresentation, or bribery in
securing a license;
      (9)   The applicant has committed fraud, misrepresentation, or made false
statements in the application and investigation for the applicant’s business;
      (10)   Business practices or conduct deemed by the city to be contrary to
the best interests or safety of the public; or
      (11)   The applicant has violated within the preceding five years, of any
law relating to theft, damage or trespass to property, sale of a controlled
substance, or operation of a business.
   (B)   No license under this subchapter shall be issued to an applicant that
is a partnership if:
      (1)   Any general partner or managing partner of the applicant is a minor
at the time the application is filed;
      (2)   Any general partner or managing partner of the applicant has been
convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation licensed as
prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 2, as it may be amended from time to time,
and has not shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present
fitness to perform the duties of a pawnbroker as prescribed by M.S. § 364.03,
Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (3)   The proposed use does not comply with
Chapter 33;
      (4)   The proposed use does not comply with any health, building,
building maintenance, or other provisions of the city code or state law;
      (5)   The owner of the premises licensed or to be licensed would not
qualify for a license under the terms of this chapter;
      (6)   The applicant has failed to comply with one or more provisions of
this subchapter;
      (7)   Any general partner or managing partner of the applicant is not a
citizen of the United States or a resident alien, or upon whom it is
impractical or impossible to conduct a background or financial investigation
due to the unavailability of information;
      (8)   Any general partner or managing partner of the applicant has
committed fraud, misrepresentation, or bribery in securing a license;
      (9)   Any general partner or managing partner of the applicant has
committed fraud, misrepresentation, or made false statements in the application
and investigation for the applicant’s business;
      (10)   Business practices, or conduct, deemed by the city to be contrary
to the best interests or safety of the public; or
      (11)   Any general partner or managing partner of the applicant has
violated within the preceding five years, of any law relating to theft, damage
or trespass to property, sale of a controlled substance, or operation of a
business.
   (C)   No license under this subchapter shall be issued to an applicant that
is a corporation or other organization if:
      (1)   Any manager, proprietor, or agent in charge of the business to be
licensed is a minor at the time the application is filed;
      (2)   Any manager, proprietor, or agent in charge of the business has
been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation licensed as
prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 2, as it may be amended from time to time,
and has not shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present
fitness to perform the duties of a pawnbroker as prescribed by M.S. § 364.03,
Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (3)   The proposed use does not comply with
Chapter 33;
      (4)   The proposed use does not comply with any health, building,
building maintenance, or other provisions of the city code or state law;
      (5)   The owner of the premises licensed or to be licensed would not
qualify for a license under the terms of this chapter;
      (6)   The applicant has failed to comply with one or more provisions of
this subchapter;
      (7)   Any manager, proprietor, or agent in charge of the business is not
a citizen of the United States or a resident alien, or upon whom it is
impractical or impossible to conduct a background or financial investigation
due to the unavailability of information;
      (8)   Any manager, proprietor, or agent in charge of the business has
committed fraud, misrepresentation, or bribery in securing a license;
      (9)   Any manager, proprietor, or agent in charge of the business has
committed fraud, misrepresentation, or made false statements in the application
and investigation for the applicant’s business;
      (10)   Business practices or conduct deemed by the city to be contrary to
the best interests or safety of the public; or
      (11)   Any manager, proprietor, or agent in charge of the business has
violated within the preceding five years, of any law relating to theft, damage
or trespass to property, sale of a controlled substance, or operation of a
business.
(Prior Code, § 111.295)
§ 113.46 GENERAL LICENSE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Records required. At the time of any reportable transaction other than
renewals, extensions, or redemptions, every licensee must immediately record in
English the following information by using ink or other indelible medium on
forms or in a computerized record approved by the Police Department:
      (1)   A complete and accurate description of each item, including, but
not limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number, model
number, brand name, or other identifying mark on such an item;
      (2)   The purchase price, amount of money loaned upon, or pledged
therefor;
      (3)   The maturity date of the transaction and the amount due, including
monthly and annual interest rates and all pawn fees and charges;
      (4)   Date, time, and place the item of property was received by the
licensee, and the unique alpha and/or numeric transaction identifier that
distinguishes it from all other transactions in the licensee’s records.
Transaction identifiers must be consecutively numbered;
      (5)   Full name, current residence address, current residence telephone
number, date of birth, and accurate description of the person from whom the
item of the property was received, including: sex, height, weight, race, color
of eyes, and color of hair;
      (6)   The identification number and state of issue from an acceptable
form of identification;
      (7)   The signature of the person identified in the transaction;
      (8)   The licensee must also take a color photograph or color video
recording of:
         (a)   Each customer involved in a billable transaction; and
         (b)   Every item pawned or sold that does not have a unique serial or
identification number permanently engraved or affixed. If a photograph is
taken, it must be at least two inches in length by two inches in width and must
be maintained in such a manner that the photograph can be readily matched and
correlated with all other records of the transaction to which they relate. The
photographs must be available to the Chief of Police, or the Chief’s designee,
upon request. The major portion of the photograph must include an identifiable
front facial close-up of the person who pawned or sold the item. Items
photographed must be accurately depicted. The licensee must inform the person
that he or she is being photographed by displaying a sign of sufficient size in
a conspicuous place in the premises. If a video photograph is taken, the video
camera must zoom in on the person pawning or selling the item so as to include
an identifiable close-up of that person’s face. Items photographed by video
must be accurately depicted. Video photographs must be electronically
referenced by time and date so they can be readily matched and correlated with
all other records of the transaction to which they relate. The licensee must
inform the person that he or she is being videotaped orally and by displaying a
sign of sufficient size in a conspicuous place on the premises. The licensee
must keep the exposed videotape for three months and furnish it to the Police
Department upon request.
      (9)   Effective 60 days from the date of notification by the Police
Department, licensees must fulfill the color photograph requirements in
division (A)(8) above by submitting them as digital images, in a format
specified by the city, electronically cross-referenced to the reportable
transaction they are associated with. Notwithstanding the digital images may be
captured from required video recordings, this provision does not alter or amend
the requirements in division (A)(8) above; and
      (10)   For renewals, extensions, and redemptions, the licensee shall
provide the original transaction identifier, the date of the current
transaction, and the type of transaction.
   (B)   Disposition of articles.
      (1)   When an article of pawned or pledged property is redeemed from a
licensee, the records shall contain an account of the redemption with the date,
interest charges accrued, and the total amount for which the article was
redeemed.
      (2)   When an article of purchased or forfeited property is sold or
disposed of by a licensee and the licensee receives $100 or more in the payment
thereof, the records shall contain an account of the sale with the date, the
amount for which the article was sold, and the full name, current address, and
telephone number of the person to whom sold.
   (C)   Inspection of records. The records must at all reasonable times be
open to inspection by the Police Department. Data entries shall be retained for
at least three years from the date of transaction. Entries of required digital
images shall be retained a minimum of 120 days.
   (D)   Daily reports to police. Licensees must submit every reportable
transaction to the Police Department daily in the following manner.
      (1)   Licensees must provide to the Police Department all information
required in divisions (A)(1) through (A)(6) above and other required
information, by transferring it from their computer to the automated pawn
system via modem. All required records must be transmitted completely and
accurately after the close of business each day in accordance with standards
and procedures established by the city using procedures that address security
concerns of the licensees and the city. The licensee must display a sign of
sufficient size, in a conspicuous place in the premises, which informs all
patrons that all transactions are reported to the Police Department daily.
      (2)   Licensees will be charged for each billable transaction reported to
the Police Department.
      (3)   If a licensee is unable to successfully transfer the required
reports by modem, the licensee must provide the Police Department printed
copies of all reportable transactions along with the videotape(s) for that
date, by 12:00 p.m. the next business day.
      (4)   If the problem is determined to be outside the licensee’s system,
the licensee must provide the required reports in division (D)(3) above, and
resubmit all the transactions via modem when the error is corrected.
      (5)   If a licensee is unable to capture, digitize, or transmit the
photographs required in division (A)(9) above, the licensee must immediately
take all required photographs with a still camera, cross-reference the
photographs to the correct transaction, and make the pictures available to the
Police Department upon request.
      (6)   Regardless of the cause or origin of the technical problems that
prevented the licensee from uploading their reportable transactions, upon
correction of the problem, the licensee shall upload every reportable
transaction from every business day the problem had existed.
      (7)   Divisions (D)(3) and (D)(4) above and §
113.99(D) notwithstanding, the Police Department may, upon presentation of
extenuating circumstances, delay the implementation of the daily reporting
penalty.
   (E)   Receipt required. Every licensee must provide a receipt to the party
identified in every reportable transaction and must maintain a duplicate of
that receipt for three years. The receipt must include at least the following
information:
      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the licensed business;
      (2)   The date and time the item was received by the licensee;
      (3)   Whether the item was pawned or sold, or the nature of the
transaction;
      (4)   An accurate description of each item received, including, but not
limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number,
brand name, or other identifying mark on such an item;
      (5)   The signature or unique identifier of the licensee or employee that
conducted the transaction;
      (6)   The amount advanced or paid;
      (7)   The monthly and annual interest rates, including all pawn fees and
charges;
      (8)   The last regular day of business by which the item must be redeemed
by the pledgor without risk that the item will be sold, and the amount
necessary to redeem the pawned item on that date;
      (9)   The full name, current residence address, current residence
telephone number, and date of birth of the pledgor or seller;
      (10)   The identification number and state of issue from an acceptable
form of identification;
      (11)   Description of the pledgor or seller including approximate sex,
height, weight, race, color of eyes, and color of hair;
      (12)   The signature of the pledgor or seller; and
      (13)   All printed statements as required by M.S. § 325J.04, Subd. 2, as
it may be amended from time to time, or any other applicable statutes.
   (F)   Redemption period. Any person pledging, pawning, or depositing an item
for security must have a minimum of 120 days from the date of that transaction
to redeem the item before it may be forfeited and sold. During the 90-day
holding period, items may not be removed from the licensed location except as
provided in §
113.48(A). Licensees are prohibited from redeeming any item to anyone other
than the person to whom the receipt was issued or, to any person identified in
a written and notarized authorization to redeem the property identified in the
receipt, or to a person identified in writing by the pledgor at the time of the
initial transaction and signed by the pledgor, or with approval of the City
Chief of Police or designee. Written authorization for release of property to
persons other than original pledgor must be maintained along with original
transaction record in accordance with division (A)(10) above.
   (G)   Holding period. Any item purchased or accepted in trade by a licensee
must not be sold or otherwise transferred for 30 days from the date of the
transaction. An individual may redeem an item 72 hours after the item was
received on deposit, excluding Sundays and legal holidays.
   (H)   Police order to hold property.
      (1)   Investigative hold. Whenever the Chief of Police, or the Chief’s
designee, notifies a licensee not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or
removed from the premises. The investigative hold shall be confirmed in writing
by the Police Department within 72 hours and will remain in effect for 15 days
from the date of initial notification, or until the investigative order is
canceled, or until an order to hold/confiscate is issued, pursuant to division
(H)(2) below, whichever comes first.
      (2)   Order to hold. Whenever the Chief of Police, or the Chief’s
designee, notifies a licensee not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or
removed from the licensed premises until authorized to be released by the
Chief, or the Chief’s designee. The order to hold shall expire 90 days from the
date it is placed unless the Chief of Police, or the Chief’s designee,
determines the hold is still necessary and notifies the licensee in writing.
      (3)   Order to confiscate. If an item is identified as stolen or evidence
in a criminal case, the Chief, or Chief’s designee, may:
         (a)   Physically confiscate and remove it from the shop, pursuant to a
written order from the Chief, or Chief’s designee; or
         (b)   Place the item on hold or extend the hold as provided in
division (H)(2) above, and leave it in the shop. When an item is confiscated,
the person doing so shall provide identification upon request of the licensee,
and shall provide the licensee the name and phone number of the confiscating
agency and investigator, and the case number related to the confiscation. When
an order to hold/confiscate is no longer necessary, the Chief of Police, or
Chief’s designee, shall so notify the licensee.
   (I)   Inspection of items.
      (1)   At all times during the terms of the license, the licensee must
allow law enforcement officials to enter the premises where the licensed
business is located, including all off-site storage facilities as authorized in
division (O) below, during normal business hours, except in an emergency, for
the purpose of inspecting the premises and inspecting the items, wares, and
merchandise, and records therein, to verify compliance with this subchapter or
other applicable laws.
      (2)   All merchandise received by a pawnbroker shall be subject to
examination, during normal business hours, by any person claiming to have had
any interest therein, when the person is accompanied by a police officer.
   (J)   Pawning of motor vehicle titles.
      (1)   In addition to the other requirements of state law, a pawnbroker
who holds a title to a motor vehicle as part of a pawn transaction shall,
pursuant to M.S. § 325J.095, as it may be amended from time to time:
         (a)   Be licensed as a used motor vehicle dealer under M.S. § 168.27,
as it may be amended from time to time, and post the license on the pawnshop
premises;
         (b)   Verify that there are no liens or encumbrances against the motor
vehicle with the Department of Public Safety;
         (c)   Verify that the pledgor has automobile insurance on the motor
vehicle as required by law; and
         (d)   A pawnbroker may not sell a motor vehicle covered by a pawn
transaction until 90 days after recovery of the motor vehicle.
      (2)   A pawn transaction that involves holding only the title to property
is subject to M.S. Chapter 168A or 336, as they may be amended from time to
time.
   (K)   Label required. Licensees must attach a label to every item at the
time it is pawned, purchased, or received in inventory from any reportable
transaction. Permanently recorded on this label must be the number or name that
identifies the transaction in the shop’s records, the transaction date, the
name of the item and the description or the model and serial number of the item
as reported to the Police Department, whichever is applicable, and the date the
item is out of pawn or can be sold, if applicable. Labels shall not be re-used.
   (L)   Firearms and weapons. A pawnbroker shall not receive, display, or sell
any merchandise through a pawn, purchase, or consignment or trade consisting of
a revolver, pistol, shotgun, automatic rifle, semiautomatic military-style
assault weapon (as defined by M.S. § 624.712, as it may be amended from time to
time), switchblade knife, or other similar weapons or firearms.
   (M)   Risk of loss. In the event pledged goods are lost or damaged while in
possession of the pawnbroker, the pawnbroker shall compensate the pledgor, in
cash or replacement of goods acceptable to the pledgor, for the fair market
value of the lost or damaged goods. Proof of compensation shall be a defense to
any prosecution or civil action.
   (N)   License display. A license issued under this subchapter must be posted
in a conspicuous place in the premises for which it is used. The license issued
is only effective for the compact and contiguous space specified in the
approved license application.
   (O)   Responsibility of licensee. A licensee under this subchapter shall be
responsible for the conduct of the business being operated and shall maintain
conditions of order. The conduct of agents or employees of a licensee engaged
in performance of duties for the licensee shall be deemed the conduct of the
licensee.
   (P)   Gambling. No licensee under this subchapter may keep, possess, or
operate, or permit the keeping, possession, or operation on the licensed
premises of dice, slot machines, roulette wheels, punchboards, blackjack
tables, or pinball machines which return coins or slugs, chips, or tokens of
any
kind, which are redeemable in merchandise or cash. No gambling equipment
authorized under M.S. Chapter 349, as it may be amended from time to time, may
be kept or operated, and no raffles may be conducted on the licensed premises
and/or adjoining rooms. The purchase of lottery tickets may take place on the
licensed premises as authorized by the director of the lottery pursuant to M.S.
Chapter 349A, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (Q)   Penalty for properly owner. It is unlawful for any person who owns or
controls real property to knowingly permit it to be used for pawn brokering
without a license.
   (R)   Premises. All property deposited, left, pledged, pawned, or held for
sale must be stored in an enclosed facility and may not be stored outside of
the premises. The city may, however, permit the licensee to designate one off-
premises locked and secured facility in which the licensee may store only cars,
boats, and other motorized vehicles. The licensee shall permit immediate
inspection of the facility at any time during business hours by the city. All
provisions in this subchapter regarding record keeping and reporting shall
apply to oversized items. All property shall be stored in compliance with
zoning and/or fire regulations and in an orderly manner. The premises shall
also be equipped with an operational security alarm.
(Prior Code, § 111.296)
§ 113.47 RESTRICTED TRANSACTIONS.
   (A)   Hours of operation. No pawnbroker shall keep the pawnbroker business
open for the transaction of business on any day of the week before 7:00 a.m. or
after 10:00 p.m.
   (B)   Minors. A pawnbroker shall not purchase or receive personal property
on deposit or pledge from any minor.
   (C)   Incompetent persons. A pawnbroker shall not purchase or receive
personal property on deposit or pledge from any incompetent person.
   (D)   Prohibited goods. No licensee under this subchapter shall accept any
item of property which contains an altered or obliterated serial number or
“operation identification” number or any item of property whose serial number
has been removed.
   (E)   Security interest. No licensee, nor any agent or employee of a
licensee, shall purchase, accept, or receive any article of property knowing,
or having reason to know, that the article of property is encumbered by a
security interest. For the purpose of this subchapter, SECURITY INTEREST means
an interest in property which secures payment or other performance of an
obligation.
   (F)   True owner. No licensee, nor any agent or employee of a licensee,
shall purchase, accept, or receive any article of property, from any person
knowing, or having reason to know, that the person is not the true and correct
owner of the property.
   (G)   Proper identification. No licensee nor any agent or employee of a
licensee shall purchase, accept, or receive any article of property, from any
person, without first having examined an acceptable form of identification.
   (H)   Payment by check. Payment of more than $250 by a licensee for any
article deposited, left, purchased, pledged, or pawned shall be made only by a
check, draft, or other negotiable or nonnegotiable instrument which is drawn
against funds held by a financial institution. This policy must be posted in a
conspicuous place in the premises.
   (I)   Restrictions on sale. A pawnbroker shall suspend, for one year, any
business transaction with any person who has sold and/or forfeited, on six
previous occasions, articles for which the person received $50 or more per
transaction within a single six-month period.
(Prior Code, § 111.297) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.48 INSPECTION BY POLICE.
   (A)   Premises. Any licensee shall, at all times during the term of the
license, allow the Police Department to enter the premises, where the licensee
is carrying on business, including all off-site storage facilities as
authorized in §
113.46(R), during normal business hours, except in an emergency, for the
purpose of inspecting the premises and inspecting the articles and records
therein to locate goods suspected or alleged to have been stolen and to verify
compliance with this section or other applicable laws. No licensee shall
conceal any article in his, her, or their possession from the Police
Department.
   (B)   Inspection by police or claimed owner. All articles of property coming
into the possession of any licensee shall be open to inspection and right of
examination of any police officer or any person claiming to have been the owner
thereof or claiming to have had an interest therein when the person is
accompanied by a police officer.
(Prior Code, § 111.298) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.49 CONDUCT OF PERSONS ON LICENSED PREMISES.
   (A)   Property of another. No person may pawn, pledge, sell, leave, or
deposit any article of property not their own; nor shall any person pawn,
pledge, sell, leave, or deposit the property of another, whether with
permission or without; nor shall any person pawn, pledge, sell, leave, or
deposit any article of property in which another has a security interest with
any licensee.
   (B)   Minors. No minor may pawn, pledge, sell, leave, or deposit any article
of property with any licensee.
   (C)   Proper identification. No person may pawn, pledge, sell, leave, or
deposit any article of property with any licensee without first having
presented an acceptable form of identification.
   (D)   Required signage. All licensees shall, by adequate signage and
separate written notice inform persons seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, leave, or
deposit articles of property with the licensee of the foregoing requirements.
      (1)   For the purpose of this subchapter, ADEQUATE SIGNAGE shall be
deemed to mean at least one sign of not less than four square feet in surface
area, comprised of lettering of not less than three-quarters of an inch in
height, posted in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises and stating
substantially the following:
TO PAWN OR SELL PROPERTY:
YOU MUST BE AT LEAST 18 YEARS OF AGE.
YOU MUST BE THE TRUE OWNER OF THE PROPERTY.
THE PROPERTY MUST BE FREE OF ALL CLAIMS AND LIENS.
YOU MUST PRESENT VALID PHOTO IDENTIFICATION.
VIOLATION OF ANY OF THESE REQUIREMENTS IS A CRIME.
      (2)   For the purpose of this subchapter, SEPARATE WRITTEN NOTICE shall
be deemed to mean either the receipt, as required in §
113.46(E), or a printed form, incorporating a statement to the effect that the
person pawning, pledging, selling, leaving, or depositing the article is at
least 18 years of age; is the true owner of the article; and that the article
is free of all claims and liens; which is acknowledged by way of signature of
the person pawning, pledging, selling, leaving, or depositing the article.
   (E)   False identification. No person seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, leave,
or deposit any article of property with any licensee shall give a false or
fictitious name; nor give a false date of birth; nor give a false or out of
date address of residence or telephone number; nor present a false driver’s
license or identification card to any licensee.
   (F)   General restrictions. No pawnbroker licensed under this subchapter
shall:
      (1)   Lend money on a pledge at a rate of interest above that allowed by
law;
      (2)   Knowingly possess stolen goods;
      (3)   Sell pledged goods before the time to redeem has expired;
      (4)   Refuse to disclose to the city, after having sold pledged goods,
the name of the purchaser or the price for which the item sold; and/or
      (5)   Make a loan on a pledge to a minor.
(Prior Code, § 111.299) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.50 RESTRICTIONS REGARDING LICENSE TRANSFER.
   Each license under this subchapter shall be issued to the applicant only and
shall not be transferable to any other person. No licensee shall loan, sell,
give, or assign a license to another person.
(Prior Code, § 111.300) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.51 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The City Council may suspend or revoke a license issued under this
subchapter upon a finding of a violation of:
      (1)   Any of the provisions of this subchapter;
      (2)   Any state statute regulating pawnbrokers;
      (3)   Any crime directly related to the occupation licensed as prescribed
by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 2, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (4)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or bribery in renewing a license;
      (5)   Business practices, or conduct, deemed by the city to be contrary
to the best interests, or safety, of the public; or
      (6)   Any law relating to theft, damage or trespass to property, sale of
a controlled substance, or operation of a business.
   (B)   A revocation or suspension by the City Council shall be preceded by
written notice to the licensee and a public hearing. The written notice shall
give at least ten days’ notice of the time and place of the hearing and shall
state the nature of the charges against the pawnbroker. The notice may be
served upon the pawnbroker personally or by United States mail addressed to the
most recent address of the business in the license application.
(Prior Code, § 111.301)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violation of any provision of §§
113.01 through
113.23 shall be a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 111.273)
   (C)   Violation of any provision of §§
113.35 through
113.51 shall be a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 111.302)
   (D)   If the problem is determined to be in the licensee’s system and is not
corrected by the close of the first business day following the failure, the
licensee must provide the required reports as detailed in §
113.46(D)(3), and must be charged a $50 reporting failure penalty, daily, until
the error is corrected.
(Prior Code, § 111.296)
CHAPTER 114: AMUSEMENTS AND LEISURE
Section
Amusement Devices
   
114.001   Definition
   
114.002   Limited number of licenses
   
114.003   Issued to operator
   
114.004   Renewals
   
114.005   Priority for available licenses
   
114.006   Expiration of licenses for failure to operate
Physical Culture and Health Services and Clubs
   
114.020   Definitions
   
114.021   Business license required
   
114.022   License application and procedures
   
114.023   Execution of application
   
114.024   License and investigation fees
   
114.025   Investigation
   
114.026   Approval or denial of application
   
114.027   Renewal application
   
114.028   Appeal to City Council
   
114.029   License not transferable; duration
   
114.030   Suspension or revocation of license
   
114.031   Hours of operation
   
114.032   Restrictions and regulations
   
114.033   Construction requirements
   
114.034   Maintenance; sanitary conditions; communicable disease
   
114.035   Inspection
   
114.036   Barber shops and beauty salons exempted
Recreational Establishments
   
114.050   Purpose and scope
   
114.051   Definition
   
114.052   Hours of operation
Fireworks Dealers
   
114.065   Purpose and findings
   
114.066   Definitions
   
114.067   License required
   
114.068   License application
   
114.069   License application verification and consideration
   
114.070   License fee
   
114.071   Term of license; renewal
   
114.072   Persons ineligible for a license
   
114.073   Locations ineligible for a license
   
114.074   License restrictions
   
114.075   Operation restrictions
   
114.076   Sanctions for license violations
 
   
114.999   Penalty
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 114.001 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMUSEMENT DEVICE. An electrical or mechanical machine for which a fee is
charged to be used by the public as a game of skill, amusement, or play.
AMUSEMENT DEVICES include, but are not limited to, shuffle boards; pinball
machines; amusement machines patterned after baseball, basketball, hockey,
bowling, tennis or other games; electric rifle or gun ranges; road racing or
driving games; billiard, pool and table tennis tables; and coin-operated rides
designed for use by small children.
(Prior Code, § 111.025)
§ 114.002 LIMITED NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   No more than 75 licenses for amusement devices, as defined in §
114.001, shall exist in the city at any one given time. Not more than 15
licenses will be issued for any one establishment. If application is made for a
license which if issued would cause the number of amusement device licenses to
exceed the maximum, the City Council shall table action on the license and
shall consider it only when issuance of the license would not be in excess of
the maximum number specified in this section.
(Prior Code, § 111.026)
§ 114.003 ISSUED TO OPERATOR.
   A license for amusement devices shall be issued only to the person or
business entity which directly operates the business establishment in which the
amusement devices are used.
(Prior Code, § 111.027)
§ 114.004 RENEWALS.
   When existing amusement device licenses expire, they will be available for
renewal by the same licensee for a period of 30 days after expiration of the
license. Any renewal will be considered prior to any pending applications for
new licenses.
(Prior Code, § 111.028)
§ 114.005 PRIORITY FOR AVAILABLE LICENSES.
   If action has been tabled on one or more applications for amusement device
licenses and licenses subsequently became available, these applications will be
considered by the City Council according to the chronological priority of the
filing of the applications.
(Prior Code, § 111.029)
§ 114.006 EXPIRATION OF LICENSES FOR FAILURE TO OPERATE.
   If the licensee does not have the amusement devices for which the license
was issued available for use by the public within six months after the license
is issued, or if use of the amusement devices is discontinued for a period of
six months, the license shall expire and shall be available for issuance to
other licensees. No portion of the license fee will be refunded after it is
paid, even if the license is not in effect for its full term.
(Prior Code, § 111.030)
PHYSICAL CULTURE AND HEALTH SERVICES AND CLUBS
§ 114.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MASSAGE. The rubbing, pressing, stroking, kneading, tapping, rolling,
pounding, vibrating, or stimulating the superficial parts of the human body
with the hands or any instrument by a person who is not duly licensed by the
state to practice medicine, surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic, physical
therapy, or podiatry.
   PHYSICAL CULTURE AND HEALTH SERVICES, PHYSICAL CULTURE AND HEALTH CLUB,
REDUCING CLUB, REDUCING SALON, and THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE STUDIO. Any building,
room, structure, place, or establishment used by the public other than a
hospital, sanitarium, rest home, nursing home, boarding home, or other
institution for the hospitalization or care of human beings, duly licensed
under the provisions of M.S. §§ 144.50 through 144.703, as they may be amended
from time to time, inclusive, where nonmedical and non-surgical manipulative
exercises or massages are practiced upon the human body for a fee or other
valuable consideration by anyone not duly licensed by the state to practice
medicine, surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic, physical therapy or podiatry, with
or without the use of mechanical, therapeutic, or bathing devices.
(Prior Code, § 111.340)
§ 114.021 BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Limiting business licenses. It is found and determined that the type
of business activity subject to being licensed under this subchapter is
particularly subject to abuse which may take a number of forms contrary to the
morals, health, safety, and general welfare of the community. Further, it is
found that control of these abuses requires intensive efforts of the Police
Department as well as other departments of the city. These efforts exceed those
required to control and regulate other business activities licensed by the
city. This concentrated use of city services tends to detract from and reduce
the level of service available to the rest of the community and thereby
diminishes the ability of the city to promote the general health, welfare,
morals, and safety of the community. Therefore, the number of business licenses
which may be in force under this subchapter at any one time shall not exceed
seven.
   (B)   Requiring license and defining businesses operating within city. No
person, partnership, corporation, or other organization shall operate a
physical culture and health service or club, reducing club or salon, or
therapeutic massage studio within the city, either exclusively or in connection
with any other operation or enterprise, unless the business is currently
licensed under this subchapter.
   (C)   Certain businesses exempt.
      (1)   The preceding provisions of this subchapter notwithstanding, no
business license shall be required for a business establishment which offers
massage as an accessory use if it meets all of the following criteria as
evidenced by affidavits and other documents submitted to and in form and
substance reasonably acceptable to the City Manager or designee.
         (a)   The principal activity of the business shall not be performing
massage for a fee or other consideration.
         (b)   The annual gross revenue of the business from performing massage
is less than 25% of the total annual gross revenue of the business as shown by
financial statements or an affidavit signed by the authorized officer of the
business. In lieu of delivery of the aforementioned affidavit, at the direction
of the city, the business shall be required to deliver, a certification from a
certified public accountant, acceptable to the City Manager or designee, that
the annual gross revenue from massage services, for the preceding 12 months, is
less than 25% of its total annual gross revenue for the period of time.
         (c)   The room or rooms where massage is performed shall not have an
exclusive entrance from or exit to the exterior of the building in which the
principal business is located or to a public concourse or public lobby.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, massage may be performed by an individual at the
residence of the person receiving the massage.
         (d)   All fees or other consideration derived from performing massage
shall be received by and accounted for by the proprietor of the principal
business.
         (e)   All individuals performing massage in connection with the
business shall be employees of the principal business or shall be independent
contractors or agents who perform massage pursuant to a written agreement with
the owner of the principal business and each individual performing massage in
connection with the business shall meet the educational requirements of §
114.032(E).
      (2)   Any business that requests an exemption from the business license
requirement shall submit the required affidavits and documents on an annual
basis. The exemption request shall be due on or before March 15 of each year.
(Prior Code, § 111.341) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.022 LICENSE APPLICATION AND PROCEDURES.
   Every application for a license under this subchapter shall be made on a
form supplied by the City Manager or designee and shall be filed with the City
Manager or designee. The provisions of §
111.02 shall apply to all licenses required by this subchapter and to the
holders of the licenses. In addition to the information required by §
111.02, the application for a license under this subchapter shall contain the
following information. Failure to complete or supply the information may cause
a license to be denied:
   (A)   Whether the applicant is a natural person, a partnership, a
corporation, or other form of organization;
   (B)   If the applicant is a natural person:
      (1)   The true name, place and date of birth, current address, and
telephone number of the applicant;
      (2)   Whether the applicant has ever used or has been known by a name
other than the applicant’s true name; and if so, the name or names and
information concerning dates and places where used;
      (3)   A specific statement as to the type and nature of the business to
be licensed;
      (4)   The name of the business, if it is to be conducted under a name
other than the full individual name of the applicant, in which case a certified
copy of the certification required by M.S. Chapter 333, as it may be amended
from time to time, shall be attached to the application;
      (5)   The addresses at which the applicant has lived during the previous
five years, including a statement of how long the applicant has been
continuously a resident of the state during the period as of and immediately
preceding the date of application;
      (6)   The kind, name, and location of every business or occupation in
which the applicant has been engaged during the preceding five years;
      (7)   The names and addresses of the applicant’s employer(s) and partner
(s), if any, who were such at any time during the preceding five years; and
      (8)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any felony, crime,
or violation of any provisions of this code or state law other than traffic
violations and, if so, information as to the time, place, and offense for which
convictions were had.
   (C)   If the applicant is a partnership:
      (1)   The names and addresses of all partners and all information
concerning each partner as is required of an applicant under division (B)
above;
      (2)   The names(s) of the managing partner(s), and the interest of each
partner in the business; and
      (3)   A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted with
the application. If the partnership is required to file a certificate as to
trade name under the provisions of M.S. Chapter 333, as it may be amended from
time to time, a certified copy of the certification shall also be attached.
   (D)   If the applicant is a corporation or other organization:
      (1)   The name of the applicant, and if incorporated, the state of
incorporation;
      (2)   A true certificate of good standing, dated as of a current date,
and true copies of the articles of incorporation or association agreement and
bylaws shall be attached to the application. If a foreign corporation, a
certificate of authority issued pursuant to M.S. Chapter 303, as it may be
amended from time to time, shall also be attached;
      (3)   The name of the person(s) who is to manage the business and all
information concerning the person(s) as is required of an applicant under
division (B) above; and
      (4)   The names of all officers, directors, and persons who control or
own an interest in excess of 5% in the corporation or organization and all
information concerning the persons as is required of an applicant under
division (B) above.
   (E)   The location of the business premises;
   (F)   Whether the applicant is licensed in other communities or has had a
license revoked, or has been denied a license, to conduct any of the activities
required to be licensed hereunder; and if so, when and where the applicant is
or was so licensed, has had a license revoked, or has been denied a license;
   (G)   The names, residences, and business addresses of three residents of
Hennepin County or Ramsey County, not related to the applicant or financially
interested in the business to be licensed, who may be referred to by the city
for information as to the applicant’s character. If the applicant is a
partnership, three names shall be supplied for each partner, and if the
applicant is a corporation or other organization, three names shall be supplied
for each officer of the applicant and each manager of the business;
   (H)   The amount of capital investment to be made by the applicant in the
premises described in the application to operate the business to be licensed.
Capital investment shall mean the amount of money that the applicant actually
invests to acquire, refurbish, repair, remodel, or furnish the premises,
including moneys invested to comply with §
114.033;
   (I)   A financial statement, certified as being true and correct by an
independent accountant, showing the gross income of the business to be licensed
for the last three fiscal years of the business, or shorter period of time that
the applicant may have been in the business to be licensed, itemized as to each
activity of the business including, without limitation, the gross income from
performing massage; and
   (J)   The names of all individuals performing massages in connection with
the business and evidence that all the individuals meet the educational
requirements of §
114.032.
(Prior Code, § 111.342)
§ 114.023 EXECUTION OF APPLICATION.
   All applications for any license under this subchapter shall be signed by
the applicant in accordance with §
111.02(B). Any falsification of information on any license application shall
result in the denial of the license applied for, and shall constitute adequate
grounds for the suspension or revocation of any license issued to the
applicant.
(Prior Code, § 111.343)
§ 114.024 LICENSE AND INVESTIGATION FEES.
   (A)   License fee. Each application for a license or renewal license shall
be accompanied by payment in full of the required license fee. The fee for a
business license shall be as set forth in Chapter 33. Upon rejection of any
application for a license, the City Manager or designee shall refund the amount
paid.
   (B)   Investigation fee. At the time of each original application for a
business license, the applicant shall deposit an investigation fee as set forth
in Chapter 33. The cost of the investigation will be based on the expense
involved. All deposit moneys not expended on the investigation will be refunded
to the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 111.344)
§ 114.025 INVESTIGATION.
   All applications shall be referred to the Police Department for verification
and investigation of the facts set forth in the application as described in §
111.02(C).
(Prior Code, § 111.345) (Ord. 2009-008, passed 6-23-2009; Ord. 2012-08, passed
10-23-2012)
§ 114.026 APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF APPLICATION.
   (A)   Within 90 days after the application date, the City Manager or
designee shall either approve or deny the application and shall notify the City
Manager or designee in writing of the decision. If the application is approved,
the City Manager or designee shall issue the license. If the application is
denied, the City Manager or designee shall furnish written notice of the denial
to the applicant, together with the reason or reasons for denial.
   (B)   A license may also be denied for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   Under legal age. If an individual applicant is under the age of 18;
      (2)   Convictions. If the applicant, or any officers, managers,
directors, shareholders, or owners, if a corporation or association, or any
partners, if a partnership, has been convicted of a felony, or has been
convicted of any illegal conduct involving moral turpitude, dishonesty, fraud,
deceit, or misrepresentation;
      (3)   Conviction without sufficient rehabilitation. If the applicant, or
any principal officers, managers, directors, shareholders, or owners, if a
corporation or association, or any partners, if a partnership, has been
convicted of any crime or crimes directly relating to the occupation of massage
services, as provided in M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 2, as it may be amended from time
to time, and has not shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and
present fitness to perform the duties of the occupation of massage services, as
provided in M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (4)   Prior denial of license. If the applicant, or any principal
officers, managers, directors, shareholders, or owners, if a corporation or
association, or any partners, if a partnership, has within one year prior to
the date of application been denied a license under this subchapter, or any
similar ordinance of any municipality within the state, or within the period
has had revoked any license issued under this subchapter, or any similar
ordinance of any municipality within the state;
      (5)   Zoning restriction. If the business to be licensed is not permitted
by Chapter 154 upon the premises described in the application; and
      (6)   Failure to meet construction requirements. If the premises
described in the application for a business license fail to comply with the
requirements of §
114.033.
(Prior Code, § 111.346)
§ 114.027 RENEWAL APPLICATION.
   Not less than 30 nor more than 60 days before the expiration of any license
issued pursuant to this subchapter, any license holder desiring to renew the
license shall submit a written application to the City Manager or designee on
forms provided by the city together with payment in full of the license fee as
required for the original license. The renewal application shall be forwarded
to the City Manager or designee who shall, within 30 days after the renewal
application date, either approve or deny the application and shall notify the
City Manager or designee in writing of the decision. The City Manager or
designee shall then issue the license or, in case of denial, notify the
applicant in writing of the denial setting forth the reason or reasons
therefor.
(Prior Code, § 111.347)
§ 114.028 APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL.
   Any applicant may appeal the denial of a license or a license renewal by
filing a written notice of appeal to the City Council in the City Manager’s
office within ten days after the denial. The City Council shall hear the appeal
within 60 days after the notice is filed, and opportunity shall be given to any
person to be heard in favor of or opposing the issuance or renewal of the
license. The City Council may order and conduct the additional investigation as
it deems necessary. Any licensee is authorized to continue to operate until
final action by the City Council upon licensee’s renewal application, unless
prohibited by City Council resolution made after the denial.
(Prior Code, § 111.348)
§ 114.029 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE; DURATION.
   Each license shall be issued to the applicant only and shall not be
transferable to another holder. Any change in the persons named as partners on
the application, as required by §
114.022(C)(1) and any change in the persons who are named in the application as
required by §
114.022(D) shall be deemed a transfer for purposes of this subchapter. If the
licensee is a limited partnership, a change in the limited partners of less
than 25% cumulatively over the license period shall not be deemed a transfer.
The change in or addition of a vice-president, secretary, or treasurer of a
corporate licensee shall not be deemed a transfer. All licenses issued pursuant
to this subchapter shall be effective for the period provided in §
111.07.
(Prior Code, § 111.349)
§ 114.030 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The City Council may suspend for any period not exceeding 60 days, or
revoke, any license issued pursuant to this subchapter upon finding a violation
of any provision of this subchapter or upon violation of any other provision of
this code or state law or regulation affecting the activities covered by this
subchapter. Any conviction for prostitution or any other crime or violation
involving moral turpitude shall result in the revocation of any license issued
under this subchapter.
   (B)   Except in the case of a suspension pending a hearing on revocation,
revocation or suspension by the City Council shall be preceded by written
notice to the licensee of a hearing. The notice may be served upon the licensee
personally or by mailing it to the business or residence address set forth in
the application or on file with the City Manager or designee. The notice shall
give at least ten days’ notice of the time and place of the hearing and shall
state the nature of the charges against the licensee. The City Council may,
without notice, suspend any license pending a hearing on revocation for a
period not exceeding 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 111.350)
§ 114.031 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No business licensed under this subchapter shall be open for business, nor
shall any customers be permitted on the premises, between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 111.351) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.032 RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Notice of change in management. The individual designated by a
partnership or a corporation in its business license application to be manager
and in responsible charge of the business shall remain responsible for the
conduct of the business until another suitable person has been designated in
writing by the license holder. The license holder shall promptly give the
Police Department written notice of any such change indicating the name and
address of the new manager and the effective date of the change.
   (B)   Clothing requirements. Employees of businesses licensed under this
subchapter shall be and shall remain fully clothed while performing massage.
   (C)   Location of services. No person shall perform a massage for a fee or
other consideration at any place other than a physical culture and health
service, physical culture or health club, reducing salon, or therapeutic
massage studio that has been duly licensed pursuant to §
114.021(B), a business which is exempt from a business license pursuant to §
114.021(C), or the residence of the person receiving the massage.
   (D)   No services allowed by sexually-oriented businesses. No person shall
perform a massage for a fee or other consideration in connection with a
sexually-oriented business as defined by Chapter 33.
   (E)   Educational requirements. No person shall perform a massage for a fee
or other consideration unless the person has at least 150 hours of education in
massage therapy from a school for massage therapy accredited by the Integrated
Massage Somatic Therapy Accreditation Council or other accrediting agency
approved by the City Manager or designee.
(Prior Code, § 111.352) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.033 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   No business license shall be issued under this subchapter unless the
premises used for the operation shall comply with the following requirements.
   (A)   Requirements for steam or hot air rooms. All rooms utilizing steam or
hot air as a cleaning, relaxing, or reducing agent, and all restrooms, changing
rooms, and bathrooms used in connection with the rooms, shall be constructed
with materials impervious to moisture, bacteria, mold, and fungus growth.
Floor-to-wall and wall-to-wall joints shall be constructed so as to provide a
sanitary cover with a minimum radius of three-eighths inch.
   (B)   Public restroom requirements. All public restrooms shall be provided
with mechanical ventilation with two cfm (cubic feet per minute) per square
foot area, a minimum of 15 footcandles of illumination, a hand washing sink
equipped with hot and cold running water under pressure, sanitary towels with
dispensers, and soap with dispensers.
   (C)   Requirements for janitor’s closet. Each operation shall have a
janitor’s closet for the storage of cleaning supplies with a mop sink,
mechanical ventilation with two cfm per square foot area and a minimum of 15
footcandles of illumination.
   (D)   Lockers. Individual lockers shall be provided for use by customers and
shall have separate keys for locking.
(Prior Code, § 111.353)
§ 114.034 MAINTENANCE; SANITARY CONDITIONS; COMMUNICABLE DISEASE.
   (A)   Clean and sanitary business. All businesses licensed under this
subchapter at all times shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
   (B)   Clean and sanitary instruments. All instruments and mechanical,
therapeutic, and bathing devices or parts that come into contact with the human
body at all times shall be kept clean and sanitary.
   (C)   Towels and linens. No towels and linens furnished for use by one
patron shall be furnished for use by another until thoroughly laundered.
   (D)   Hand washing. All individuals who practice massage shall wash their
hands before each massage.
   (E)   Communicable disease. No person suffering from a communicable disease
shall work or be employed in a licensed business. No person suffering from a
communicable disease to the knowledge of the owner, custodian, or employees of
a licensed business shall be accommodated as a patron.
(Prior Code, § 111.354) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.035 INSPECTION.
   Each business required to be licensed shall at all times be held open for
inspection by duly authorized representatives of the city.
(Prior Code, § 111.355)
§ 114.036 BARBER SHOPS AND BEAUTY SALONS EXEMPTED.
   Barber shops and beauty salons which do not give, or hold themselves out to
give, massages, other than are customarily given in the shops and salons for
the purpose of facial beautification only shall not be subject to the
provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 111.356)
RECREATIONAL ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 114.050 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   This subchapter is intended to preserve and protect the common welfare and
to promote the public peace, health, and order by regulating the hours of
operation of certain establishments. The City Council finds that certain
recreational establishments open between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
adversely affect or endanger the public morality and health; disturb the peace
and quiet of the community; induce crime, juvenile delinquency, and other
antisocial conduct; and reduce neighboring property values.
(Prior Code, § 111.170)
§ 114.051 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   RECREATIONAL ESTABLISHMENT. A theater, restaurant, drive-in restaurant,
delicatessen, cafeteria, pool or billiard hall, video arcade, physical culture
or health gym, spa or club, an establishment having more than three amusement
devices as defined in §
114.001, bowling alley, or establishment primarily for the sale of beverages
for consumption on the premises.
(Prior Code, § 111.171)
§ 114.052 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   Every recreational establishment within the city must be closed to the
public between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 111.172) Penalty, see §
114.999
FIREWORKS DEALERS
§ 114.065 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to regulate the sale of consumer
fireworks in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the general
public.
   (B)   The City Council makes the following findings regarding the need to
license and regulate the sale, display, distribution, and storage of consumer
fireworks:
      (1)   The unregulated sale, display, distribution, and storage of
consumer fireworks presents a fire safety hazard because these items contain
pyrotechnic chemical compositions that are combustible;
      (2)   To ensure compliance with the limitations as to chemical content
provided in M.S. § 624.20, Subd. 1(c), as it may be amended from time to time,
regular inspection, sampling, and testing of consumer fireworks held for sale,
display, distribution, and storage is necessary;
      (3)   To prevent the illegal sale of consumer fireworks to minors,
regular police inspections are necessary;
      (4)   Regular inspections by the City Fire Department are necessary to
prevent improper display, storage, and disposal of consumer fireworks;
      (5)   The improper disposal of consumer fireworks presents environmental
hazards; and
      (6)   Accurate information concerning the addresses and locations of
persons holding consumer fireworks for sale, display, distribution, and storage
in the city is necessary to facilitate the inspection of the premises for
compliance with necessary safety regulations and performance standards and to
assist the city in responding to any emergency situation arising at or adjacent
to the premises.
(Prior Code, § 111.370)
§ 114.066 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSUMER FIREWORKS. Those non-explosive, non-aerial pyrotechnic
entertainment devices containing only the limited amounts of pyrotechnic
chemical compositions permitted by M.S. § 624.20, Subd. 1(c), as it may be
amended from time to time, including certain wire or wood sparklers, other
sparkling items, and other novelty items.
   FIREWORKS DEALER. A person engaged in the business of selling, displaying,
or storing any form of consumer fireworks.
   LICENSE. A license granted pursuant to this subchapter.
   LICENSED PREMISES. The premises described in the license application and
approved site plan for the sale, display, or storage of consumer fireworks.
   LICENSEE. The person, partnership, corporation, or association to whom a
license is issued under this subchapter, including any agents or employees of
the person, partnership, corporation, or association.
   MINOR. Any natural person under the age of 18 years.
   NON-PERMANENT PLACE OF BUSINESS. A business whose physical location is not
permanent or is capable of readily being moved or changed, including, without
limitation, commercial transactions conducted in whole or in part from non-
permanent stands, sales kiosks, tents, motorized vehicles, trailers, or carts.
   SALE, SELL, SOLD. All barters, exchanges, gifts, sales, and other means used
to obtain, dispose of, or furnish any consumer fireworks, directly or
indirectly, as part of a commercial transaction, in violation or evasion of the
provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 111.371)
§ 114.067 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall keep for retail sale or wholesale distribution, sell at
retail or wholesale, or otherwise supply or furnish as part of any commercial
transaction, directly or indirectly, upon any pretense or by any device, any
consumer fireworks without first having obtained a current license hereunder,
paid the required license fee, and conspicuously posted the license on the
licensed premises. Issuance of a license under this subchapter shall not
relieve the person from obtaining any other license required by the city code,
state law, or federal law, to conduct this or other businesses at the same or
any other location.
(Prior Code, § 111.372) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.068 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   An application for any license required by this subchapter or the
renewal of an existing license shall be made on forms provided by the City
Manager or designee. A separate application is required for each premises for
which the applicant seeks a license. The provisions of
Chapter 111 shall apply to all licenses required by this subchapter, and to the
holders of the licenses, except that licenses and renewals shall be granted or
denied in accordance with §§
114.069 through
114.071. All applications shall be accompanied by the fees set forth in
Chapter 33.
   (B)   In addition to the application requirements provided in
Chapter 111, applicants shall also provide the following:
      (1)   The applicant’s full legal name, mailing address, and telephone
number;
      (2)   Identification of whether the applicant is a natural person,
partnership, corporation, or any other business association or organization;
      (3)   The street address or legal description of the premises for which
the applicant seeks a license;
      (4)   A description of the type of business that is currently transacted
on the premises for which the applicant is seeking a license;
      (5)   A detailed site plan illustrating the location of and describing
any and all methods of sale, display, distribution, and storage of consumer
fireworks;
      (6)   The hours of operation, identification of and policies related to
on-site management, and parking facilities of the premises for which the
applicant seeks a license;
      (7)   If the applicant is not the owner of or otherwise not legally
responsible for the premises or which the applicant seeks a license, the name,
address, and telephone number of the person legally responsible for the
licensed premises;
      (8)   If the applicant is not the owner of the premises for which the
applicant seeks a license, a true and correct copy of the current, executed
lease, as well as a written authorization executed by the owner of the
premises, for the applicant’s use of the premises for the sale, display,
distribution, and storage of consumer fireworks;
      (9)   Any affidavits of the applicant as required by the City Manager or
designee, on forms provided by the City Manager or designee, in support of the
application;
      (10)   The applicant’s written authorization to release information
obtained in connection with the application;
      (11)   A statement signed by the applicant and, where the applicant is
not the owner of the premises for which the license is sought, from the
property owner stating that he or she has reviewed and understands the
pertinent provisions of this subchapter and state law; and
      (12)   Any additional information deemed necessary by the City Manager or
designee to undertake consideration of the application.
(Prior Code, § 111.373)
§ 114.069 LICENSE APPLICATION VERIFICATION AND CONSIDERATION.
   All applications will require criminal history data as described in §
111.02(C). Within 30 days after receipt of the completed application and the
criminal history background has been completed, the Police Department will make
a written report and recommendation to the City Council as to the issuance or
non-issuance of the license. If the application is denied, the City Manager or
designee shall notify the applicant of the denial in writing. The notice shall
be mailed by regular and certified mail to file applicant at the address
provided in the application and it shall inform the applicant of the
applicant’s right, within 20 days from the date of the notice, to submit a
written request to the City Manager or designee for an appeal of the denial to
the City Council. Appeals that are timely received shall take place before the
City Council within reasonable period.
(Prior Code, § 111.374) (Ord. 2009-008, passed 6-23-2009; Ord. 2012-08, passed
10-23-2012)
§ 114.070 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual license application fee shall be the amounts set forth in
Chapter 33. The amount of the license fee will depend upon whether the
fireworks dealer is engaged in the business of selling only consumer fireworks.
The license fee shall cover the administrative and enforcement costs, including
the costs associated with conducting unannounced compliance checks, inspections
by the Fire Department, inspections by the Police Department, as well as
sampling and testing of the merchandise to ascertain chemical content. Full
payment of the required license fee shall accompany the application. A separate
fee and license shall be required for each separate, non-contiguous licensed
premises, even if owned and operated by the same licensee.
(Prior Code, § 111.375)
§ 114.071 TERM OF LICENSE; RENEWAL.
   (A)   Term of license. The annual license shall be effective for one year
from the date of approval.
   (B)   Renewal. An application for the renewal of an existing license shall
be made prior to the expiration date of the license and shall be made in the
form as the city requires. Renewal applications shall be submitted at least 60
days but not more than 150 days before expiration of the license. If, in the
judgment of the City Council, good and sufficient cause for the applicant’s
failure to apply for a renewal within the time provided is shown, the City
Council may, if the other provisions of this subchapter are complied with,
grant the license.
(Prior Code, § 111.376)
§ 114.072 PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR A LICENSE.
   (A)   The following restrictions apply to any applicant who is a natural
person, a general partner if the applicant is a partnership, or a corporate
officer if the applicant is a corporation.
   (B)   No license shall be granted to:
      (1)   Any person who is a minor at the time the application is filed;
      (2)   Any person who is not of good moral character or repute;
      (3)   Is not the real party in interest in the business being licensed;
      (4)   Any person who has knowingly falsified or misrepresented
information on the license application;
      (5)   Any person who owes taxes or assessments to the state, county,
school district, or city that are due and delinquent; and
      (6)   Any person who has been convicted of any crime directly related to
the occupation licensed as prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 2, as it may be
amended from time to time, and has not shown competent evidence of sufficient
rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of a fireworks dealer
as prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to
time.
(Prior Code, § 111.377)
§ 114.073 LOCATIONS INELIGIBLE FOR A LICENSE.
   The following locations shall be ineligible for a license under this
subchapter.
   (A)   Claims due. No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on
any property on which taxes, assessments, or other financial claims of the
state, county, school district, or city are due, delinquent, or unpaid. In the
event a suit has been commenced under M.S. §§ 278.01 through 278.14, as they
may be amended from time to time, questioning the amount or validity of taxes,
the City Council may on application waive strict compliance with this
provision; no waiver may be granted, however, for taxes or any portion thereof
which remain unpaid for a period exceeding one year after becoming due.
   (B)   Improper zoning. No license shall be granted if the property is not
properly zoned for the activity being licensed under
Chapter 154, unless the business is a legal, nonconforming use.
   (C)   Non-permanent place of business. No license shall be granted for the
sale of consumer fireworks at a non-permanent place of business.
(Prior Code, § 111.378)
§ 114.074 LICENSE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   License display. A license issued under this subchapter must be posted
in a conspicuous place in the premises for which it is used. The license issued
is only effective for the compact and contiguous space specified in the
approved license application.
   (B)   Licensed premises. A separate license is required for each place of
business.
   (C)   Change in ownership. Any change, directly or beneficially, in the
ownership of the licensed business shall require the application for a new
license, and the new owner must satisfy all current eligibility requirements.
   (D)   Non-transferable. Each license under this subchapter shall be issued
to the applicant only and shall not be transferable to any other person. No
licensee shall loan, sell, give, or assign a license to another person.
   (E)   Location restrictions. A license under this subchapter authorizes the
licensee to carry on its business only at the permanent place of business
designated on the license. However, upon written request, the city may approve
an off-site locked and secured storage facility. The site must meet all city
zoning requirements and must have the written approval of the city’s Fire
Department. The licensee shall permit inspection of the facility in accordance
with this subchapter. Property shall be stored in compliance with all
provisions of the city code and in compliance with the standards established by
the city’s Fire Department. The licensee must either own the building in which
the business is conducted, and any approved off-site storage facility, or have
a lease on the business premises which extends for more than six months. No
retail business transactions shall be conducted at this off-site storage site.
(Prior Code, § 111.379) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.075 OPERATION RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Customer safety information provided. At the point of sale, each
purchaser of consumer fireworks shall be provided with safety information
complied by the State Department of Public Safety, State Fire Marshal Division,
or other safety information as directed by the City Manager or designee or City
Council.
   (B)   Maintenance of order. A licensee under this subchapter shall be
responsible for the conduct of the business being operated and shall maintain
conditions of order.
   (C)   Maintenance of storage areas; permissible amounts of consumer
fireworks. Any significant deviation, enlargement, or alteration from the
approved site plan for the storage areas covered by the license must be pre-
approved in writing by the city’s Fire Department. The total quantity of
consumer fireworks stored on any property shall not exceed 100 pounds.
Buildings used for the storage of consumer fireworks shall be one-story,
without a basement, nonresidential, and fully protected by an automatic fire
sprinkler system. Buildings used for the storage of consumer fireworks that are
also used for other purposes shall store the consumer fireworks in a room or
area used exclusively for the storage of consumer fireworks having interior
walls with a minimum fire-resistance rating of one hour and having doors with a
minimum fire-resistance rating of 45 minutes. Buildings used for the storage of
consumer fireworks must be located at a minimum distance of 70 feet from
inhabited buildings and 35 feet from public highways and other storage
buildings.
   (D)   Retail sale displays. Any and all displays of consumer fireworks for
retail sale must meet the standards and requirements provided in National Fire
Protection Association Standard 1124 (2003 edition).
   (E)   Smoking prohibited. A licensee under this sub chapter must strictly
prohibit any cigarette, cigar, or pipe smoking in or around the licensed
premises and conspicuously post and maintain appropriate “NO SMOKING” signage
throughout.
   (F)   Prohibited transactions. No licensee, clerk, agent, or employee
thereof shall sell, distribute, or furnish any consumer fireworks to a minor,
to any person who is obviously intoxicated, chemically impaired, or
incompetent, or to any person who fails to present competent age identification
in the form of a current, valid state driver’s license, current, valid state
identification card, or current, valid photo driver’s license or photo
identification issued by another state or a province of Canada.
   (G)   Inspection of items. The licensee must, at all times during the term
of the license, allow the authorized agents of the city, Fire Department, and
Police Department, to enter the premises where the licensed business is
located, including all display areas, storage areas, and all approved off-site
storage facilities, during normal business hours, or beyond normal business
hours where the inspector determines an emergency situation exists, for the
purpose of inspecting the premises and inspecting the items, wares, and
merchandise therein for the purpose of verifying compliance with the
requirements of this subchapter, and any other applicable state and federal
regulations. Upon request, the licensee must provide a test sample to the
inspector for the purpose of verifying the chemical content of the merchandise.
   (H)   Proper disposal of unsold consumer fireworks. It shall be the
responsibility of the licensee to properly dispose of all unsold permitted
consumer fireworks. Any consequential cost to the city for disposal of these
goods shall be the ultimate responsibility of the property owner, and the city
may levy the amount of the cost plus interest as a special assessment against
the property to which the costs pertain.
   (I)   Confiscation and destruction of illegal fireworks. Any authorized
agent of the Fire Department or Police Department may seize, take, remove, or
cause to be removed all stocks of fireworks or other combustibles offered or
exposed for sale, stored or held in violation of this subchapter or applicable
state or federal law. Any consequential cost to the city for disposal of these
goods shall be the ultimate responsibility of the property owner, and the city
may levy the amount of the cost plus interest as a special assessment against
the property to which the costs pertain.
(Prior Code, § 111.380) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.076 SANCTIONS FOR LICENSE VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Suspension or revocation. The City Council may suspend or revoke a
license issued pursuant to this subchapter for a violation of:
      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in a license
application or a renewal application;
      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the licensed occupation or business;
      (3)   Any violation of this subchapter or state law;
      (4)   A licensee’s criminal conviction that is directly related to the
occupation or business licensed as defined by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 2, as it may
be amended from time to time, provided that the licensee cannot show competent
evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties
of the licensed occupation or business as defined by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 3, as
it may be amended from time to time;
      (5)   Conducting the licensed business or occupation in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the community;
and
      (6)   Any significant unauthorized deviation, enlargement, or alteration
of the approved site plan for the storage and sales display areas of the
licensed premises shall, in and of itself, constitute a basis for license
revocation.
   (B)   Notice of hearing. A revocation or suspension by the City Council
shall be preceded by written notice to the licensee and a hearing. The notice
shall give at least ten days’ notice of the time and place of the hearing and
shall state the nature of the charges against the licensee. The notice shall be
mailed by regular and certified mail to the licensee at the most recent address
listed on the license application.
(Prior Code, § 111.381)
§ 114.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   A violation of §§
114.065 through
114.076 shall be a misdemeanor under state law.
(Prior Code, § 111.382)
CHAPTER 115: VENDORS
Section
Tobacco
   
115.001   Purpose
   
115.002   Definitions
   
115.003   License required
   
115.004   Fee
   
115.005   Basis for denial of license
   
115.006   Prohibited sales
   
115.007   Responsibility
   
115.008   Compliance checks and inspections
   
115.009   Other illegal acts
   
115.010   Violations
   
115.011   Administrative penalties
   
115.012   Exceptions and defenses
   
115.013   Smoking prohibited
Towing Services
   
115.025   Definition
   
115.026   License required
   
115.027   Application
   
115.028   License fee
   
115.029   License expiration date
   
115.030   Equipment; inspection
   
115.031   Display of license
   
115.032   Posting fee schedule
   
115.033   Receipt for services
   
115.034   Possessory lien
   
115.035   Denial, suspension, and revocation
   
115.036   Insurance
Haulers of Recyclables, Rubbish, and Yard Waste
   
115.050   Definitions
   
115.051   Licensing requirements
   
115.052   Requirements and restrictions
   
115.053   Reporting of recyclables and yard waste
   
115.054   Reporting of participation rates
Peddlers and Solicitors
   
115.065   Definitions
   
115.066   Exceptions to definitions
   
115.067   Licensing; exemptions
   
115.068   License ineligibility
   
115.069   License suspension and revocation
   
115.070   License transferability
   
115.071   Registration
   
115.072   Prohibited activities
   
115.073   Exclusion by placard
 
   
115.999   Penalty
TOBACCO
§ 115.001 PURPOSE.
   (A)   This subchapter is intended to regulate the sale of commercial
tobacco, tobacco-related devices, electronic delivery devices, and nicotine or
lobelia delivery products for the purpose of enforcing and furthering existing
laws, to protect youth and young adults against the serious health effects
associated with use and initiation, and to further the official public policy
of the state to prevent young people from starting to smoke.
   (B)   The city further recognizes the public health hazards of exposure of
individuals to secondhand smoke. This subchapter is intended to regulate the
sale, possession, and use of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related
devices, and electronic delivery devices for the purpose of enforcing and
furthering existing laws, to protect minors against the serious effects
associated with the illegal use of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related
devices, and electronic delivery devices, to protect individuals from the
hazards of secondhand smoke, and to further the official public policy of the
state as stated in M.S. § 144.391 and M.S. § 144.412, as they may be amended
from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 111.045)
§ 115.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CANNABIS or MARIJUANA. Includes “cannabis flower,” “cannabis products,”
“lower-potency hemp edibles,” and “hemp-derived consumer products” and shall
have the definitions given to them in M.S. § 342.01, as it may be amended from
time to time.
   CHILD-RESISTANT PACKAGING. Packaging that meets the definition set forth in
16 C.F.R. § 1700.15(b), as in effect on January 1, 2015, and was tested in
accordance with the method described in 16 C.F.R. § 1700.20, as in effect on
January 1, 2015.
   CIGAR. Any roll of tobacco that is wrapped in tobacco leaf or in any other
substance containing tobacco, with or without a tip or mouthpiece, which is not
a cigarette as defined in M.S. § 297F.01, Subd. 3, as may be amended from time
to time.
   COMPLIANCE CHECKS. The process the city uses to investigate and ensure that
those authorized to sell licensed products are complying with the requirements
of this subchapter. COMPLIANCE CHECKS shall involve persons under the age of 21
who are authorized by this subchapter, state, and federal regulations and who
purchase or attempt to purchase licensed products for educational, research,
and training purposes, and for the enforcement of the aforementioned city,
state, and federal regulations pertaining to licensed products.
   ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE. Any product containing or delivering nicotine,
lobelia, or any other substance, whether natural or synthetic, intended for
human consumption through the inhalation of aerosol or vapor from the product.
ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE includes, but is not limited to, devices
manufactured, marketed, or sold as e-cigarettes, e-cigars, e-pipes, vape pens,
mods, tank systems, or under any other product name or descriptor. ELECTRONIC
DELIVERY DEVICE includes any component part of a product, whether or not
marketed or sold separately. ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE does not include any
product that has been approved or certified by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration for sale as a tobacco-cessation product, as a tobacco-dependence
product, or for other medical purposes, and is marketed and sold for such an
approved purpose.
   INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED. The practice of selling any tobacco or tobacco
product wrapped individually for sale. Individually wrapped tobacco and tobacco
products include, but are not limited to, single cigarette packs, single bags
or cans of loose tobacco in any form, and single cans or other packaging of
snuff or chewing tobacco. Cartons or other packaging containing more than a
single pack or other container as described in this definition shall not be
considered INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED.
   INDOOR AREA. All space between a floor and a ceiling that is bounded by
walls, doorways, or windows, whether open or closed, covering more than 50% of
the combined surface area of the vertical planes constituting the perimeter of
the area. A wall includes any retractable divider, garage door, or other
physical barrier, whether temporary or permanent. A standard window screen
(0.011 gauge with an 18 by 16 mesh count) is not considered a wall.
   LICENSED PRODUCTS. The term that collectively refers to any tobacco,
tobacco-related device, electronic delivery device, or nicotine or lobelia
delivery product.
   LOOSIES. The term that collectively refers to any tobacco, tobacco-related
device, electronic delivery device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery product.
   MOVEABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any form of business that is operated out of a
truck, van, kiosk, automobile, or other type of vehicle or transportable
shelter and not a fixed address store front or other permanent type of
structure authorized for sales transactions.
   NICOTINE OR LOBELIA DELIVERY PRODUCT. Any product containing or delivering
nicotine or lobelia intended for human consumption, or any part of such a
product, that is not a tobacco or an electronic delivery device as defined in
this section. NICOTINE OR LOBELIA DELIVERY PRODUCT does not include any product
that has been approved or otherwise certified for legal sale by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration as a tobacco-cessation product, a tobacco-dependence
product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely
for that approved purpose.
   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT. Any indoor area at which two or more individuals
perform any type of a service for consideration of payment under any type of
contractual relationship, including, but not limited to, an employment
relationship with or for a private corporation, partnership, individual, or
government agency. PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT includes any indoor area where two or
more individuals gratuitously perform services for which individuals are
ordinarily paid. A PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT also includes, but is not limited to:
public conveyances, factories, warehouses, offices, retail stores, restaurants,
bars, banquet facilities, theaters, food stores, banks, financial institutions,
employee cafeterias, lounges, auditoriums, gymnasiums, restrooms, elevators,
hallways, museums, libraries, bowling establishments, employee medical
facilities, and rooms or areas containing photocopying equipment or other
office equipment used in common. Vehicles used in whole or in part for work
purposes are PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT during hours of operation if more than one
person is present. An area in which work is performed in a private residence is
a PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT during hours of operation if:
      (1)   The homeowner uses the area exclusively and regularly as a
principal place of business and has one or more on-site employees; or
      (2)   The homeowner uses the area exclusively and regularly as a place to
meet or deal with patients, clients, or customers in the normal course of the
homeowner’s trade or business.
   PUBLIC MEETING. All meetings open to the public pursuant to M.S. § 13D.01,
as it may be amended from time to time.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any enclosed, indoor area used by the general public,
including, but not limited to, restaurants; banks; bars; any other food or
liquor establishment; hotels and motels; reception areas; retail establishments
and other commercial establishments; shopping malls; educational facilities;
hospitals; nursing homes; auditoriums; arenas; meeting rooms; waiting rooms;
government buildings; and common areas of rental apartment buildings.
   PUBLIC PLACE, OUTDOOR. All city and county parks; parking lots adjacent to
such parks; trails with in city parks; on the main city campus, including City
Hall and fire station; on other city-owned property, including the public works
maintenance facility; and adjacent parking lots to each of these facilities.
   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Any place of business where licensed products are
available for sale to the general public. RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS include, but
are not limited to, grocery stores, tobacco products shops, convenience stores,
gasoline service stations, bars, and restaurants.
   SALE. Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter, or other
consideration.
   SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING. The open display of licensed products in any
manner where any person has access to the licensed products without the
assistance or intervention of the licensee or the licensee’s employee.
   SMOKING. Inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated
cigar, cigarette, or pipe, or any other lighted or heated product containing,
made, or derived from nicotine, tobacco, marijuana, cannabis, hemp, or other
plant, whether natural or synthetic, that is intended for inhalation. SMOKING
also includes carrying or using an activated electronic delivery device.
   TOBACCO or TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Any product containing, made, or derived from
tobacco that is intended for human consumption, whether chewed, smoked,
absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means,
or any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product including but not
limited to cigarettes; cigars; cheroots; stogies; perique; granulated, plug
cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and other smoking tobacco; snuff; snuff flour;
cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts;
refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds
and forms of tobacco. TOBACCO does not include any product that has been
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco-
cessation product, as a tobacco-dependence product, or for other medical
purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose.
   TOBACCO-RELATED DEVICES. Any rolling papers, wraps, pipes, or other device
intentionally designed or intended to be used with tobacco products. TOBACCO-
RELATED DEVICE includes components of tobacco-related devices or tobacco
products, which may be marketed or sold separately. TOBACCO-RELATED DEVICES may
or may not contain tobacco.
   VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electric or electronic, or other type of
device that dispenses licensed products upon the insertion of money, tokens, or
other form of payment directly into the machine by the person seeking to
purchase the licensed product.
(Prior Code, § 111.046) (Ord. 2011-01, passed 4-26-2011; Ord. 2023-06, passed
11-28-2023)
§ 115.003 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Generally. No person may, directly or indirectly, or by means of any
device keep for retail sale, sell at retail, offer to sell, or otherwise
dispose of any licensed products at any place in the city unless a license has
first been issued by the City Council as provided in this section.
   (B)   Term. All licenses issued under this subchapter shall be valid for one
calendar year from the date of March 15.
   (C)   Revocation or suspension. Any license issued under this subchapter may
be revoked or suspended as provided in §
115.013.
   (D)   Transfers. All licenses issued under this section shall be valid only
on the premises for which the license was issued and only for the person to
whom the license was issued. The transfer of any license to another location or
person is prohibited.
   (E)   Maximum number of licenses. The maximum number of licenses issued by
the city at any time is limited to zero. The city will not issue any new
licenses for the sale of licensed products after January 15, 2025. The city
will only renew existing licenses to license holders that were issued prior to
January 15, 2025 and have applied for renewal by March 15 of each year.
Eligible parties will lose the existing license if they fail to renew it
annually or if the license is revoked for any reason.
   (F)   Moveable place of business. No license shall be issued to a moveable
place of business. Only fixed location businesses shall be eligible to be
licensed under this subchapter.
   (G)   Display. All licenses shall be posted and displayed at all times in
plain view of the general public on the licensed premises.
   (H)   Renewals. The renewal of a license issued under this section shall be
handled in the same manner as the original application. The request for a
renewal shall be made at least 30 days, but no more than 60 days before the
expiration of the current license. The license holder is not entitled to an
automatic renewal of the license.
(Prior Code, § 111.047) (Ord. 2025-01, passed 4-8-2025)
§ 115.004 FEE.
   If an application is granted by the City Council, a license will be issued
by the Licensing Clerk upon payment in full of the fee required under
Chapter 33.
(Prior Code, § 111.048)
§ 115.005 BASIS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The following shall be grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of
a license under this subchapter.
      (1)   The applicant is under 21 years of age.
      (2)   The applicant has been convicted within the past five years of any
violation of a federal, state, or local law, ordinance provision, or other
regulation relating to licensed products.
      (3)   The applicant has had a license to sell licensed products suspended
or revoked within the preceding 12 months of the date of application.
      (4)   The applicant fails to provide any of the information required on
the licensing application, or provides false or misleading information.
      (5)   The applicant is prohibited by federal, state, or other local law,
ordinance, or other regulation, from holding a license.
      (6)   Nonpayment by the property owner and/or applicant of any fees or
charges owed to the city and/or county, including, but not limited to,
utilities and property taxes.
   (B)   If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it will be
revoked upon the discovery that the person was ineligible for the license under
this subchapter. The city will provide the license holder with notice of the
revocation, along with information on the right to appeal.
(Prior Code, § 111.049)
§ 115.006 PROHIBITED SALES.
   (A)   In general. It shall be a violation of this subchapter for any person
to sell or offer to sell any licensed products:
      (1)   By means of any type of vending machine;
      (2)   By means of loosies as defined;
      (3)   Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna, strychnos,
cocaine, marijuana, or other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic, or controlled
substances except nicotine and other substances found naturally in tobacco or
added as part of an otherwise lawful manufacturing process. It is not the
intention of this provision to ban the sale of lawfully manufactured cigarettes
or other products subject to this subchapter; and/or
      (4)   By any other means, to any other person, or in any other manner or
form prohibited by federal, state or other local law, ordinance provision, or
other regulation.
   (B)   Legal age. No person shall sell any licensed product to any person
under the age of 21.
      (1)   Age verification. Licensees must verify by means of government-
issued photographic identification that the purchaser is at least 21 years of
age.
      (2)   Signage. Notice of the legal sales age and age verification
requirement must be posted prominently and in plain view at all times at each
location where licensed products are offered for sale. The required signage,
which will be provided to the licensee by the city, must be posted in a manner
that is clearly visible to anyone who is or is considering making a purchase.
   (C) Self-service sales. No person shall allow the sale of licensed products
by any self-service displays where the customer may have access to those items
without having to request the item from the licensee or the licensee’s employee
and where there is not a physical exchange of the licensed product from the
licensee or the licensee’s employee to the customer. All licensed products must
be stored behind the sales counter, in another area not freely accessible to
customers, or in a case or other storage unit not left open and accessible to
the general public. Any retailer selling licensed products at the time this
subchapter is adopted must comply with this section within 90 days of the
effective date of this subchapter.
   (D) Liquid packaging. No person shall sell or offer to sell any liquid,
whether or not such liquid contains nicotine, which is intended for human
consumption and use in an electronic delivery device, in packaging that is not
child-resistant. Upon request by the city, a licensee must provide a copy of
the certificate of compliance or full laboratory testing report for the
packaging used.
   (E)   Cigar minimum price and package size. No person shall sell or offer to
sell any cigar unless it is within a package containing a minimum of five
cigars; and any package of cigars for a sales price of less than $15 per
package before taxes and fees.
   (F)   Cigarette minimum price. No person may sell or offer to sell cigarette
packages or cartons for a sales price of less than $15 per pack before taxes
and fees.
   (G)   Moist snuff minimum price and package size. No person shall sell or
offer to sell moist snuff retail packages or multipacks for a sales price of
less than $15 per 1.2-ounce package before taxes of fees. No person shall sell
or offer to sell any smokeless tobacco or moist snuff for retail sale unless it
is sold in a package of at least 1.2 ounces minimum package size. The price
floor for packages larger than 1.2 ounces shall be computed by adding $2.50 for
each 0.3 ounce or any fraction thereof more than 1.2 ounces, excluding taxes
and fees.
   (H)   Snus minimum price and package size. No person shall sell or offer to
sell snus for a sales price of less than $15 per 0.32-ounce package before
taxes and fees. No person shall sell or offer to sell any snus unless it is
sold in a package of at least 0.32 ounce minimum pack size. The price floor for
packages larger than 0.32 ounce shall be computed by adding $2.50 for each 0.08
ounce or any fraction thereof more than 0.32 ounce excluding taxes and fees. In
addition, no person shall sell or offer to sell a package of loose tobacco for
three ounces or less, prior to applicable sales taxes being imposed, of less
than $5 nor a package of loose tobacco greater than three ounces, prior to
taxes being imposed, of less than $15.
   (I)   Electronic delivery device minimum price. No person shall sell or
offer to sell any electronic delivery device at a price that is less than $20
per device, excluding taxes or fees. This price is applicable to any type of
electronic delivery device and applies per unit even if sold together.
   (J)   Price adjustment. The licensing official may annually modify by rule
the minimum prices described in this section to account for changes in the
Saint Anthony Village consumer price index, adjusted for inflation.
   (K)   Coupon and price promotion. No person shall accept or redeem any
coupon, price promotion, or other instrument or mechanism, whether in paper,
digital, electronic, mobile, or any other form, that provides any license
products to a consumer at no cost or at a price that is less than the non-
discounted, standard price listed by a retailer on the item or an any related
shelving, posting, advertising, or display at the location where the item is
sold or offered for sale, excluding all applicable taxes and fees.
(Prior Code, § 111.050) (Ord. 2025-01, passed 4-8-2025)  Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.007 RESPONSIBILITY.
   All licensees under this subchapter shall be responsible for the actions of
their employees in regard to the sale, offer to sell, and furnishing of
licensed products on the licensed premises. The sale, offer to sell, or
furnishing of any licensed product by an employee shall be considered an act of
the license holder. Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as
prohibiting the city from also subjecting the clerk to whatever penalties are
appropriate under this subchapter, state or federal law, or other applicable
law or regulation.
(Prior Code, § 111.052)
§ 115.008 COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS.
   All licensed premises must be open to inspection by law enforcement or other
authorized city officials during regular business hours. From time to time, but
at least twice per year, the city will conduct compliance checks. Prior written
consent is required for any person under the age of 18 to participate in a
compliance check. Persons used for the purpose of compliance checks will be
supervised by law enforcement or other designated personnel. No person used in
compliance checks shall attempt to use a false identification misrepresenting
the person’s age, and all persons lawfully engaged in a compliance check shall
answer all questions about their age asked by the licensee or the licensee’s
employee and shall produce any identification, if any exists, for which the
person is asked. Nothing in this section shall prohibit compliance checks
authorized by state or federal laws for educational, research, or training
purposes, or required for the enforcement of a particular state or federal law.
(Prior Code, § 111.053) (Ord. 2025-01, passed 4-8-2025)  Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.009 OTHER ILLEGAL ACTS.
   Unless otherwise provided, the following acts are an administrative
violation of this subchapter.
   (A)   Prohibited furnishing or procurement. It is a violation of this
subchapter for any person 21 years of age or older to purchase or otherwise
obtain any licensed product on behalf of a person under the age of 21. It is
also a violation for any person 21 years of age and older to coerce or attempt
to coerce a person under the age of 21 to purchase or attempt to purchase any
licensed product.
   (B)   Use of false identification. It is a violation of this subchapter for
any person to use any form of false identification, whether the identification
is that of another person or has been modified or tampered with to represent an
age older than the actual age of the person using that identification.
(Prior Code, § 111.054)
§ 115.010 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Notice. Upon discovery of suspected violation, the alleged violator
may be issued, either personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the
alleged violation and which shall inform the alleged violator of his or her
right to a hearing on the matter and how and where a hearing may be requested,
including a contact address and phone number.
   (B)   Hearings.
      (1)   Upon issuance of a citation, a person accused of violating this
subchapter may request in writing a hearing on the matter. Hearing requests
must be made within ten business days of the issuance of the citation and
delivered to the City Clerk or other designated city officer. Failure to
properly request a hearing within ten business days of the issuance of the
citation will terminate the person’s right to a hearing.
      (2)   The City Manager or designee will set the time and place for the
hearing. Written notice of the hearing time and place will be mailed or
delivered to the accused violator at least ten business days prior to the
hearing.
   (C)   Hearing officer. The Police Chief or designee shall serve as the
hearing officer.
   (D)   Decision. If the hearing officer determines that a violation did
occur, that decision, along with the hearing officer’s reasons for finding a
violation and the penalty to be imposed under this section, shall be recorded
in writing, a copy of which shall be provided to the city and the accused
violator by in-person delivery or mail as soon as practicable. If the hearing
officer finds that no violation occurred or finds ground for not imposing any
penalty, the findings shall be recorded and a copy provided to the city and the
acquitted accused violator by in-person delivery or mail as soon as
practicable. The decision of the hearing officer is final, subject to an appeal
as described in division (F) below.
   (E)   Costs. If the citation is upheld by the hearing officer, the city’s
actual expenses in holding the hearing up to a maximum of $1,000 must be paid
by the person requesting the hearing.
   (F)   Appeals. Appeals of any decision made by the hearing officer shall be
filed in the District Court having jurisdiction over the city.
   (G)   Continued violation. Each violation, and every day on which a
violation occurs or continues, shall constitute a separate offense.
   (H)   Misdemeanor prosecution. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the
city from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any alleged violation of
this subchapter by a person 21 years of age or older.
(Prior Code, § 111.055) (Ord. 2025-01, passed 4-8-2025)
§ 115.011 ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.
   (A)   Licensees. Any licensee cited for violating this subchapter, or whose
employee has violated this subchapter, will be charged an administrative fine
of $1,000 for a first violation; $2,000 for a second offense at the same
licensed premises within a 36-month period and a three-day suspension of the
license; and $2,000 for a third or subsequent offense at the same location
within a 36-month period and a seven-day suspension of the license. Upon a
fourth violation within a 36-month period, the license will be revoked.
   (B)   Employees of licensees and other individuals. Individuals, other than
persons under the age of 21 regulated by §
115.999(B)(3), who are found to be in violation of this subchapter may be
charged an administrative fine of $50.
   (C)   Persons under the age of 21. Persons under the age of 21 who use a
false identification to purchase or attempt to purchase licensed products may
only be subject to non-criminal, non-monetary civil penalties or remedies such
as tobacco-related education classes, diversion programs, community services,
or another non-monetary, civil penalty that the city determines to be
appropriate. The City Council will consult with educators, parents, guardians,
persons under the age of 21, public health officials, court personnel, and
other interested parties to determine an appropriate remedy for persons under
the age of 21 in the city in the best interest of the underage person. The
remedies for persons under 21 who use a false identification to purchase or
attempt to purchase licensed products may be established by ordinance and
amended from time to time.
   (D)   Statutory penalties. If the administrative penalty for violations
against licensed retailers under Section 11(B)(1) authorized to be imposed by
M.S. § 461.12, as it may be amended from time to time, differ from that
established in this section, then the higher penalty will prevail.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 4-8-2025)
§ 115.012 EXCEPTIONS AND DEFENSES.
   (A)   Religious, spiritual, or cultural ceremonies or practices. Nothing in
this subchapter shall prevent the providing of tobacco, tobacco products, and
tobacco-related devices to any person as part of a lawfully recognized
religious, spiritual, or cultural ceremony.
   (B)   Reasonable reliance. It shall be an affirmative defense to the
violation of this subchapter for a person to have reasonably relied on proof of
age as described by state law.
(Prior Code, § 111.056) (Ord. 2025-01, passed 4-8-2025)
§ 115.013 SMOKING PROHIBITED.
   Smoking is prohibited, and no person shall smoke in a public place; in a
public place, outdoor as herein defined; at a public meeting; in a place of
employment; or in public transportation.
(Prior Code, § 111.059) (Ord. 2011-01, passed 4-26-2011; Ord. 2012-01, passed
1-24-2012; Ord. 2014-02, passed 9-3-2014; Ord. 2019-09, passed 10-8-2019; Ord.
2023-06, passed 11-28-2023; Ord. 2025-01, passed 4-8-2025)
TOWING SERVICES
§ 115.025 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE. Starting or attempting to start, or towing or
pushing, another motor vehicle by any type of electrical device or battery for
remuneration or compensation of any kind, or operating a vehicle for the
purposes, but excluding multi-vehicle transports.
(Prior Code, § 111.110)
§ 115.026 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person may provide motor vehicle service within the city without being
duly licensed in accordance with this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 111.111) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.027 APPLICATION.
   (A)   An application for license must be filed with the City Manager or
designee on forms provided by the Manager.
   (B)   The application must be verified under oath and contain the
information required under §
111.02, plus the following information:
      (1)   The name or names of the owners and operators and their respective
resident addresses and home phone numbers;
      (2)   The name under which the business is to be conducted, the address
where the business is to be located, and its business phone number;
      (3)   A current schedule of minimum charges to be made for service calls
where service is for any reason not provided. Immediate notification of any
changes in the minimum fees schedule must be made to the City Manager or
designee;
      (4)   A description of each vehicle to be used in the business;
      (5)   Information with respect to the owner’s prior experience in
operating businesses similar to that in which the licensed service vehicle will
be used, including the name under which each such business was operated and its
address, length of time operated, and whether any claims for damage were made
against the business as a result of motor vehicle services; and
      (6)   Any other information as may from time to time be required.
(Prior Code, § 111.112)
§ 115.028 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual license fee will be the amount set forth in
Chapter 33.
(Prior Code, § 111.113)
§ 115.029 LICENSE EXPIRATION DATE.
   Licenses granted under this subchapter will expire on September 1 of each
year.
(Prior Code, § 111.114)
§ 115.030 EQUIPMENT; INSPECTION.
   (A)   No service vehicle will be licensed until it has been thoroughly and
carefully examined by the city’s Police and Fire Departments and found to:
      (1)   Be thoroughly safe for the providing of any motor vehicle service;
      (2)   Be equipped with a 2AIOBC or larger fire extinguisher, as approved
by the Fire Chief, which is properly charged and in good working order at all
times;
      (3)   Be clean in appearance and well painted; and
      (4)   Have the operating name, address, and telephone number affixed in a
permanent manner on the outer side of each of the front doors of the vehicle or
on the side of the vehicle in letters of not less than three inches in height.
   (B)   The City Manager or designee may also require periodic or random
inspections of service vehicles after a license has been granted. Any defect
found in a service vehicle which may cause a safety or fire hazard must be
corrected prior to its further use.
(Prior Code, § 111.115)
§ 115.031 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   When the requirements of this subchapter are complied with, a suitable
license certificate or sticker for each licensed service vehicle issued will be
to the licensee. The license, certificate, or sticker must be permanently and
prominently affixed and displayed at all times on the upper half of the
driver’s door or the service vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 111.116)
§ 115.032 POSTING FEE SCHEDULE.
   The schedule of minimum fees must be posted at the business location and on
or in the service vehicle. Upon request, a copy of the schedule must be
presented to each prospective customer. If a service vehicle is called by an
individual seeking assistance and assistance cannot be given or is no longer
needed, the maximum charge which may be assessed must be the minimum service
charge stated in the license application and on the posted schedule of fees.
(Prior Code, § 111.117)
§ 115.033 RECEIPT FOR SERVICES.
   The licensee must give to the person to whom services are rendered a printed
form receipt stating the name of the business supplying the services, the
license number under which the licensee is doing business, the fee charged for
the services, and the name of the operator of the service vehicle rendering the
services.
(Prior Code, § 111.118)
§ 115.034 POSSESSORY LIEN.
   No possessory lien will attach for motor vehicle services performed on any
vehicle where the services are limited to starting or attempting to start the
vehicle. It is unlawful for any person to seize or take into custody any
vehicle in order to collect fees or charges for the services, except with the
express consent of the driver, or owner, or agent of the owner of the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 111.119) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.035 DENIAL, SUSPENSION, AND REVOCATION.
   Any license under this subchapter may be denied, suspended, revoked, or
refused renewal for any one or more of the following causes.
   (A)   No licensee may provide any motor vehicle service to any motor vehicle
involved in an accident when a police officer or other peace officer is
investigating that accident, without permission of that officer.
   (B)   No licensee may solicit or contract for the providing of motor vehicle
services to any vehicle involved in an accident at the scene of that accident,
until a police officer has arrived and given permission to do so.
   (C)   Any licensee providing towing services to any motor vehicle involved
in an accident must remove or cause to be removed any glass or other injurious
substance dropped upon the street or highway from the vehicle towed.
(Prior Code, § 111.120)
§ 115.036 INSURANCE.
   Each applicant for a license under this subchapter must file with the City
Manager or designee a public liability policy or certificate of insurance from
a company authorized to do business in the state insuring the applicant against
any and all liability incurred in the use or operation of the vehicle licensed
under this subchapter. The policy of insurance must be in the amounts of not
less than $100,000 for injury or death to one person, $300,000 for each
occurrence, and $25,000 property damage.
(Prior Code, § 111.121) Penalty, see §
115.999
HAULERS OF RECYCLABLES, RUBBISH, AND YARD WASTE
§ 115.050 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COLLECTION DAYS. Wednesday or Thursday of each week.
   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. Any premises where a commercial or industrial
enterprise of any kind is carried on, including restaurants and clubs,
churches, and schools where food is served.
   GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, or consumption of food.
   HAULER. A collector or transporter of garbage, refuse, recyclable materials,
or yard waste.
   MULTIPLE DWELLING. Any building used for residential purposes consisting of
more than four residential units with individual kitchen facilities for each in
an R-4 District.
   RECYCLABLES. Materials which may be recycled or reused through recycling
processes, including metal and plastic beverage containers, glass, newsprint,
and any other materials designated as recyclables by City Council resolution.
   REFUSE. Ashes, nonrecyclable glass, crockery, cans, paper, boxes, rags, and
similar nonputrescible materials.
   RESIDENTIAL. Property zoned R-1, R-1A, R-2, or R-3.
   RESIDENTIAL CONTAINER. Any container intended for the collection of waste or
recycling materials that has a volume of 100 gallons or smaller container upon
request of the resident.
   RUBBISH. The miscellaneous waste materials resulting from housekeeping,
mercantile enterprises, trades, manufacturing, and offices, including garbage
and refuse.
   SPECIAL PICK UP. Any collection of materials other than garbage, refuse,
recyclables, or yard waste, including white goods, furniture, oversized
materials, and construction debris.
   YARD WASTES. Organic materials such as leaves, grass clippings, branches,
and other tree material, organic garden waste, or similar materials.
(Prior Code, § 111.215) (Ord. 2022-03, passed 5-24-2022)
§ 115.051 LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to haul garbage, refuse, recyclables, or
yard waste without the appropriate license issued by the city and payment of
the license fee set forth in Chapter 33, unless the person is hauling from his
or her own residence or commercial establishment.
   (B)   (1) The following categories of haulers must be separately licensed:
         (a)   Haulers collecting recyclables and any nonrecyclables from
residential areas;
         (b)   Haulers collecting any nonrecyclables from commercial
establishments and/or multiple dwellings; and
         (c)   Haulers of recyclables only.
      (2)   Each application for a license and each license issued must
identify the type of license and the specific vehicles to be used by the
licensed hauler.
   (C)   Before a license is issued, the applicant must file with the City
Manager or designee evidence that the applicant has in effect public liability
insurance for the hauler’s business and for all vehicles in at least the sum of
$500,000 for injury of one person, $1,000,000 for the injury of two or more
persons in the same accident, and $100,000 for property damages.
   (D)   When the application is submitted, the applicant must file with the
City Manager or designee a schedule of proposed rates to be charged during the
licensed period. Every licensee must provide 14-day prior written notification
to the city and the licensee’s customers of any change in rates to be
implemented during the licensed period.
   (E)   In addition to the other requirements of this subchapter, haulers
servicing residences must comply with the following.
      (1)   Curbside recycling collection will be made available to all
residential customers. At minimum, the service must include bi-weekly
collection. Charges for service to customers who have no curbside recycling
collection will be no less than the charges for services which include curbside
recycling collection.
      (2)   Weekly collection of garbage, refuse, and yard waste will be
provided on collection days.
      (3)   A minimum of three rate levels for regular service, priced on the
basis of volume, will be provided.
      (4)   Each licensee must separately collect and dispose of yard waste for
a minimum of eight weeks in the spring, commencing on April 1, and eight weeks
in the fall, commencing on September 15.
(Prior Code, § 111.216) (Ord. 07-005, passed 11-13-2007) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.052 REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS.
   All licensees, and any other haulers in the city, must comply with all of
the following requirements and restrictions.
   (A)   No hauler may operate in a residential district after 8:00 p.m. or
before 7:00 a.m. of any day, and no hauler may operate in a residential
district on Sunday or legal holidays.
   (B)   No licensed hauler may operate on residential streets on any day other
than collection days except to collect a missed pick up or special pick up, or
for collection on a day in substitution for a legal holiday which falls on a
collection day.
   (C)   All haulers operating on a route in a residential district must comply
with all weight limitations provided for in this code and under state law.
   (D)   Licensees must have watertight, packer-type vehicles, or in the case
of recycling, appropriate container vehicles, in good condition and which
prevent loss in transit of liquid or solid cargo. All vehicles must be kept
clean and as free from offensive odors as possible, and may not be allowed to
stand in any street longer than reasonably necessary to collect garbage,
refuse, recyclables, or yard waste.
   (E)   Persons may haul garbage, refuse, recyclables, or yard waste from
their own residence, multiple dwelling, or commercial establishment if hauled
in containers which are watertight on all sides and the bottom and have tight-
fitting covers on top, and if hauled in vehicles with leakproof bodies which do
not permit the loss of cargo.
   (F)   All garbage and refuse may be dumped or unloaded only at designated
sanitary landfills or county-designated facilities.
   (G)   Recyclables must be disposed of at a recycling facility, an organized
recyclable drive, or through another licensed recyclable hauler.
   (H)   Yard wastes may be composted privately or may be disposed of at a
composting facility or through a licensed recyclable hauler.
   (I)   Each vehicle for which a hauler’s license is issued must exhibit the
license in a prominent position on the vehicle.
   (J)   Upon request of the City Manager or designee, a licensee will provide
the city with a list of the names and addresses of the licensee’s customers in
the city.
(Prior Code, § 111.217)
§ 115.053 REPORTING OF RECYCLABLES AND YARD WASTE.
   All licensees must report to the city, on forms provided by the city, the
quantity of all recyclables and yard waste abated from landfills. The
quantities must be reported by tonnage, except that yard waste may be reported
in estimates of cubic yardage abated. Copies of weight tickets must also be
submitted with the abatement quantities. Failure to certify accurate volumes in
a timely manner may be cause for revocation of a hauling license.
(Prior Code, § 111.218)
§ 115.054 REPORTING OR PARTICIPATION RATES.
   All licensees must report to the city, on forms provided by the city, the
number of households participating in the curbside recycling program each week.
Licensees must report the number of actual household accounts in the city, the
number of households signed up to participate in the curbside program, and the
number of households actually recycling each week.
(Prior Code, § 111.219) Penalty, see §
115.999
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
§ 115.065 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms
shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this
subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLER. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-
business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place, for the
purpose of offering for sale, displaying or exposing for sale, selling or
attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares,
products, merchandise, or other personnel property that the person is carrying
or otherwise transporting. The term PEDDLER shall mean the same as the term
HAWKER.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation,
partnership, or association. As applied to groups, organizations, corporations,
partnerships, and associations, the term shall include each member, officer,
partner, associate, agent, or employee.
   REGULAR BUSINESS DAY. Any day during which the City Hall is normally open
for the purpose of conducting public business. Holidays defined by state law
shall not be counted as REGULAR BUSINESS DAYS.
   SOLICITOR. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-
business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place, for the
purpose of obtaining, or attempting to obtain, orders for goods, wares,
products, merchandise, other personal property or services of which he or she
may be carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog
or by other means, and for which delivery or performance shall occur at a later
time. The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person from the
scope of this provision if the actual purpose of the person’s activity is to
obtain or attempt to obtain orders as discussed above. The term shall mean the
same as the term CANVASSER.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. A person who temporarily sets up business out of a
vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, other portable shelter, or empty store front
for the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling or attempting to
sell, and delivering, goods, wares, products, merchandise, or other personal
property and who does not remain or intend to remain in any one location for
more than 14 consecutive days.
(Prior Code, § 113.01)
§ 115.066 EXCEPTIONS TO DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of the requirements of this chapter, the terms
PEDDLER, SOLICITOR, and TRANSIENT MERCHANT shall not apply to any person
selling or attempting to sell at wholesale any goods, wares, products,
merchandise, or other personal property to a retailer of the items being sold
by the wholesaler. The terms also shall not apply to any person who makes
initial contacts with other people for the purpose of establishing or trying to
establish a regular customer delivery route for the delivery of perishable food
and dairy products such as baked goods and milk, nor shall they apply to any
person making deliveries of perishable food and dairy products to the customers
on his or her established regular delivery route.
   (B)   In addition, persons conducting the type of sales commonly known as
garage sales, rummage sales, or estate sales, as well as those persons
participating in an organized multi-person bazaar or flea market, shall be
exempt from the definitions of PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, and TRANSIENT MERCHANTS,
as shall be anyone conducting an auction as a properly licensed auctioneer, or
any officer of the court conducting a court-ordered sale. Exemption from the
definitions for the scope of this subchapter shall not excuse any person from
complying with any other applicable statutory provision or local ordinance.
   (C)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be interpreted to prohibit or
restrict door-to-door advocacy. Persons engaging in door-to-door advocacy shall
not be required to register as solicitors under §
115.071. The term DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCACY includes door-to-door canvassing and
pamphleteering as vehicles for the dissemination of religious, political, and
other ideas.
(Prior Code, § 113.02)
§ 115.067 LICENSING; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   County license required. No person shall conduct business as a
peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant within the city limits without first
having obtained the appropriate license from the county as required by M.S.
Chapter 329, as it may be amended from time to time, if the county issues a
license for the activity.
   (B)   No license shall be required of any person going from house-to-house,
door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or other type of place-
to-place when the activity is for the purpose of exercising that person’s state
or federal constitutional rights such as the freedom of speech, press,
religion, and the like, except that this exemption may be lost if the person’s
exercise of constitutional rights is merely incidental to a commercial
activity.
   (C)   No licensee shall conduct business in residential areas of the city
except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(Prior Code, § 113.03) (Ord. 2009-008, passed 6-23-2009; Ord. 2012-08, passed
10-23-2012; Ord. 2025- 02, passed 4-22-2025)  Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.068 LICENSE INELIGIBILITY.
   The following shall be grounds for denying a license under this subchapter:
   (A)   The failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of having
obtained any required county license;
   (B)   The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the
information requested by the city as a part of the application, or the failure
to sign the application, or the failure to pay the required fee at the time of
application;
   (C)   The conviction of the applicant within the past five years from the
date of application for any violation of any federal or state statute or
regulation, or of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects on the person’s
ability to conduct the business for which the license is being sought in an
honest and legal manner. Those violations shall include, but not be limited to,
burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, and
any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person;
   (D)   The revocation within the past five years of any license issued to the
applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor, or
transient merchant; and
   (E)   The applicant is found to have a bad business reputation. Evidence of
a bad business reputation shall include, but not be limited to, the existence
of more than three complaints against the applicant with the Better Business
Bureau, the Attorney General’s office, or other similar business or consumer
rights office or agency, within the preceding 12 months, or three complaints
filed against the applicant within the preceding five years.
(Prior Code, § 113.04)
§ 115.069 LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Generally. Any license issued under this subchapter may be suspended
or revoked at the discretion of the City Council for violation of any of the
following:
      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statements on the
application form;
      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements made during the
course of the licensed activity;
      (3)   Conviction of any offense for which granting of a license could
have been denied under §
115.068; and/or
      (4)   Violation of any provision of this chapter.
   (B)   Multiple persons under one license. The suspension or revocation of
any license issued for the purpose of authorizing multiple persons to conduct
business as peddlers or transient merchants on behalf of the licensee shall
serve as a suspension or revocation of each authorized person’s authority to
conduct business as a peddler or transient merchant on behalf of the licensee
whose license is suspended or revoked.
   (C)   Notice. Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued under this
subchapter, the city shall provide the license holder with written notice of
the alleged violations and inform the licensee of his or her right to a hearing
on the alleged violation. Notice shall be delivered in person or by mail to the
permanent residential address listed on the license application, or if no
residential address is listed, to the business address provided on the license
application.
   (D)   Public hearing. Upon receiving the notice provided in division (C)
above, the licensee shall have the right to request a public hearing. If no
request for a hearing is received by the City Manager or designee within ten
regular business days following the service of the notice, the city may proceed
with the suspension or revocation. For the purpose of mailed notices, service
shall be considered complete as of the date the notice is placed in the mail.
If a public hearing is requested within the stated time frame, a hearing shall
be scheduled within 20 days from the date of the request. Within three regular
business days of the hearing, the City Council shall notify the licensee of its
decision.
   (E)   Emergency. If, in the discretion of the City Council, imminent harm to
the health or safety of the public may occur because of the actions of a
peddler or transient merchant licensed under this chapter, the City Council may
immediately suspend the person’s license and provide notice of the right to
hold a subsequent public hearing as prescribed in division (C) above.
   (F)   Appeals. Any person whose license is suspended or revoked under this
section shall have the right to appeal that decision in court.
(Prior Code, § 113.05) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.070 LICENSE TRANSFERABILITY.
   No license issued under this subchapter shall be transferred to any person
other than the person to whom the license was issued.
(Prior Code, § 113.06) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.071 REGISTRATION.
   All solicitors, and any person exempt from the licensing requirements of
this subchapter under §
115.067, shall be required to register with the city. Persons engaging in door-
to-door advocacy shall not be required to register. The term DOOR-TO-DOOR
ADVOCACY includes door-to-door canvassing and pamphleteering as vehicles for
the dissemination of religious, political and other ideas. Registration shall
be made on the same form required for a license application, but no fee shall
be required. Immediately upon completion of the registration form, the City
Manager or designee shall issue to the registrant a certificate of registration
as proof of the registration. Certificates of registration shall be
nontransferable.
(Prior Code, § 113.07) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.072 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall conduct business in any
of the following manners:
   (A)   Calling attention to his or her business or items to be sold by means
of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out, or by any other
noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed structure;
   (B)   Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on
any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way;
   (C)   Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the health,
safety, and welfare of any individual or the general public;
   (D)   Conducting business before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.;
   (E)   Failing to provide proof of license or registration, and
identification, when requested; or using the license or registration of another
person;
   (F)   Making any false or misleading statements about the product or service
being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement. No peddler, solicitor,
or transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the city solely
based on the city having issued a license or certificate of registration to
that person; and/or
   (G)   Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave, or to
otherwise conduct business in a manner a reasonable person would find obscene,
threatening, intimidating, or abusive.
(Prior Code, § 113.08) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.073 EXCLUSION BY PLACARD.
   No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant, unless invited to do so by the
property owner or tenant, shall enter the property of another for the purpose
of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant when the
property is marked with a sign or placard at least four inches long and four
inches wide with print of at least 48-point in size stating “No Peddlers,
Solicitors, or Transient Merchants,” or “Peddlers, Solicitors, and Transient
Merchants Prohibited,” or other comparable statement. No person other than the
property owner or tenant shall remove, deface, or otherwise tamper with any
sign or placard under this section.
(Prior Code, § 113.09) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1) Any licensee found to have violated §§
115.001 through 115.013, or whose employee violated §§
115.001 through 115.013, will be charged an administrative fine of $200 for a
first violation; $500 for a second offense at the same licensed premises within
a 24-month period; and $750 for a third or subsequent offense at the same
location within a 24-month period. Upon the third violation, the license will
be suspended for a period of not less than 30 consecutive days. Upon a fourth
violation, the license will be revoked.
      (2)   Individuals, other than persons under the age of 21 regulated by
division (B)(3) below, who are found to be in violation of §§
115.001 through 115.013 shall be charged an administrative fine of $50.
      (3)   Persons under the age of 21 who use a false identification to
purchase, or attempt to purchase, licensed products may only be subject to non-
criminal, nonmonetary civil penalties such as tobacco-related education
classes, diversion programs, community services, or another penalty that the
city determines to be appropriate. The city will consult with court personnel,
educators, parents, children, and other interested parties to determine an
appropriate penalty for persons under the age of 21 in the city. The penalty
may be established by ordinance and amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 111.055)
CHAPTER 116: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
Regulations
   
116.01   Definitions
   
116.02   Off-sale limited to municipal liquor stores
   
116.03   License required
   
116.04   License types
   
116.05   License application; renewal
   
116.06   Consideration of application; public hearing
   
116.07   Fees
   
116.08   Persons ineligible for license
   
116.09   Places ineligible for a license
   
116.10   General restrictions; conditions of sale
   
116.11   Special requirements for the on-sale of 3.2% malt liquor
   
116.12   Special requirements for the on-sale of wine, intoxicating malt
liquor, and intoxicating liquor
   
116.13   Restrictions on transfer of license
   
116.14   Violations
   
116.15   Limit on number of on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses
   
116.16   Incorporation by reference
Municipal Liquor
   
116.30   Definitions
   
116.31   Stores established
   
116.32   Location and operation
   
116.33   Liquor Fund
   
116.34   Hours of operation
   
116.35   Operation and restrictions
REGULATIONS
§ 116.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   3.2% MALT LIQUOR. Any potable beverage with an alcoholic content of more
than one-half of 1% by volume and not more than 3.2% by weight.
   BAR. A table or counter where alcohol is stored or prepared and served to
customers who sit or stand at the bar.
   COMMISSIONER. The State Commissioner of Public Safety.
   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment providing for table service or self-
service of food or beverages.
   HOTEL. An establishment where food and lodging are regularly furnished to
transients and which has a dining room serving the general public at tables and
having facilities for seating at least 30 guests at one time, and at least 50
guest rooms.
   INTOXICATING LIQUOR. Ethyl alcohol and distilled, fermented, spirituous,
vinous, and malt beverages containing in excess of 3.2% of alcohol by weight.
   INTOXICATING MALT LIQUOR. Any beer, ale, or other beverage made from malt by
fermentation and containing more than 3.2% of alcohol by weight.
   LICENSE. A license granted pursuant to this subchapter.
   LICENSED PREMISES. The area shown in the license application as the place
where wine or liquor will be served or consumed.
   LIQUOR. Three-point-two percent malt liquor, intoxicating liquor, and
intoxicating malt liquor.
   MEAL. Entrees and sandwiches offered on a restaurant menu.
   OFF-SALE. Retail sale in the original package for consumption away from the
premises only.
   ON-SALE. Sale for consumption on the premises only.
   ORIGINAL PACKAGE. Any container or receptacle holding liquor, in which the
liquor is corked or sealed at the place of manufacture.
   RESTAURANT. An establishment, under control of a single proprietor or
manager, having appropriate facilities for serving meals and where, in
consideration of payment, meals are regularly served at tables to the general
public, and which employs an adequate staff to provide the usual and suitable
service to its guests, and which has a seating capacity for not fewer than 30
guests at one time.
   SALE, SELL, SOLD. All barters, exchanges, gifts, sales, and other means used
to obtain, dispose of, or furnish any liquor or wine or any other beverage,
directly or indirectly, as part of a commercial transaction, in violation or
evasion of the provisions of this subchapter, but does not include sales by
state licensed liquor wholesalers selling to licensed retailers.
   STATE COMMISSIONER OF PUBLIC SAFETY. Individual that leads the Department of
Public Safety for the state.
   STATE ESTABLISHED LEGAL DRINKING AGE. For purposes of this subchapter, the
STATE ESTABLISHED LEGAL AGE for consumption of liquor and wine is 21 years of
age.
   WINE. Vinous beverage created by fermentation.
(Prior Code, § 112.01)
§ 116.02 OFF-SALE LIMITED TO MUNICIPAL LIQUOR STORES.
   No intoxicating liquor, intoxicating malt liquor, or wine shall be sold, or
caused to be sold, at off-sale within the city by any person, or by any store
or establishment, or by any agent or employee of the person, store, or
establishment, except by the city and on the premises in the city occupied by
the municipal stores for off-sale of liquor.
(Prior Code, § 112.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 116.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person, except wholesalers or manufacturers to the extent authorized by
law, directly or indirectly, upon any pretense or by any device, shall sell at
off-sale any 3.2% malt liquor or at on-sale any 3.2% malt liquor, intoxicating
malt liquor, wine, or intoxicating liquor without first having obtained a
license except that a license shall not be required for any sales at the
municipal stores for the on-sale and off-sale of liquor established by §
116.10.
(Prior Code, § 112.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 116.04 LICENSE TYPES.
   Licenses shall be of eight types:
   (A)   On-sale intoxicating liquor license. Permits the on-sale of liquor and
wine at qualifying hotels and restaurants. A qualifying hotel with multiple
points of liquor sale and service within the hotel may operate under a single
on-sale intoxicating liquor license provided that the sale of food and liquor
is under the exclusive ownership and control of the licensee. Any restaurant or
other facility serving liquor within a hotel which operates under separate
ownership or control shall be considered a distinct entity for purposes of this
subchapter;
   (B)   Off-sale 3.2% malt liquor license. Permits the off-sale of 3.2% malt
liquor at certain retail establishments;
   (C)   On-sale 3.2% malt liquor license. Permits the on-sale of 3.2% malt
liquor at certain retail establishments;
   (D)   Wine license. Permits the on-sale of wine at qualifying hotels and
restaurants;
   (E)   Temporary on-sale 3.2% malt liquor license. Permits the on-sale of
3.2% malt liquor at events sponsored by certain organizations. Not more than
three licenses shall be issued to any one organization in a 12-month period
with at least 30 days between issue dates. Each license shall be issued for not
more than three consecutive days;
   (F)   Temporary wine license. Permits the on-sale of wine at events
sponsored by certain organizations. Not more than three licenses shall be
issued to any one organization in a 12-month period with at least 30 days
between issue dates. Each license shall be issued for not more than three
consecutive days. A temporary wine license may provide that the licensee may
contract for wine catering services with the holder of an on-sale intoxicating
liquor license or the holder of a full-year on-sale intoxicating liquor license
issued by another municipality;
   (G)   Sunday on-sale license. Permits the on-sale of intoxicating liquor on
Sunday. Only persons holding an on-sale intoxicating liquor license may hold a
Sunday on-sale license; and
   (H)   Combination on-sale wine and on-sale 3.2% malt liquor license. A
holder of an on-sale wine license issued pursuant to this subchapter, who is
also licensed to sell 3.2% malt liquor pursuant to state statute, and gross
receipts are at least 60% attributable to the sale of food, and holds a liquor
liability insurance policy, may sell intoxicating malt liquor on-sale without
an additional license.
(Prior Code, § 112.04)
§ 116.05 LICENSE APPLICATION; RENEWAL.
   (A)   An application for any license required by this subchapter or the
renewal of an existing license shall be made on forms provided by the City
Manager or designee. The provisions of §§
111.01 through
111.14 shall apply to all licenses required by this subchapter, and to the
holders of the licenses, except that licenses and renewals shall be granted or
denied in accordance with §
116.06. All applications shall be accompanied by the fees set forth in §
116.07. Every license issued under this subchapter shall expire at 12:01 a.m.
on March 15 following its date of issuance. Renewal applications shall be
submitted at least 60 days but not more than 150 days before expiration of the
license. If, in the judgment of the City Council as to off-sale and on-sale
licenses, good and sufficient cause for the applicant’s failure to apply for a
renewal within the time provided is shown, the City Council, may, if the other
provisions of this subchapter are complied with, grant the license.
   (B)   In addition to the application requirements provided in §§
111.01 through
111.14, applicants shall also provide the following:
      (1)   The type of license the applicant seeks;
      (2)   A description of the type of business to be transacted on the
licensed premises;
      (3)   Proof of financial responsibility with regard to liability imposed
by M.S. § 340A.801, as it may be amended from time to time, in the manner and
to the extent required by M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to
time. If the applicant claims exemption from the requirements of the statute,
proof of exemption shall be established by affidavit given by the applicant in
form and substance acceptable to the City Manager or designee;
      (4)   All forms and information required by the Chief of Police, the
State Department of Public Safety, and the State Department of Revenue;
      (5)   Any affidavits of the applicant as required by the City Manager or
designee, on forms provided by the City Manager or designee, in support of the
application;
      (6)   Authorization to release information obtained in connection with
the application;
      (7)   A statement signed by the applicant stating that he or she has
reviewed and understands the pertinent provisions of this subchapter and state
law;
      (8)   In the case of an application for a wine license, or on-sale
intoxicating liquor license, the applicant shall provide evidence satisfactory
to the City Manager or designee as to compliance with the requirements of §
116.12 as to the completion of an alcohol awareness program;
      (9)   In the case of an application for a wine license or on-sale
intoxicating liquor license, the applicant shall provide evidence satisfactory
to the City Manager or designee as to compliance with the requirements of §
116.12 as to the percentage of food sold on the licensed premises. This
requirement shall be established by an affidavit of the licensee on a form
provided by the City Manager or designee. The affidavit shall be given with
each application for issuance or renewal on a wine license or an on-sale
intoxicating liquor license, or at other times as the City Manager or designee
may request. If the application is for the renewal of a wine license or an on-
sale intoxicating liquor license, the affidavit shall also include the actual
percentage of gross receipts attributable to the sale of food during the
immediately preceding 12-month period. The City Manager or designee shall
require that any such affidavit be verified and confirmed, on a form provided
by the City Manager or designee, by a certified public accountant. Failure or
refusal of a licensee to give the affidavit with the application, or on request
of the City Manager or designee, or any false statement in any such affidavit,
shall be grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation of all licenses held by
the licensee;
      (10)   In the case of an application for a temporary on-sale 3.2% malt
liquor license or temporary wine license, the applicant shall provide evidence
satisfactory to the City Manager or designee that the applicant complies with
the requirements of §
116.08 as to being a qualified corporation or organization; and
      (11)   Any other information deemed necessary by the City Manager or
designee to undertake consideration of the application.
(Prior Code, § 112.05)
§ 116.06 CONSIDERATION OF APPLICATION; PUBLIC HEARING.
   The provisions of §§
111.01 through
111.14 shall apply to all licenses required by §
116.04 and to the holders of the licenses, provided that all licenses shall be
granted or denied by the City Council and the Department of Public Safety, if
required by state law. The City Council shall conduct a public hearing on the
application for a new on-sale intoxicating liquor license within a reasonable
period following receipt of a complete application and completion of the
investigation required by §
116.05. A notice of the date, time, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be
published once in the official newspaper not less than ten days before the date
of the hearing. After hearing the oral and written views of all interested
persons, the City Council shall make its decision at the same meeting or at a
specified future meeting. No hearing shall be required for the renewal or the
transfer of an on-sale intoxicating liquor license.
(Prior Code, § 112.06)
§ 116.07 FEES.
   (A)   Application fee. The annual license application fee shall be the
amount set forth in Chapter 33. When a new wine license or on-sale intoxicating
liquor license is issued for a portion of a year, the annual license
application fee shall be prorated at the rate of one-twelfth of the license fee
per month or portion of a month remaining in the license year at the time of
application. The annual license application fee for a wine license or for an
on-sale intoxicating liquor license may be refunded, less costs incurred by the
city as determined by the City Manager or designee, in the event that the
application is withdrawn by the applicant or denied by the City Council.
   (B)   Refunds. A monthly pro-rata share of the annual license fee for a wine
license or an on-sale intoxicating liquor license issued pursuant to this
subchapter may be refunded, less the cost of issuance as determined by the City
Manager or designee, if:
      (1)   The business permanently ceases to operate;
      (2)   The license is transferred to a new licensee in accordance with §
116.13, and the city receives a license fee for the remainder of the license
term from the transferee; or
      (3)   A premises licensed to sell wine receives an on-sale intoxicating
liquor license prior to the expiration of the wine license. In this instance, a
pro-rata share of the wine license fee may be refunded.
   (C)   Investigation fees. Upon application for a new or the transfer of an
existing wine license, on-sale intoxicating liquor license, on-sale 3.2% malt
liquor license, or off-sale 3.2% malt liquor license, the applicant shall
deposit $500 with the city for the investigation fee. If the investigation
requires an out-of-state investigation, an additional $2,000 shall be deposited
before further processing of the application by the city. The City Manager or
designee may from time to time require the deposit of additional investigation
fees up to the limits provided herein before further processing of the
application if the cost of investigation exceeds the amounts previously
deposited. The cost of the investigation shall be based on the expense
involved, but in no event shall it exceed $500 if the investigation is limited
to the state or $10,000 if outside the state. All deposited monies not expended
on the investigation shall be refunded to the applicant. All investigative
expenses incurred in excess of the deposit shall be paid prior to consideration
of the license application by the City Council. Investigation fees for license
renewal shall not exceed $200 unless there is a change of ownership of more
than 10% cumulatively over the then existing license period.
(Prior Code, § 112.07)
§ 116.08 PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   The following restrictions apply to any applicant who is a natural
person, a general partner if the applicant is a partnership, or a corporate
officer if the applicant is a corporation.
   (B)   No license shall be granted to:
      (1)   Any manufacturer, brewer, or wholesaler as defined in M.S. §
340A.101, as it may be amended from time to time, or any manufacturer of 3.2%
malt liquor, or to any person who has a financial interest, directly or
indirectly, in the manufacturer, brewer, or wholesaler;
      (2)   Any person under the state established legal drinking age;
      (3)   Any person convicted of any willful violation of any law of the
United States or any provision of state law or this code with regard to the
manufacture, sale, or distribution of liquor;
      (4)   Any person not eligible under M.S. § 340A.402, as it may be amended
from time to time, or the regulations of the Department of Public Safety;
      (5)   Any person who has:
         (a)   Been convicted, within the five years prior to the application
for a license, of any violation of any law of the United States, the state, or
any other state or territory, or of any local ordinance with regard to: the
manufacture, sale, distribution, or possession for sale or distribution of
intoxicating liquor or other controlled substances as defined by state statute;
gambling; theft; or vice; or
         (b)   Had an intoxicating liquor license, including a wine on-sale
license, revoked for any violation of any statutes, ordinances, or regulations
relating to the manufacture, sale, distribution, or possession of liquor or
wine.
      (6)   Any person who has applied for or holds a federal wholesale or
retail liquor dealer’s special stamp or a federal or state gambling or gaming
stamp or license;
      (7)   Any person who is an employee or elected official of the city;
      (8)   Any person who has falsified any information given either in the
application or in the process of investigation;
      (9)   Any person who, upon renewal, has been found in violation of any
provision of this subchapter or applicable state law;
      (10)   If an individual, any person who is not a U.S. citizen or resident
alien;
      (11)   Any person who is financially indebted to a person who is
disqualified under this section;
      (12)   If for a temporary on-sale 3.2% malt liquor license, any person
who is not a charitable, religious, or other nonprofit corporation or
organization in existence at least three years. No corporation or organization
shall be granted more than three licenses in a 12-month period and there shall
be at least 30 days between the license issue dates; and
      (13)   If for a temporary wine license, any person who is not a
charitable, religious, or other nonprofit corporation or organization in
existence at least three years. No corporation or organization shall be granted
more than three licenses in a 12-month period and there shall be at least 30
days between the license issue dates.
(Prior Code, § 112.08)
§ 116.09 PLACES INELIGIBLE FOR A LICENSE.
   (A)   General restrictions. No off-sale or on-sale license shall be granted
or renewed for:
      (1)   Any property on which taxes, assessments, or other financial claims
of the state, county, or city are due, delinquent, or unpaid;
      (2)   Any property on which the business is to be conducted is owned by a
person who is ineligible for a license pursuant to §
116.08;
      (3)   Any property located within 300 feet of a place of worship or an
elementary, junior high or senior high school having a regular course of study
accredited by the state. A location which holds a license under this subchapter
shall not be declared ineligible for license renewal or transfer due to a place
of worship or school that was newly located in its proximity after license
issuance. The provisions of this division (A)(3) shall not apply to temporary
on-sale 3.2% malt liquor licenses or temporary wine licenses;
      (4)   Any property where a license issued under this subchapter has been
revoked during the preceding year unless the issuance of the license is
unanimously approved by the City Council then present;
      (5)   Any property where the conduct of the business is prohibited by
Chapter 154;
      (6)   Any property not eligible under M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be
amended from time to time, and the regulations of the Department of Public
Safety; and/or
      (7)   Any property used as a sexually-oriented business as defined by
Chapter 110.
   (B)   Off-sale 3.2% malt liquor licenses. In addition to the requirements of
division (A) above, no off-sale 3.2% malt liquor license shall be granted to
any theater, recreation establishment, public dancing place, or establishment
holding any on-sale license.
   (C)   On-sale 3.2% malt liquor licenses. In addition to the requirements of
division (A) above, no on-sale 3.2% malt liquor license shall be granted for
establishments other than restaurants, golf courses, bowling centers, and
hotels. The provisions of this division (C) do not apply to temporary on-sale
3.2% malt liquor licenses.
   (D)   Wine licenses. In addition to the requirements of division (A) above,
no wine license shall be granted to any establishment other than a restaurant
located in the Commercial or golf courses located in the Recreation/Open Space
R/O District.
   (E)   On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses. In addition to the requirements
of division (A) above, no on-sale intoxicating liquor license shall be granted
to any establishment other than a restaurant or hotel located in the Commercial
District or golf courses located in the Recreation/Open Space R/O District.
(Prior Code, § 112.09) (Ord. 2019-06, passed 5-28-2019)
§ 116.10 GENERAL RESTRICTIONS; CONDITIONS OF SALE.
   (A)   Conduct. Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of the
licensee’s place of business and shall maintain conditions of sobriety and
order.
   (B)   Age. No wine or liquor shall be sold to any person under the state
established legal drinking age, or to an intoxicated person, directly or
indirectly.
   (C)   Underage workers. No person under the age of 18 shall serve or sell
liquor or wine.
   (D)   Gambling and prostitution. No licensee shall keep, possess, or
operate, or permit the keeping, possession, or operation on the licensed
premises, or in any room adjoining the licensed premises controlled by the
licensee, any slot machines, dice, or other gambling equipment as defined in
M.S. § 349.30, as it may be amended from time to time, nor permit any gambling
therein, nor permit the licensed premises or any room in the same or in any
adjoining building, directly or indirectly under licensee’s control, to be used
as a resort for prostitutes or other disorderly persons; provided, however,
that lawful gambling may be carried on if allowed by this code and where
allowed by a license issued pursuant to M.S. Chapter 349, as it may be amended
from time to time, or this code.
   (E)   Manufacturer or distiller of malt liquor. No equipment or fixture in
any licensed place shall be owned in whole or in part by any manufacturer or
brewer, as defined in M.S. § 340A.101, as it may be amended from time to time,
of wine or liquor.
   (F)   Open to inspection. All licensed premises shall be open to inspection
by any police officer or other designated officer or employee of the city at
any time there are persons within the licensed premises.
   (G)   Hours of sale. The hours and days of sale shall be as set forth in
M.S. § 340A.504, as it may be amended from time to time, except that:
      (1)   Establishments holding a wine license or an on-sale intoxicating
liquor license under this subchapter may not sell liquor or wine between 1:00
a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the days of Monday through Saturday and after 1:00 a.m.
on Sundays, except as provided by division (G)(2) below; and
      (2)   Establishments holding a wine license under this subchapter or
establishments holding both an on-sale intoxicating liquor license and a Sunday
on-sale license under this subchapter may sell intoxicating liquor or wine in
conjunction with the sale of food between the hours of 8:00 a.m. Sundays and 1:
00 a.m. on Mondays, provided that the licensee is in conformance with the
state’s Clean Air Act, being M.S. §§ 144.411 et seq., as they may be amended
from time to time.
   (H)   Hours of consumption. No liquor or wine shall be consumed by any
person on, in, or about a licensed premises more than 30 minutes following the
time established by this section for cessation of the sale of wine or liquor.
   (I)   No liquor or wine in non-licensed food establishments. Except as
permitted by a license issued pursuant to this subchapter, no person shall take
or carry any wine or liquor into any food establishment.
   (J)   Mixing or sale for mixing prohibited. Except as permitted by a license
issued pursuant to this subchapter, no person shall mix with liquor or wine, or
sell for the purpose of mixing with liquor or wine, any soft drink, other
liquor, or beverage in any food establishment.
   (K)   Illegal to permit mixing. Except as permitted by a license issued
pursuant to this subchapter, no person shall consume, or permit the
consumption, mixing, or spiking of any beverage by adding to the same any
liquor, in any building or place operated as a food establishment. The fact
that any person in any food establishment, sold any liquid or beverage to a
person who thereupon and therein added to the liquid or beverage any liquor or
wine shall be prima facie evidence that the liquid or beverage was sold by the
person for the purpose of adding liquor or wine and shall be prima facie
evidence that the person and the person’s employer permitted the mixing or
spiking of the liquid by adding wine or liquor.
   (L)   Bottle clubs prohibited. Except as permitted by a license issued
pursuant to this subchapter, establishments or clubs that directly or
indirectly allow the consumption or display of wine or liquor, or knowingly
serve any liquid for the purpose of mixing with liquor or wine, shall be
prohibited. Permits for bottle clubs issued by the Department of Public Safety
under M.S. § 340A.414, as it may be amended from time to time, shall not be
approved by the City Council.
   (M)   Posting of license. A license issued under this subchapter shall be
posted in a conspicuous place in the licensed premises.
   (N)   Compact and contiguous premises. A license issued under this
subchapter is only effective for the compact and contiguous space specified in
the approved license application. No sales or consumption of wine or liquor
shall be permitted beyond the licensed premises. The licensed premises shall
not be increased in size or seating capacity during the then license period.
   (O)   Sobriety and order. A licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of
business being operated and shall maintain conditions of sobriety and order.
   (P)   Adult entertainment prohibited. The findings, purpose, and objectives
of Chapter 110 are hereby incorporated by reference. No licensee shall permit
any specified sexual activities, the presentation or display of any specified
anatomical areas or the conduct of a sexually-oriented business all as defined
by Chapter 154 on the licensed premises or in areas adjoining the licensed
premises where the activities or the conduct of such a business can be seen by
patrons of the licensed premises.
   (Q)   State law. All applicable provisions of state law shall be complied
with in connection with the sale of wine and liquor.
(Prior Code, § 112.10) (Ord. 2016-03, passed 5-24-2016) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 116.11 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR THE ON-SALE OF 3.2% MALT LIQUOR.
   In addition to the requirements imposed by §
116.10, the following special requirements apply to the on-sale of 3.2% malt
liquor.
   (A)   Place of serving and consumption. Three-point-two percent malt liquor
sold pursuant to an on-sale 3.2% malt liquor license shall be served and
consumed at tables in the dining or refreshment room on the licensed premises
and shall not be consumed or served at bars; provided, the same may be consumed
or served at the following locations:
      (1)   At counters where food is regularly served and consumed;
      (2)   On decks, patios, and other outdoor dining areas which are adjacent
to the licensed premises; and
      (3)   On the grounds of a golf course.
   (B)   Temporary licenses. The provisions of division (A) above do not apply
to 3.2% malt liquor sold pursuant to a temporary 3.2% malt liquor license.
(Prior Code, § 112.11) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 116.12 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR THE ON-SALE OF WINE, INTOXICATING MALT
LIQUOR, AND INTOXICATING LIQUOR.
   In addition to the requirements of §
116.10, the following special requirements apply to the sale of wine,
intoxicating malt liquor, and intoxicating liquor sold pursuant to a wine
license or an on-sale intoxicating liquor license issued in accordance with
this subchapter.
   (A)   Licensed premises. The licensed premises must:
      (1)   Have an exclusive entrance from and exit to the exterior of the
building in which the licensed premises is located or to a public concourse or
public lobby, and have a physical barrier separating the licensed premises from
other areas so as to prevent the passing of patrons other than through the
required entrances and exits;
      (2)   Have adequate space for the storage, preparation, and handling or
service of food, wine, and liquor; and
      (3)   The premises shall not have more than 15% of its seating capacity
located at a bar or service counter.
   (B)   Alcohol awareness training.
      (1)   Within 30 days following the issuance of a new wine license or a
new on-sale intoxicating liquor license, not less than 75% of the employees
authorized to serve or sell wine or liquor on the licensed premises shall have
completed an alcohol awareness program approved by the Chief of Police.
      (2)   Not less than 75% of the employees authorized to serve or sell wine
or liquor on the licensed premises must complete an alcohol awareness program
approved by the Chief of Police within 90 days prior to an application for
license renewal for a wine license or a on-sale intoxicating liquor license.
   (C)   Percentage of food sold. Not less than 50% of the restaurant’s or
hotel’s gross receipts from the combined sale of food, non-alcoholic beverages,
wine, and liquor, on an annual basis, shall be attributable to the sale of food
and non-alcoholic beverages.
   (D)   Limit of alcohol strength. No wine over 14% alcohol by volume may be
sold or consumed on a premises holding a wine license.
   (E)   Denied sales or consumption. No sales or consumption of wine or liquor
shall be permitted beyond the licensed premises.
   (F)   Container volume restrictions. Wine may not be sold, served, or
consumed in containers larger in volume than one liter.
   (G)   Diluting, changing, or tampering with wine or liquor prohibited. No
licensee shall sell, offer for sale, or keep for sale, wine or liquor in any
original package that has been refilled or partly refilled. No licensee shall
directly, or through any other person, dilute, or in any manner tamper with,
the contents of any original package so as to change its composition or
alcoholic content while in the original package. Possession on the premises by
the licensee of any wine in the original package differing in composition,
alcoholic content, or type from the wine received from the manufacturer or
wholesaler from whom it was purchased shall be prima facie evidence that the
contents of the original package have been diluted, changed, or tampered with.
   (H)   Sales in hotels. No sale of wine or liquor shall be made to or in
guest rooms of hotels unless:
      (1)   The rules of the hotel provide for the service of meals in guest
rooms;
      (2)   The sale of the wine and liquor is made in the manner which
conforms to the requirements of §
116.12;
      (3)   The sale is incidental to the regular service of meals to guests in
their rooms; and
      (4)   The rules of the hotel and the description, location, and number of
the guest rooms are fully set out in the license application.
(Prior Code, § 112.12) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 116.13 RESTRICTIONS ON TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   (A)   No license shall be transferred to any person or premises by the
person or from the premises to whom and for which the license was granted, by
any means whatsoever, including, without limitation, devise or descent or
involuntarily by the operation of law, without the person and premises to whom
and to which the license is to be transferred having first submitted an
application containing all of the information required in an original
application, and complying with all requirements for an original license, and
receiving the approval of the City Council, and where required, the Department
of Public Safety. Any change in the persons named in the original application
or any change in the information in the original application shall be deemed a
transfer for the purposes of this subchapter.
   (B)   Provided, however, the following changes shall not be deemed a
transfer:
      (1)   A change in the ownership of a limited partnership comprising 10%
or less cumulatively of the limited partnership during the then license period;
      (2)   A change in ownership of a corporation comprising 10% or less
cumulatively of the stock owners during the then license period; or
      (3)   A change in one of the corporation’s officers during the term of
the then license. Provided, however, the corporation shall give notice of a
change in officer to the City Manager or designee, and the new officer shall
comply with all requirements of this section and §§
111.01 through
111.14.
(Prior Code, § 112.13)
§ 116.14 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Compliance checks and inspections. All licensed premises shall be open
to inspection by the Police Department or other authorized city official during
regular business hours. At least once per year, the city shall conduct
compliance checks by engaging persons over the age of 18 and less than 21
years, to enter the licensed premises to attempt to purchase intoxicating or
3.2% malt liquor. Persons used for the purpose of compliance checks shall be
supervised by city designated law enforcement officers or other designated city
personnel. Persons used for compliance checks shall not be guilty of unlawful
possession of intoxicating or 3.2% malt liquor when the items are obtained as a
part of the compliance check. No person used in compliance checks shall attempt
to use a false identification misrepresenting the person’s age, and all minors
lawfully engaged in a compliance check shall answer all questions about the
person’s age asked by the licensee or the licensee’s employee and shall produce
any identification, if any exists, for which the person is asked. Nothing in
this subchapter shall prohibit compliance checks authorized by state or federal
laws for educational, research, or training purposes, or required for the
enforcement of a particular state or federal law.
   (B)   Hearing notice for revocation or suspension of license. Revocation or
suspension of a license by the City Council shall be preceded by public hearing
conducted in accordance with M.S. §§ 14.57 through 14.69, as they may be
amended from time to time. The City Council may appoint a hearing examiner or
may conduct a hearing itself. The hearing notice shall be given at least ten
days prior to the hearing, include notice of the time and place of the hearing,
and state the nature of the charges against the licensee.
   (C)   Grounds for revocation or suspension of license. The City Council may
suspend or revoke any license for the sale of intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt
liquor for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   False or misleading statements made on a license application or
renewal, or failure to abide by the commitments, promises, or representations
made to the City Council;
      (2)   Violation of any special conditions under which the license was
granted, including, but not limited to, the timely payment of real estate
taxes, and all other charges;
      (3)   Violation of any federal, state, or local law regulating the sale
of intoxicating liquor, 3.2% malt liquor, or controlled substance;
      (4)   Creation of a nuisance on the premises or in the surrounding area;
      (5)   That the licensee suffered or permitted illegal acts upon the
licensed premises or on property owned or controlled by the licensee adjacent
to the licensed premises, unrelated to the sale of intoxicating liquor or 3.2%
malt liquor;
      (6)   That the licensee had knowledge of illegal acts upon or
attributable to the licensed premises, but failed to report the same to the
police;
      (7)   Expiration or cancellation of any required insurance, or failure to
notify the city within a reasonable time of changes in the term of the
insurance or the carriers; and/or
      (8)   Failure of an establishment granted a license to exhibit
satisfactory progress toward completion of construction within six months from
its issuance, or failure of an establishment to operate for a period of six
months. A hearing shall be held to determine what progress has been made toward
opening or reopening the establishment and, if satisfactory progress is not
demonstrated, the City Council may revoke the license.
   (D)   Presumptive civil penalties. The purpose of this section is to
establish a standard by which the City Council determines the length of license
suspensions and the propriety of revocations, and shall apply to all premises
licensed under this chapter. These penalties are presumed to be appropriate for
every case; however, the City Council may deviate in an individual case where
the City Council finds that there exist substantial reasons making it more
appropriate to deviate, such as, but not limited to, a licensee’s efforts in
combination with the state or city to prevent the sale of alcohol to minors.
When deviating from these standards, the City Council will provide written
findings that support the penalty selected.
      (1)   The minimum penalties for convictions or violations must be
presumed as follows (unless specified, numbers below indicate consecutive days’
suspensions):
Type of Violation Appearance
                  First Second Third Fourth
Type of Violation                     Appearance
                                      First      Second   Third      Fourth
After hours display or consumption of $500       Six days 18 days    Revocation
liquor
After hours sale of liquor            $500       Six days 18 days    Revocation
Commission of a felony related to the Revocation N/A      N/A        N/A
licensed activity
Failure to take reasonable steps to
stop person from leaving premises     $500       Six days 18 days    Revocation
with liquor (does not apply to off-
sale 3.2% malt liquor license)
Illegal gambling on premises          $500       Six days 18 days    Revocation
Refusal to allow city inspectors or   $500       15 days  Revocation
police admissions to inspect premises
Sale of liquor to obviously           $500       Six days 18 days    Revocation
intoxicated person
Sale of liquor to underage persons    $500       Six days Revocation N/A
Sale of intoxicating liquor where     Revocation N/A      N/A        N/A
only license is for 3.2% malt liquor
Sale of liquor while license is under Revocation N/A      N/A        N/A
suspension
 
      (2)   The City Council may impose a three-day suspension for failure to
pay the required fine on the first appearance.
   (E)   Multiple violations. At a licensee’s first appearance before the City
Council, the court must act upon all of the violations that have been alleged
in the notice sent to the licensee. The City Council in that case must consider
the presumptive penalty for each violation under the first appearance column in
division (D) above. The occurrence of multiple violations is grounds for
deviation from the presumed penalties in the City Council’s discretion.
   (F)   Subsequent violations. Violations occurring after the notice of
hearing has been mailed, but prior to the hearing, must be treated as a
separate violation and dealt with as a second appearance before the City
Council, unless the City Manager or designee and licensee agree in writing to
add the violation to the first appearance. The same procedure applies to a
second, third, or fourth appearance before the City Council.
   (G)   Subsequent appearances. Upon a second, third, or fourth appearance
before the City Council by the same licensee, the City Council must impose the
presumptive penalty for the violation or violations giving rise to the
subsequent appearance without regard to the particular violation or violations
that were the subject of the first or prior appearance. However, the City
Council may consider the amount of time elapsed between appearances as a basis
for deviating from the presumptive penalty imposed by this subchapter.
   (H)   Computation of appearances. After the first appearance, a subsequent
appearance by the same licensee will be determined as follows.
      (1)   If the first appearance was within 18 months of the current
violation, the current violation will be treated as a second appearance.
      (2)   If a licensee has appeared before the City Council on two previous
occasions, and the current violation occurred within 30 months of the first
appearance, the current violation will be treated as a third appearance.
      (3)   If a licensee has appeared before the City Council on three
previous occasions, and the current violation occurred within 42 months of the
first appearance, the current violation will be treated as a fourth appearance.
      (4)   Any appearance not covered by divisions (H)(1), (H)(2), or (H)(3)
above will be treated as a first appearance.
   (I)   Other penalties. Nothing in this section shall restrict or limit the
authority of the City Council to suspend up to 60 days, revoke the license, or
impose a civil fine not to exceed $2,000 for each violation, to impose
conditions, or impose any combination of the foregoing sanctions, or take any
other action in accordance with law; provided, that the license holder has been
afforded an opportunity for a hearing in the manner provided for in this
section.
(Prior Code, § 112.14)
§ 116.15 LIMIT ON NUMBER OF ON-SALE INTOXICATING LIQUOR LICENSES.
   At any one time, there shall not be more than four on-sale intoxicating
liquor licenses issued by the city.
(Prior Code, § 112.15) (Ord. 2015-03, passed - -)
§ 116.16 INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE.
   The provisions of M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time,
which are referenced in this subchapter, are hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference and made a part of this subchapter, including all regulations of the
Department of Public Safety which relate to the incorporated provisions of M.S.
Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 112.16)
MUNICIPAL LIQUOR
§ 116.30 DEFINITIONS.
   The words used in this subchapter will have the meanings given them in M.S.
§ 340A.101, as it may be amended from time to time, and the term LIQUOR, as
used in this subchapter, means INTOXICATING LIQUOR, as defined in M.S. §
340A.101, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 112.30)
§ 116.31 STORES ESTABLISHED.
   There are hereby established municipal stores for the on-sale and off-sale
of liquor.
(Prior Code, § 112.31)
§ 116.32 LOCATION AND OPERATION.
   The stores will be located at places determined by the City Council and as
authorized by state law.
(Prior Code, § 112.32)
§ 116.33 LIQUOR FUND.
   A Municipal Liquor Fund is hereby created. All revenues received from the
operation of the city’s liquor stores will be deposited in that fund. All
ordinary operating expenses of the stores will be paid from the fund. Surpluses
accumulated in the fund may be transferred, by resolution of the City Council,
to the general fund or to any other appropriate fund to be expended for
municipal purposes. The handling of the municipal liquor receipts and
disbursements must comply with the procedures prescribed by law for receipt and
disbursement of municipal funds generally.
(Prior Code, § 112.33)
§ 116.34 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   The hours of operation of city liquor stores will comply with M.S. §
340A.504, as it may be amended from time to time. The city liquor stores will
not be open for business of any kind during the hours when sales of
intoxicating liquor are prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 112.34)
§ 116.35 OPERATION AND RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Credit. No alcoholic beverages may be sold on credit.
   (B)   Minors. No city liquor store may be operated in violation of M.S. §
340A.503, as it may be amended from time to time, pertaining to persons under
21 years of age.
   (C)   Intoxicated persons. No person may sell, give, furnish, or in any way
procure for another alcoholic beverages for the use of an obviously intoxicated
person.
(Prior Code, § 112.35) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 117: CANNABIS
Section
General Provisions
   
117.01   Purpose
   
117.02   Findings of City Council
   
117.03   Definitions
   
117.04   Enforcement
Hemp-Derived Cannabinoid Products
   
117.15   License required
   
117.16   Sales of cannabinoids derived from hemp
   
117.17   Additional requirements for edible cannabinoid products
   
117.18   Prohibited sales
   
117.19   Other regulations
 
   
117.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 117.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish licensing regulations for the
sale of cannabinoid products derived from hemp as provided in M.S. § 151.72, as
it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 7-25-2023)
§ 117.02 FINDINGS OF CITY COUNCIL.
   The City Council makes the following findings regarding the need to
regulate, license, and inspect establishments that sell certain cannabinoid
products.
   (A)   By enacting S.L. 2022 Chapter 98, Article 13, the legislature of the
state amended M.S. § 151.72, as it may be amended from time to time, to allow
for the sale of certain cannabinoid products.
   (B)   This new law does not prohibit municipalities from licensing the sale
of cannabinoid products derived from hemp locally.
   (C)   The National Academies of Science, Engineering, and Medicine note that
the growing acceptance, accessibility, and use of cannabis and its derivatives
have raised important public health concerns, while the lack of aggregated
knowledge of cannabis-related health effects has led to uncertainty about the
impact of its use.
   (D)   The legislature of the state recognized the danger of cannabis use
among youth by prohibiting the sale of any product containing cannabinoid or
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) extracted or otherwise derived from hemp to those
under the age of 21 and requiring that edible cannabinoid products be packaged
without appeal to children and in child-resistant packaging or containers.
   (E)   Due to the passage of this new law by the legislature of the state,
the City Council believes the following rules, regulations, and standards for
licensing the sale of cannabinoid products are necessary to promote and protect
the public health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the city.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 7-25-2023)
§ 117.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CANNABINOID PRODUCT. Any product containing nonintoxicating cannabinoids
extracted from hemp, including an edible cannabinoid product, that is sold for
human or animal consumption.
   CERTIFIED HEMP. The definition for the same provided in M.S. § 151.72, Subd.
1(c), as it may be amended from time to time.
   COMPLIANCE CHECKS. The system the city uses to investigate and ensure that
those authorized to sell cannabinoid products are following and complying with
the requirements of state laws and this chapter. COMPLIANCE CHECKS involve the
use of persons under the age of 21 who purchase or attempt to purchase
cannabinoid products. COMPLIANCE CHECKS may also be conducted by the city or
other units of government educational, research, and training purposes or for
investigating or enforcing federal, state, or local laws and regulations
relating to cannabinoid products.
   DELIVERY SALE. The sale of any cannabinoid products to any person for
personal consumption and not for resale when the sale is conducted by any means
other than an in-person, over-the-counter sales transaction in a licensed
retail establishment. DELIVERY SALE includes, but is not limited to, the sale
of any cannabinoid products when the sale is conducted by telephone, other
voice transmission, mail, the internet, or app-based service. DELIVERY SALE
includes delivery by licensees or third-parties by any means, including
curbside pick-up.
   EDIBLE CANNABINOID PRODUCT - BEVERAGE. Any product that is intended to be
consumed as a liquid and is in the form of a beverage, and which contains a
cannabinoid in connection with food ingredients, and is not a drug.
   EDIBLE CANNABINOID PRODUCT - SOLID. Any product that is intended to be eaten
and is in the form of a gummie, bar, or similar product, or as an ingredient to
be added to other foods, and which contains a cannabinoid in connection with
food ingredients, and is not a drug.
   HEMP or INDUSTRIAL HEMP. The definition for the same provided in M.S. §
18K.02, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time.
   LABEL. The definition for the same provided in M.S. § 151.01, Subd. 18, as
it may be amended from time to time.
   LABELING. The definition for the same provided in M.S. § 151.72, Subd. 1(h),
as it may be amended from time to time.
   MATRIX BARCODE. The definition for the same provided in M.S. § 151.72, Subd.
1(j), as it may be amended from time to time.
   MOVEABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any form of business that is operated out of a
kiosk, truck, van, automobile, or other type of vehicle or transportable
shelter and that is not a fixed address or other permanent type of structure
licensed for over-the-counter sales transactions.
   NONINTOXICATING CANNABINOID. Substances extracted from certified hemp plants
that do not produce intoxicating effects when consumed by any route of
administration.
   OPERATOR. The person in legal possession and control of a location by reason
of ownership, lease, contract, or agreement, for the sale of cannabinoid
products at retail.
   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Any fixed place of business where cannabinoid products
are available for sale to the general public. RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT, for
purposes of this chapter, does not include exclusive liquor stores or
residences.
   SALE. Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter, or other
consideration.
   SELF-SERVICE VENDING. The display for sale of cannabinoid products that are
accessible to the public without the need of assistance of an employee.
   VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electrical, or electronic, or other type of
device that dispenses cannabinoid products upon the insertion of money, tokens,
or other form of payment into or onto the device by the person seeking to
purchase cannabinoid products.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 7-25-2023)
§ 117.04 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Compliance checks and inspections. All licensed premises must be open
to inspections by law enforcement or other authorized city officials during
regular business hours. From time to time, but at least once per year, the city
will conduct compliance checks. The city will conduct a compliance check that
involves the participation of a person at least 17 years of age, but under the
age of 21 to enter the licensed premises to attempt to purchase cannabinoid
products. Prior written consent from a parent or guardian is required for any
person under the age of 18 to participate in a compliance check. Persons used
for the purpose of compliance checks will be supervised by law enforcement or
other designated personnel.
   (B)   Civil penalty, suspension, or revocation of licenses.
      (1)   Compliance. The City Council will follow the provisions of this
section of the chapter on the suspension, revocation, or imposition of a civil
penalty against any license granted under this chapter.
      (2)   Notice of violation. The Chief of Police will provide, in writing,
to the licensee either personally or by mail, notice of any alleged violation
of the provisions of this chapter or M.S. Chapter 151, as it may be amended
from time to time, committed in the operation of the licensee’s business, and
provide notice to the City Attorney’s office. If the City Attorney’s office
determines from the facts and circumstances reported, together with any other
facts and circumstances known to it, that the violation may warrant a civil
penalty, suspension, or revocation of the license held by the licensee, it will
notify the licensee, and set a time and place for a hearing sufficiently in
advance to provide ten days’ written notice of the time, place, and purpose of
such hearing to the licensee.
      (3)   Hearing on alleged violations. The hearing will be held before an
independent hearing officer, in accordance with §§
30.45 through
30.48. At the time of the hearing, the licensee may appear and present any
evidence which is material to the investigation. The hearing officer will make
findings of fact as to whether a violation of the provisions of this chapter or
M.S. Chapter 151, as it may be amended from time to time, have been committed
in the operation of the licensee’s business and whether the violation was
willful in nature. The hearing officer will also make a recommendation as to
what penalty, if any, will be applied. The City Council will adopt the hearing
officer’s findings of fact that the licensee has violated any of the provisions
of this chapter or state law, and may impose a civil fine, suspend, or revoke
the license in accordance with the schedule in §
10.99.
      (4)   Mandatory revocation. The Council will revoke the license of any
licensee under this chapter if the licensee willfully violates any provisions
of this chapter or M.S. Chapter 151, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 7-25-2023)
HEMP-DERIVED CANNABINOID PRODUCTS
§ 117.15 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It will be unlawful for any person to sell at retail any cannabinoid
products within the city unless the person holds a retail cannabinoid products
license, in full force and effect.
   (A)   Procurement of license.
      (1)   Any person desiring a retail cannabinoid products license will make
and file with the City Clerk an application, in writing, on a form provided by
the city. Such application will give the name and residence address of the
applicant, if an individual; will identify the location at which it is proposed
to sell the cannabinoid products at retail; and will provide such other
information as the City Council may require from time to time. The application
will be accompanied by the required fee.
      (2)   The City Clerk will immediately transmit a copy of the application
to the Chief of Police, who will investigate all facts and information which he
or she can reasonably find, bearing upon the question of the applicant’s
fitness to receive the license and to perform the duties imposed by this
chapter. Upon completing the investigation, the Chief of Police will report, in
writing, her or his findings to the City Manager or designee, together with the
Chief’s recommendation as to the issuance of a license to the applicant. The
City Manager or designee will submit to the City Council the report of the
Chief of Police, together with the recommendation as to the issuance of the
license to the applicant.
      (3)   The City Council will consider the facts and recommendation of the
Chief of Police and of the City Manager or designee, together with any material
facts which it may have or obtain, and then, by motion, will approve or deny
the application to the City Clerk together with a copy of the motion. If the
City Council has approved the application, it is the duty of the City Clerk to
execute and deliver a license to the applicant on a form approved by the City
Attorney. Such license will be for March 15 of the year of the issuance to
March 14 of the following year or other such time frame as specified.
   (B)   Basis for denial of license.
      (1)   Grounds for denial. Grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of
a license include, but are not limited to, the following.
         (a)   The applicant is under 21 years of age.
         (b)   The applicant has been convicted within the past five years of
any violation of federal, state, or local law; ordinance provision; or other
regulation relating to cannabinoid products.
         (c)   The applicant has had a license to sell cannabinoid products
suspended or revoked within the preceding 12 months of the date of application.
         (d)   The applicant fails to provide any of the information required
on the licensing application, or provides false or misleading information.
         (e)   The applicant is prohibited by federal, state, or other local
law; ordinance; or other regulation from holding a license.
         (f)   The business for which the license is requested is a moveable
place of business. Only fixed-location retail establishments that are not
excluded under the definition for retail establishments in this chapter are
eligible to be licensed.
      (2)   Location ineligible. No license will be approved unless the
premises proposed to be licensed complies with all applicable zoning
requirements.
   (C)   Issued mistakenly. If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a
person, the city will revoke the license upon the discovery that the person was
ineligible for the license under this chapter. The city will provide the
license holder with notice of the revocation, along with information on the
right to appeal.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 7-25-2023)
§ 117.16 SALES OF CANNABINOIDS DERIVED FROM HEMP.
   In accordance with M.S. § 151.72, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to
time, the following apply.
   (A)   Nonintoxicating cannabinoids. A product containing nonintoxicating
cannabinoids, including an edible cannabinoid product, may be sold for human or
animal consumption only if all of the requirements of this section are met,
provided that a product sold for human or animal consumption does not contain
more than 0.3% of any tetrahydrocannabinol and an edible cannabinoid product
does not contain more than five milligrams of any tetrahydrocannabinol in a
single serving, or more than a total of 50 milligrams of any
tetrahydrocannabinol per package.
   (B)   Intention of substance. No other substance extracted or otherwise
derived from hemp may be sold for human consumption if the substance is
intended:
      (1)   For external or internal use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation,
treatment, or prevention of disease in humans or animals; or
      (2)   To affect the structure or any function of the bodies of humans or
other animals.
   (C)   Age limit. No product containing any cannabinoid or
tetrahydrocannabinol extracted or otherwise derived from hemp may be sold to
any individual who is under the age of 21.
   (D)   Controlled substances. Products that meet the requirements of this
section are not controlled substances under M.S. § 151.02, as it may be amended
from time to time.
   (E)   Testing requirements. All testing must comply with the requirements
set forth in M.S. § 151.72, Subd. 4, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (F)   Labeling requirements. All labeling must comply with the requirements
set forth in M.S. § 151.72, Subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (G)   Eligible licensed establishments. Only the following establishments
shall be eligible to apply for or receive a license from the city for the sales
of products subject to this section in one of three categories:
      (1)   City-licensed off-sale retail liquor establishments. This category
of license is limited to municipal liquor retail locations. The sale and
licensing of edible cannabinoid - beverage products (both solid and beverages)
in such establishments shall be subject to the regulations of this section, as
well as to all of the same requirements of the liquor license and city codes
regulating such licensing, including Chapter 116;
      (2)   City-licensed on-sale retail liquor establishments. The sale and
licensing of edible cannabinoid products - beverages, as an accessory use, and
expressly excluding solids. Such establishments shall be subject to the
regulations of this section, as well as to all of the same requirements of the
liquor license and city codes regulating such licensing, including Chapter 116;
and
      (3)   City-licensed tobacco retail establishments, limited to the sale of
edible cannabinoid products. Solids as defined herein as an accessory use, and
expressly excluding beverages. The sale and licensing of THC-infused products
in such establishments shall be subject to the regulations of this section, as
well as to all of the same requirements of the tobacco license and city codes
regulating such licensing, including §§
115.001 through
115.012.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 7-25-2023)
§ 117.17 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR EDIBLE CANNABINOID PRODUCTS.
   In accordance with M.S. § 151.72, Subd. 5a, as it may be amended from time
to time, the following apply.
   (A)   An edible cannabinoid product must not:
      (1)   Bear the likeness or contain cartoon-like characteristics of a real
or fictional person, animal, or fruit that appeals to children;
      (2)   Be modeled after a brand of products primarily consumed by or
marketed to children;
      (3)   Be made by applying an extracted or concentrated hemp-derived
cannabinoid to a commercially available candy, beverage, snack food, or any
other consumable item;
      (4)   Contain an ingredient, other than a hemp-derived cannabinoid, that
is not approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in
food;
      (5)   Be packaged in a way that resembles the trademarked,
characteristic, or product-specialized packaging of any commercially available
food product; or
      (6)   Be packaged in a container that includes a statement, artwork, or
design that could reasonably mislead any person to believe that the package
contains anything other than an edible cannabinoid product.
   (B)   An edible cannabinoid product must be prepackaged in packaging or a
container that is child-resistant, tamper-evident, and opaque or placed in
packaging or a container that is child-resistant, tamper-evident, and opaque at
the final point of sale to a customer. The requirement that packaging be child-
resistant does not apply to an edible cannabinoid product that is intended to
be consumed as a beverage and which contains no more than a trace amount of any
tetrahydrocannabinol.
   (C)   If an edible cannabinoid product is intended for more than a single
use or contains multiple servings, each serving must be indicated by scoring,
wrapping, or other indicators designating the individual serving size.
   (D)   A label containing at least the following infonnation must be affixed
to the packaging or container of all edible cannabinoid products sold to
consumers:
      (1)   The serving size;
      (2)   The cannabinoid profile per serving and in total;
      (3)   A list of ingredients, including identification of any major food
allergens declared by name; and
      (4)   The following statement: “Keep this product out of reach of
children.”
   (E)   An edible cannabinoid product must not contain more than five
milligrams of any tetrahydrocannabinol in a single serving, or more than a
total of 50 milligrams of any tetrahydrocannabinol per package.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 7-25-2023)
§ 117.18 PROHIBITED SALES.
   (A)   Samples prohibited. Sampling of cannabinoid products within any retail
establishment licensed for on-sale cannabinoid beverages or for retail
cannabinoid solids under this chapter is prohibited. No person subject to this
section shall distribute samples of any cannabinoid products free of charge or
at a nominal cost. The distribution of cannabinoid products as a free donation
is prohibited. This clause is not intended to prohibit licensed retail sales of
full-serving on-sale THC-infused beverages at licensed on-sale liquor
establishments.
   (B)   Coupon and price promotion. No person shall accept or redeem any
coupon, price promotion, or other instrument or mechanism, whether in paper,
digital, electronic, mobile, or any other form, that provides any cannabinoid
products to a consumer at no cost or at a price that is less than the non-
discounted, standard price listed by a retailer on the item or on any related
shelving, posting, advertising, or display at the location where the item is
sold or offered for sale, including all applicable
taxes.
   (C)   Self-service displays. All cannabinoid products must be stored behind
the sales counter, in a locked case, in a storage unit, or in another area not
freely accessible to the general public. No person shall allow the sale of
cannabinoid products in open displays that are accessible to the public without
the intervention of a store employee. This section does not apply to a retail
establishment, as defined in this chapter, that is continuously staffed by an
employee from which persons under 21 years of age are prohibited from entering
the store.
   (D)   Prohibition against retail sales of cannabinoid products by vending
machines. No person will sell or dispense cannabinoid products through use of a
vending machine.
   (E)   Delivery sales. All sales of cannabinoid products must be conducted in
person, in a licensed retail establishment under this chapter, in over-the-
counter sales transactions.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 7-25-2023)
§ 117.19 OTHER REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Adulterated or misbranded products. A cannabinoid product shall be
considered adulterated or misbranded under the provisions set forth in M.S. §
151.72, Subd. 6, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Signage. At each location where cannabinoid products are sold, the
licensee shall display a sign in plain view to provide public notice that
selling any of these products to any person under the age of 21 is illegal and
subject to penalties. The notice shall be placed in a conspicuous location in
the licensed establishment and shall be readily visible to any person who is
purchasing or attempting to purchase these products. The sign shall provide
notice that all persons responsible for selling these products must verify, by
means of photographic identification containing the bearer’s date of birth, the
age of any person under 30 years of age.
   (C)   Age verification. At each location where edible cannabinoid products
are sold, the licensee shall verify, by means of government-issued photographic
identification containing the bearer’s date of birth, that the purchaser or
person attempting to make the purchase is at least 21 years of age.
Verification is not required if the purchaser or person attempting to make the
purchase is 30 years of age or older. It shall not constitute a defense to a
violation of this section that the person appeared to be 30 years of age or
older.
   (D)   Responsibility. All licensees are responsible for the actions of their
employees regarding the sale, offer to sell, and furnishing of cannabinoid
products on the licensed premises. The sale, offer to sell, or furnishing of
any cannabinoid product by an employee shall be considered an act of the
licensee.
   (E)   Hours of sales. No sales of cannabinoid products will be allowed at
the licensed premises after 10:00 p.m. and before 8:00 a.m. daily.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 7-25-2023)
§ 117.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Upon a violation by a licensee holding a cannabinoid products license
of any provision of this chapter or any provision of state law regulating the
sale of cannabinoid products, or failing to comply with any other requirements
of M.S. § 151.72, as it may be amended from time to time, the City Council may
impose a civil fine, suspend, or revoke the license in accordance with the
following schedule:
 
First violation                       Fine up to $300
Second violation within 36 months     Fine up to $600 and a 30-day license
                                      suspension
Third violation within 36 months      Fine up to $1,000 and a license
                                      revocation
Violation during period of suspension License revocation
 
   (B)   Any civil fine assessed against a licensee pursuant to this section
must be paid in full within 30 days from receipt of written notification of the
City Council’s imposition of the civil fine. Failure to pay the fine within
that time period will result in a ten-day license suspension. Licensees whose
licenses have been revoked may not be issued a new license within six months
from the effective date of such revocation.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 7-25-2023)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
      
131.   DRUGS AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
      
132.   PREDATORY OFFENDERS
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
General Offenses
   
130.01   Disorderly conduct
   
130.02   Injury to public property
   
130.03   Obstruction of public access
   
130.04   Curfew for minors
Weapons
   
130.15   Definition
   
130.16   Possession prohibited
   
130.17   Transportation of weapon
   
130.18   Discharge of firearm
   
130.19   Exceptions
   
130.20   Confiscation
   
130.21   Use of bow and arrow
Obscenity
   
130.35   Obscene materials prohibited
   
130.36   Obscene performances prohibited
   
130.37   Definition
   
130.38   Required findings
   
130.39   Research and study
Garbage and Solid Waste Offenses
   
130.50   Disposal requirements
   
130.51   Scavengers
Commercial Fireworks
   
130.65   Prohibited acts
   
130.66   Permitted acts; limitations
GENERAL OFFENSES
§ 130.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   The following are deemed disorderly conduct and are prohibited:
   (A)   Exposure. Willfully and lewdly exposing his or her person, or
procuring another to expose himself or herself, any open and gross lewdness or
lascivious behavior, or any act of public indecency;
   (B)   Nudity. Appearing in a street or other public or exposed place in a
state of nudity or in any indecent or lewd dress;
   (C)   Abuse of animals. Inhumanly, unnecessarily, cruelly, or wantonly
beating, injuring, or otherwise abusing an animal;
   (D)   Defacement of school property. Marking with ink, paint, chalk, or
other substance, or posting handbills on, or in any other manner defacing or
injuring any public, private, or parochial school building or structure used or
usable for school purposes, or marking, defacing, or injuring fences, trees,
lawns, or fixtures appurtenant to or located on the site of school buildings,
or posting handbills on school fences, trees, or fixtures, or placing a sign
anywhere on any school property without the approval of school authorities;
   (E)   Breach of peace on school grounds. Willfully or maliciously making, or
assisting in making, on any school grounds or on property adjacent to any
school building or structure any noise, disturbance, or improper diversion or
activity by which peace, quiet, and good order may be disturbed; and
   (F)   Offensive language and conduct on school property. Using offensive,
obscene, or abusive language, or engaging in boisterous or noisy conduct
tending to arouse alarm, anger, or resentment in others on any school property.
(Prior Code, § 130.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.02 INJURY TO PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   No person may willfully or maliciously displace, remove, injure, damage, or
destroy a:
   (A)   Street, highway, or bridge;
   (B)   Monument designating a boundary line;
   (C)   Public sign;
   (D)   Telephone, cable television, or electric line;
   (E)   Gas or water line; and/or
   (F)   Sewer drain, pipe, or connection.
(Prior Code, § 130.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.03 OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC ACCESS.
   No person may obstruct any public street, highway, sidewalk, or any other
public place or building, or the access to property abutting the same, by
hindering or impeding, or tending to hinder or impede, the free and
uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic, or pedestrians.
(Prior Code, § 130.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.04 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
   (A)   Purpose. The curfew for minors established by this section is
maintained for four primary reasons:
      (1)   To protect the public from illegal acts of minors committed during
the curfew hours;
      (2)   To protect minors from improper influences that prevail during the
curfew hours, including involvement with gangs;
      (3)   To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs during the
curfew hours; and
      (4)   To help parents control their minor children.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      EMERGENCY ERRAND. A task that if not completed promptly threatens the
health, safety, or comfort of the minor or a member of the minor’s household.
The term shall include, but shall not be limited to, seeking urgent medical
treatment, seeking urgent assistance from law enforcement or Fire Department
personnel, and seeking shelter from the elements or urgent assistance from a
utility company due to a natural or human-made calamity.
      OFFICIAL CITY TIME. The time of day as determined by reference to the
master clock used by the Police Department.
      PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT, OR REFRESHMENT. Those places that
include, but are not limited to, movie theaters, pinball arcades, shopping
malls, nightclubs catering to minors, restaurants, and pool halls.
      PRIMARY CARE or PRIMARY CUSTODY. The person who is responsible for
providing food, clothing, shelter, and other basic necessities to the minor.
The person providing PRIMARY CARE OR CUSTODY to the minor shall not be another
minor.
      SCHOOL ACTIVITY. An event which has been placed on a school calendar by
public or parochial school authorities as a school sanctioned event.
   (C)   Hours.
      (1)   Minors under the age of 12 years. No minor under the age of 12
years shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or
other public grounds, public places, or public buildings; nor in or upon places
of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment; nor in or upon any vacant lot,
during weekdays after 9:00 p.m., official city time; and after 10:00 p.m. on
weekends, official city time.
      (2)   Minors ages 12 years to 14 years. No minor between the ages of 12
years and 14 years shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks,
playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places, or public buildings; nor
in or upon places of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment; nor in or upon
any vacant lot, during weekdays after 10:00 p.m., official city time; and after
11:00 p.m. on weekends, official city time.
      (3)   Minors ages 15 years to 17 years. No minor between the ages of 15
years and 17 years shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks,
playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places, or public buildings, nor
in places of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment; nor in or upon any
vacant lot, during weekdays after 11:00 p.m., official city time; and after
midnight on weekends, official city time.
      (4)   End of curfew. The curfew is lifted at 5:00 a.m.
   (D)   Effect on control by adult responsible for minor. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to give a minor the right to stay out until the
curfew hours designated in this section if otherwise directed by a parent,
guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the
minor; nor shall this section be construed to diminish or impair the control of
the adult person having the primary care or custody of the minor.
   (E)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply in the
following situations:
      (1)   To a minor accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or other
adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor;
      (2)   To a minor who is upon an emergency errand at the direction of his
or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and
custody of the minor;
      (3)   To a minor who is in any of the places described in this section if
in connection with or as required by an employer engaged in a lawful business,
trade, profession, or occupation; or to a minor traveling directly to or from
the location of the business, trade, profession, or occupation and the minor’s
residence. Minors who fall within the scope of this exception shall carry
written proof of employment and proof of the hours the employer requires the
minor’s presence at work;
      (4)   To a minor who is participating in or traveling directly to or from
an event which has been officially designated as a school activity by public or
parochial school authorities; or who is participating in or traveling directly
to or from an official activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city,
a civic organization, school, religious institution, or similar entity that
takes responsibility for the minor and with the permission of the minor’s
parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody of
the minor;
      (5)   To a minor who is attending or traveling directly to or from an
activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech,
freedom of assembly, or freedom of religion;
      (6)   To minors on the sidewalk abutting his or her residence or abutting
the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor does not complain to the
city’s designated law enforcement provider about the minor’s presence; and/or
      (7)   To a minor who is married or has been married, or is otherwise
legally emancipated.
   (F)   Duties of person legally responsible for minor. No parent, guardian,
or other adult having the primary care or custody of any minor shall permit any
violation of the requirements of this section by the minor.
   (G)   Duties of other persons. No person operating or in charge of any place
of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment shall permit any minor to enter or
remain in his or her place of business during the hours prohibited by this
section unless the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or
other adult person having primary care or custody of the minor, or unless one
of the exceptions to this section applies.
   (H)   Defense. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that
the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the
city’s designated law enforcement provider that a minor was present on the
premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
   (I)   Before arrest. A law enforcement officer must look into whether a
minor has an affirmative defense before making an arrest.
(Prior Code, § 130.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
WEAPONS
§ 130.15 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   WEAPON. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm, including any device from which is propelled any
missile, projectile, or bullet by means of explosives, gas, compressed air,
springs, or elastic material, including air and “BB” guns;
      (2)   Dagger, dirk, or stiletto;
      (3)   Saber or sword;
      (4)   Switchblade knife, spring blade knife, or any knife the blade of
which can be opened by gravity or a flick of the wrist;
      (5)   Blackjack, sand club, sap, pipe club, or bludgeon;
      (6)   Chain club or chains assembled or used or intended to be used as a
weapon;
      (7)   Artificial knuckles or other objects designed to be worn over the
fist or knuckles;
      (8)   Throwing device with cutting or pointed edges;
      (9)   Japanese or other nightstick, nutcracker, nunchaku, chaka, flail,
karate stick, or morning star;
      (10)   Slingshot; and/or
      (11)   Spear or lance.
(Prior Code, § 130.15)
§ 130.16 POSSESSION PROHIBITED.
   No person may have a weapon in his or her possession, custody, or control in
a public place, in the residence of another without their permission, or in the
passenger compartment of a motor vehicle, unless in compliance with §
130.17.
(Prior Code, § 130.16) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.17 TRANSPORTATION OF WEAPON.
   A weapon may be transported in a motor vehicle only if it is:
   (A)   A firearm which is unloaded and in a gun case expressly made to
contain a firearm, and the case fully encloses the firearm by being zipped,
snapped, buckled, tied, or otherwise fastened, and without any portion of the
firearm exposed, or an unloaded firearm in the closed trunk of the motor
vehicle;
   (B)   A weapon other than a firearm which is in the closed trunk of a motor
vehicle; or
   (C)   A handgun carried in compliance with M.S. §§ 624.714 and 624.715, as
they may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 130.17) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.18 DISCHARGE OF FIREARM.
   No person in any public or private place may shoot or discharge any firearm,
as defined in this subchapter, whether it is loaded with powder, blank
cartridges, or any other explosive, bullet, pellet, or shot, without prior
authorization from the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 130.18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.19 EXCEPTIONS.
   This subchapter does not apply to the discharge of a firearm in the lawful
defense of person, property, or family, or in the necessary enforcement of law.
This subchapter does not apply to law enforcement officers, military personnel
while on duty, or to possession of handguns or pistols permitted under M.S. §§
624.711 through 624.717, as they may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 130.19)
§ 130.20 CONFISCATION.
   (A)   Any weapon adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to have
been worn, carried, possessed, used, or handled in violation of this subchapter
or state statute may be confiscated and disposed of by the Chief of Police.
   (B)   The Chief of Police may provide for the sale, destruction, or other
disposition of the weapon.
(Prior Code, § 130.20)
§ 130.21 USE OF BOW AND ARROW.
   It is unlawful for any person to shoot a bow and arrow in the city, except
in the physical education program of a school supervised by a member of the
school’s faculty, or in a community-wide supervised class or event specifically
authorized by the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 130.21) Penalty, see §
10.99
OBSCENITY
§ 130.35 OBSCENE MATERIALS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person, knowing or with reason to know its content
and character, to manufacture, issue, sell, offer to sell, give away, provide,
lend, rent, deliver, transfer, transmit, publish, distribute, circulate,
disseminate, publicly present, exhibit, or advertise any obscene material.
(Prior Code, § 130.35) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.36 OBSCENE PERFORMANCES PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person knowingly to produce, present, or direct an
obscene play, dance, motion picture, video or audio reproduction, or other
obscene exhibition or performance, or to participate in a portion thereof which
is obscene or which contributes to its obscenity.
(Prior Code, § 130.36) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.37 DEFINITION.
   For purposes of this subchapter, the word OBSCENE and the other terms
defined in M.S. § 624.241, as it may be amended from time to time, have the
meaning given them in M.S. § 624.241, as it may be amended from time to time.
The term OBSCENE MATERIAL includes devices designed and marketed as useful
primarily for stimulation of the human genital organs.
(Prior Code, § 130.37)
§ 130.38 REQUIRED FINDINGS.
   In determining that a work is obscene, the trier of fact must find:
   (A)   The work depicts or describes sexual conduct in a patently offensive
way;
   (B)   To the average person, applying contemporary community standards, the
dominant theme of the work, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest
in sex; and
   (C)   The work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political, or scientific value.
(Prior Code, § 130.38)
§ 130.39 RESEARCH AND STUDY.
   The provisions of this subchapter do not apply to persons who may possess or
distribute obscene works or participate in conduct otherwise proscribed by this
subchapter when the possession, participation, distribution, or conduct occurs
in the course of law enforcement activities.
(Prior Code, § 130.39)
GARBAGE AND SOLID WASTE OFFENSES
§ 130.50 DISPOSAL REQUIREMENTS.
   One of the following provisions must be made for each property in the city
for the disposal of garbage and other solid waste:
   (A)   Regular collection service by a hauler licensed by the city;
   (B)   Participation in a sharing or pool for a regular collection service by
a hauler licensed by the city; or
   (C)   Lawful disposal by transporting the solid waste to a place of business
owned or controlled by the property owner.
(Prior Code, § 130.50) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.51 SCAVENGERS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, except a law enforcement officer acting
in the course of official business, to scavenge or otherwise collect refuse,
recyclable materials, or yard waste at the curb or from refuse containers, or
from recyclable materials containers, without a license therefore from the city
and an account relationship with the owner or occupant of the premises.
   (B)   Responsibility for and ownership of recyclable materials shall remain
with the individual resident until collected by a licensed hauler or recyclable
materials, at which time the ownership and responsibility shall pass to the
hauler.
(Prior Code, § 130.51) Penalty, see §
10.99
COMMERCIAL FIREWORKS
§ 130.65 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   The use, display, possession, discharge, or sale of any fireworks not
expressly permitted by M.S. § 624.20, Subd. 1(c), as it may be amended from
time to time, is strictly prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 130.65) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.66 PERMITTED ACTS; LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   The use, display, or discharge of permitted consumer fireworks must be
conducted in a manner that minimizes the risk of fire or injury to other
persons or property.
   (B)   The use, display, or discharge of those nonexplosive, non-aerial
pyrotechnic entertainment devices only containing the limited amounts of
pyrotechnic chemical compositions described in and permitted by M.S. § 624.20,
Subd. 1(c), as it may be amended from time to time, hereinafter “consumer
fireworks,” is strictly prohibited in the area on, below, above, or within, or
in close proximity to:
      (1)   Public property, including schools, parks, sidewalks, roadways,
streets, rights-of-way, highways, alleys, bicycle and pedestrian paths,
schools, lakes, rivers, and waterways located in whole or in part within the
city limits;
      (2)   Private property within the city limits that has conspicuously
posted a written sign or notice that no fireworks discharge is allowed;
      (3)   Within 500 feet of any premises on which consumer fireworks are
held for sale, display, distribution, or storage; and/or
      (4)   Any property, area, structure, or material that by its physical
condition or the physical conditions in which it is set would constitute a fire
or personal safety hazard.
(Prior Code, § 130.66) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 131: DRUGS AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
Section
Controlled Substances
   
131.01   Definitions
   
131.02   Prohibited acts
   
131.03   Exceptions
   
131.04   Unlawful procuring, purchase, delivery, or possession
   
131.05   Confiscation and disposition
   
131.06   Use of original containers and labels required
Marijuana and Drug Paraphernalia
   
131.20   Possession of small amount of marijuana
   
131.21   Drug paraphernalia
Clandestine Drug Lab Sites
   
131.35   Purpose and intent
   
131.36   Interpretation and application
   
131.37   Definitions
   
131.38   Declaration of public health nuisance
   
131.39   Law enforcement action
   
131.40   Seizure of property
   
131.41   Inspection and declaration of nuisance
   
131.42   Site owner’s responsibility to act
   
131.43   Site owner’s responsibility for costs
   
131.44   City action and recovery of costs
   
131.45   Recovery of costs from persons causing damage
   
131.46   Entry into or onto the site
   
131.47   Removal of personal property from the site
 
   
131.99   Penalty
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
§ 131.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. As defined in M.S. Chapter 152, as it may be amended
from time to time.
   POSSESSION. Having a controlled substance on one’s person or in constructive
possession, including, but not limited to, constructive possession by an owner
of a motor vehicle, or by a driver of a motor vehicle if the owner is not
present, or keeping a controlled substance in a motor vehicle or allowing it to
be kept in the motor vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 131.01)
§ 131.02 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   No person may manufacture, possess, constructively possess, sell, give away,
barter, exchange, distribute, or otherwise transfer any controlled substance,
except by way of a lawful prescription by a person licensed by law to prescribe
and administer controlled substances.
(Prior Code, § 131.02) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.03 EXCEPTIONS.
   Section 131.02 does not apply to the exceptions listed in M.S. §§ 152.0974,
152.11, or 152.12, as they may be amended from time to time, or to the
following in the ordinary course of their lawful trade, business, or
profession:
   (A)   Warehouse operators authorized by law to store controlled substances;
   (B)   Persons engaged in transporting controlled substances as an agent or
employee of an authorized practitioner, pharmacist, manufacturer, warehouse
operator, wholesaler, or common carrier;
   (C)   Public officers or public employees in the performance of official
duties requiring possession or control of controlled substances, or persons
aiding the officers or employees in the performance of the duties;
   (D)   A patient using controlled substances in accordance with prescribed
treatment;
   (E)   Persons who procure, possess, or use controlled substances for the
purpose of lawful research, teaching, or testing, and not for sale; and
   (F)   Lawfully licensed and registered hospitals or bona fide clinics or
other institutions for treatment of sick or injured persons or animals.
(Prior Code, § 131.03)
§ 131.04 UNLAWFUL PROCURING, PURCHASE, DELIVERY, OR POSSESSION.
   No person may procure, purchase, deliver, or possess, or attempt to procure,
purchase, deliver, or possess, a controlled substance by:
   (A)   Fraud, deceit, misrepresentation, or subterfuge;
   (B)   Forgery or alteration of a prescription;
   (C)   Concealment of a material fact;
   (D)   Use of a false name or address;
   (E)   False statement in any prescription, order, report, or record relative
to a controlled substance;
   (F)   Falsely assuming the title of, or falsely representing any person to
be, a manufacturer, wholesaler, warehouse operator, pharmacist, practitioner,
or other person described in §
131.03; and/or
   (G)   Making, issuing, or uttering any false or forged prescription.
(Prior Code, § 131.04) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.05 CONFISCATION AND DISPOSITION.
   Any controlled substance found in the possession of any person convicted of
a violation of this subchapter will be confiscated and forfeited to the Chief
of Police.
(Prior Code, § 131.05)
§ 131.06 USE OF ORIGINAL CONTAINERS AND LABELS REQUIRED.
   A patient having possession of a controlled substance by lawful prescription
must keep the controlled substance in the original container in which it was
delivered until used in accordance with the prescription, and may not remove
the pharmacist’s original label identifying the prescription.
(Prior Code, § 131.06) Penalty, see §
131.99
MARIJUANA AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
§ 131.20 POSSESSION OF SMALL AMOUNT OF MARIJUANA.
   (A)   Prohibited act. Except as otherwise provided in division (B) below, it
is unlawful for any person to possess a small amount of marijuana, as defined
in division (C) below, except when the possession is for the person’s use and
is authorized by law.
   (B)   Medical exceptions. The provisions of M.S. §§ 152.0974, 152.11, and
152.12, as they may be amended from time to time, are made a part of this
subchapter, and apply as lawful exceptions.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      MARIJUANA. As defined in M.S. § 152.01, Subd. 9, as it may be amended
from time to time.
      SMALL AMOUNT. One and one-half ounces or less of the nonresinous form of
marijuana.
   (D)   Possession in a motor vehicle. It is unlawful for a person who is the
owner of a motor vehicle, or the driver of the motor vehicle if the owner is
not present, to possess or knowingly keep or allow to be kept in a motor
vehicle within the area of the vehicle normally occupied by the driver or
passengers more than five-hundredths of an ounce of marijuana. The prohibited
area does not include the trunk of the vehicle but does include the utility or
glove compartment.
   (E)   Discharge and dismissal. The provisions of M.S. § 152.18, as it may be
amended from time to time, are made a part of this subchapter and apply to
violations of this subchapter.
   (F)   Forfeiture. All marijuana which has been possessed in violation of
this subchapter is subject to forfeiture and may be seized without process when
the seizure is made incident to an arrest or pursuant to a search warrant.
(Prior Code, § 131.20) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.21 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   (A)   Use or possession prohibited. It is unlawful for any person knowingly
or intentionally to use or possess drug paraphernalia.
   (B)   Delivery or manufacturing prohibited. A person may not deliver,
possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver, drug
paraphernalia, if that person knows or should reasonably know that the drug
paraphernalia will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, enhance, convert, produce, process, prepare, test,
analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of
M.S. Chapter 152, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   Advertising prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to place or
cause to be placed in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication
any advertisement knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should
know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote
the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.
   (D)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      (1)   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(1)(b) below, DRUG
PARAPHERNALIA means all equipment, products, and materials of any kind, which
are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, enhancing,
converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling,
or otherwise introducing into the human body, a controlled substance in
violation of M.S. Chapter 152, as it may be amended from time to time.
         (b)   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA does not include the possession, manufacture,
delivery, or sale of hypodermic needles or syringes.
         (c)   The term PARAPHERNALIA includes, without limitation:
            1.   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting of any species of plant which
is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;
            2.   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing
controlled substances;
            3.   Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for
use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance;
            4.   Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use
in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of
controlled substances;
            5.   Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for
use in weighing or measuring controlled substances;
            6.   Diluents and adulterants, including quinine hydrochloride,
mannitol, mannite, dextrose, and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed
for use in cutting controlled substances;
            7.   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or
designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or otherwise cleaning or
refining, marijuana;
            8.   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, grinders, and mixing
devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding,
manufacturing, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances;
            9.   Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers used,
intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances;
            10.   Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or
designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances or products or
materials used or intended for use in manufacturing, producing, processing, or
preparing controlled substances;
            11.   Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in
ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing controlled substances to include,
but not limited to, marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human
body, and also including:
               a.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic
pipes, with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured
metal bowls;
               b.   Water pipes;
               c.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
               d.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
               e.   Objects, sometimes commonly referred to as roach clips,
used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become
too small or too short to be held in the hand;
               f.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
               g.   Chamber pipes;
               h.   Carburetor pipes;
               i.   Electric pipes;
               j.   Air driven pipes;
               k.   Chillums;
               l.   Bongs; and
               m.   Ice pipes or chillers.
            12.   Ingredients or components to be used or intended or designed
to be used in manufacturing, producing, processing, preparing, testing, or
analyzing a controlled substance, whether or not otherwise lawfully obtained,
including anhydrous ammonia, nonprescription medications, methamphetamine
precursor drugs, or lawfully dispensed controlled substances.
      (2)   The terms CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE, MANUFACTURING, MARIJUANA, and
PERSON will have the meanings set forth in M.S. §
152.01, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (E)   Drug paraphernalia guidelines. In determining whether an object is
drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority shall consider, in addition to
all the other logically relevant factors:
      (1)   Statements by an owner, or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use;
      (2)   Prior convictions, if any, of the owner, or of anyone in control of
the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled
substance;
      (3)   The proximity of the object in time and space to the direct
violation of this section;
      (4)   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
      (5)   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the
object;
      (6)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of
any person in control of the object, to deliver the object to another person
whom the owner or person in control of the object knows, or should reasonably
know, intends to use the object to facilitate a violation of this section. The
innocence of an owner, or of any person in control of the object, as to a
direct violation of this section may not prevent a finding that the object is
intended or designed for use as drug paraphernalia;
      (7)   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning
the object’s use;
      (8)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object that explain or
depict the object’s use;
      (9)   National and local advertising concerning the object’s use;
      (10)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
      (11)   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
      (12)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the
object to the total sales of the business enterprise;
      (13)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community;
      (14)   Expert testimony concerning its use; and
      (15)   The actual or constructive possession by the owner or by a person
in control of the object or the presence in a vehicle or structure where the
object is located of written instructions, directions, or recipes to be used,
or intended or designed to be used in manufacturing, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, or analyzing a controlled substance.
(Prior Code, § 131.21) (Ord. 2014-03, passed 9-3-2014) Penalty, see §
131.99
CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITES
§ 131.35 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to reduce public exposure to health risks
associated with hazardous chemicals or residue from a clandestine drug lab
site. Professional testing and investigations show that chemicals used in the
production of illicit drugs can condense, penetrate, and contaminate surfaces,
furnishings, and equipment of surrounding structures. The City Council finds
that the sites and the personal property within the sites may contain suspected
chemicals and residues that place people, particularly children or adults of
childbearing age, at risk when exposed through inhabiting or visiting the site
or being exposed to contaminated personal property.
(Prior Code, § 131.35)
§ 131.36 INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION.
   The provisions of this subchapter must be construed to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare. When the conditions imposed by this subchapter
conflict with comparable provisions imposed by another law, ordinance, statute,
or regulation, the regulations that are more restrictive or that impose higher
standards will prevail.
(Prior Code, § 131.36)
§ 131.37 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHEMICAL DUMP SITE. A place or area where chemicals or other waste materials
used in a clandestine drug lab operation have been located.
   CITY. The City of St. Anthony, Minnesota.
   CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB OPERATION. The unlawful manufacture or attempt to
manufacture a controlled substance.
   CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITE or SITE. A place or area where law enforcement
personnel have determined that conditions associated with an unlawful
clandestine drug lab operation exits. A CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITE may include
dwellings, accessory buildings, structures or units, a chemical dumpsite, a
vehicle, boat, trailer, or other appliance.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. A drug substance or immediate precursor specified in
M.S. §
152.02, Schedules I through V, as they may be amended from time to time. The
term does not include distilled spirits, wine, malt beverages, intoxicating
liquors, or tobacco.
   MANUFACTURE. In places other than a pharmacy, includes the production,
cultivation, quality control, or standardization, by mechanical, physical,
chemical, or pharmaceutical means, and the packaging, re-packaging, tableting,
encapsulating, labeling, re-labeling, or filling of drugs, by any other
process.
   OWNER. A person, firm, corporation, or other entity who or which owns, in
whole or in part, the land, building, structure, vehicle, boat, trailer, or
other location associated with clandestine drug lab site. Unless information is
provided to prove otherwise, the OWNER of real property is deemed to be the
property taxpayer of record in the Ramsey/Hennepin County files, and the OWNER
of a vehicle, boat, or trailer is deemed to be the person listed as the owner
on the most recent title to the vehicle, boat, or trailer.
(Prior Code, § 131.37)
§ 131.38 DECLARATION OF PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCE.
   All dwellings, accessory structures, buildings, vehicles, boats, trailers,
personal property, adjacent property, or other locations associated with a
clandestine drug lab site are potentially unsafe due to health hazards and are
declared to be a public health nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 131.38)
§ 131.39 LAW ENFORCEMENT ACTION.
   (A)   Law enforcement authorities that identify conditions associated with a
clandestine drug lab site that may place the public or occupants at risk for
exposure to harmful contaminants and other associated conditions may:
      (1)   Promptly notify the appropriate municipal, child protection, and
public health authority, the United States Drug Enforcement Administration, and
the site owner about the site and the conditions found;
      (2)   Treat, store, transport, or dispose of all waste generated from the
clandestine drug lab operation and found at the site in a manner consistent
with the State Department of Health and State Pollution Control Agency
regulations;
      (3)   The appropriate county would issue a temporary declaration of
public health nuisance for the affected site and post a copy of the declaration
on all doorway entrances to the site or, in the case of bare land, in several
conspicuous places on the property. This temporary declaration will expire
after the city inspects the site and determines the appropriateness of issuing
a permanent declaration of public heath nuisance;
      (4)   Notify all people occupying the site that a temporary declaration
of public health nuisance has been issued;
      (5)   Require all people occupying the site to immediately vacate the
site, remove all pets from the site, and not return without written
authorization from the city;
      (6)   Notify the occupants vacating the site that the personal property
at the site may be contaminated with dangerous chemical residue; and
      (7)   Put locks on each doorway entrance to the site to prohibit people
from entering the site without authorization.
   (B)   The notification of the people and organizations mentioned above may
be delayed to accomplish appropriate law enforcement objectives.
(Prior Code, § 131.39)
§ 131.40 SEIZURE OF PROPERTY.
   When a clandestine drug lab site is inside a vehicle, boat, trailer, or
other form of moveable personal property, law enforcement authorities must
immediately seize it and not allow it to be transported except to a more secure
location. All other requirements of this subchapter must be followed as closely
as possible given the specific type of property in which the site is
discovered.
(Prior Code, § 131.40)
§ 131.41 INSPECTION AND DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
   (A)   Generally. Within 48 hours of notification that law enforcement
authorities have determined the existence of a clandestine drug lab site, the
city will contact the appropriate county, and they must inspect the site. The
county may then promptly issue a permanent declaration of public health
nuisance and a “Do Not Enter-Unsafe to Occupy Order” for the affected site to
replace the temporary declaration. A copy of the permanent declaration and
order must be posted on all doorway entrances to the site or, in the case of
bare land, in several conspicuous places on the property.
   (B)   Abatement order. After issuing the permanent declaration, the city
must send written notice to the site owner ordering abatement of the public
health nuisance. The abatement order must include the following:
      (1)   A copy of the declaration of public health nuisance and “Do Not
Enter-Unsafe to Occupy Order”;
      (2)   Information about the potentially hazardous condition of the site;
      (3)   A summary of the site owner’s and occupant’s responsibilities under
this subchapter; and
      (4)   Information that may help the owner locate appropriate services
necessary to abate the public health nuisance.
   (C)   Notice to other parties. The city must also mail a copy of the
permanent declaration of public health nuisance and a copy of this section to
the following parties at their last known addresses:
      (1)   Occupants or residents of the site if known;
      (2)   Neighbors in proximity to the site who may be affected by the
conditions found;
      (3)   The appropriate enforcement division of the United States Drug
Enforcement Administration; and
      (4)   Other city, state, and local authorities, such as the city Public
Works Department, the State Pollution Control Agency, the State Department of
Health, and the Department of Natural Resources, that are known to have public
and environmental protection responsibilities applicable to the situation.
   (D)   Modification or removal of declaration. The city may modify or remove
the declaration of public health nuisance after the city receives documentation
from a city-approved environmental hazard testing and cleaning firm stating
that the suspected health and safety risks, including those to neighbors and
potential occupants, either do not exist or have been sufficiently abated or
corrected to justify amendment or removal of the declaration.
(Prior Code, § 131.41)
§ 131.42 SITE OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY TO ACT.
   (A)   Within ten business days after the abatement order is mailed to the
site owner, the owner must accomplish the following:
      (1)   Provide the city, in writing, with:
         (a)   Confirmation that all persons and their pets have vacated the
site;
         (b)   The names of all children who the owner believes were residing
at the site during the time period the clandestine drug lab is suspected to
have been at the site; and
         (c)   Confirmation that the site will remain vacated and secured until
the public health nuisance is completely abated, as required by this
subchapter.
      (2)   Contract with one or more city-approved environmental hazard
testing and cleaning firms to conduct the following work in accordance with the
most current state guidelines:
         (a)   A detailed on-site assessment of contamination at the site,
including the personal property in the site;
         (b)   Soil testing of the site and testing of all property and soil in
proximity to the site which the environmental hazard testing and cleaning firm
determines may have been affected by the conditions found at the site;
         (c)   A complete clean-up of the site (including the clean-up or
removal of plumbing, ventilation systems, fixtures, and contaminated soil) or a
demolition of the structures on the site and complete clean-up of the
demolished site;
         (d)   A complete clean-up, or disposal at an approved dump site, of
all personal property in the site that is found to have been affected by the
conditions at the site;
         (e)   A complete clean-up of all property and soil in proximity to the
site that is found to have been affected by the conditions at the site; and
         (f)   Remediation testing and follow-up testing, including testing of
the ventilation system and plumbing, to determine that all health risks are
sufficiently reduced to allow safe human occupancy and use of the site, use of
the personal property in it, and use of all property and soil in proximity to
the site.
      (3)   Provide the city with the identity of the testing and cleaning firm
with which the owner has contracted for abatement of the public health nuisance
as required above; and
      (4)   Sign an agreement with the city establishing a clean-up schedule.
The schedule must establish reasonable deadlines for completing all actions
required by this subchapter for abatement of the public health nuisance. The
city will consider practical limitations and the availability of contractors in
approving the clean-up schedule.
   (B)   The owner must meet all deadlines established in the clean-up
schedule. The owner must provide the city with written documentation of the
clean-up, including a signed statement from a city-approved environmental
hazard testing and cleaning firm that the site, all personal property in it,
and all property and soil in proximity to the site is safe for human occupancy
and use and that the clean-up was conducted in accordance with the most current
state guidelines.
(Prior Code, § 131.42) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.43 SITE OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS.
   (A)   The site owner is responsible for all costs of dealing with and
abating the public health nuisance, including contractor’s fees and the city’s
costs for services performed in connection with the clandestine drug lab site
clean-up.
   (B)   The city’s costs may include:
      (1)   Posting of the site;
      (2)   Notification of affected parties;
      (3)   Securing the site, providing limited access to the site, and
prosecution of unauthorized persons found at the site;
      (4)   Expenses related to the recovery of costs, including the special
assessment process;
      (5)   Laboratory fees;
      (6)   Clean-up services;
      (7)   Administrative fees;
      (8)   Legal fees; and
      (9)   Other associated costs.
(Prior Code, § 131.43)
§ 131.44 CITY ACTION AND RECOVERY OF COSTS.
   (A)   If the site owner fails to comply with any of the requirements of this
subchapter, the city is authorized to take all reasonable actions necessary to
abate the public health nuisance, including contracting with a city-approved
environmental hazard testing and cleaning firm to complete the necessary clean-
up. The city is also authorized to provide a copy of the declaration of public
health nuisance to the holders of mortgage or lien interests in the affected
site.
   (B)   If the costs to clean the site or to clean the personal property at
the site are prohibitively high in relation to the value of the site or the
personal property, the city is authorized to remove or demolish the site,
structure, or building and dispose of the personal property in it. These
actions must be taken in accordance with the provisions of M.S. §§ 463.15
through 463.261, as they may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   If the city abates the public health nuisance, the city is entitled to
recover all of its actual costs, plus an additional 25% of the costs for
administrative expense, in addition to any other legal remedy. The city may
recover costs by civil action against the site owner or by assessing the costs
against the site as a lien against the property and certifying the same to
Ramsey/Henepin County for collection in the same manner as ad valorem taxes and
special assessments are collected.
(Prior Code, § 131.44)
§ 131.45 RECOVERY OF COSTS FROM PERSONS CAUSING DAMAGE.
   Nothing in this subchapter limits the right of the site owner or the city to
recover clean-up costs from the tenant or operators of the clandestine drug
lab.
(Prior Code, § 131.45)
§ 131.46 ENTRY INTO OR ONTO THE SITE.
   While a declaration of public health nuisance for a site is in effect and
has been posted at the site, no person, other than a law enforcement officer or
a person authorized by the city, is permitted to be inside or on a site.
(Prior Code, § 131.46) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.47 REMOVAL OF PERSONAL PROPERTY FROM THE SITE.
   (A)   While a declaration of public health nuisance for a site is in effect
and has been posted at the site, no personal property may be removed from the
site without prior written consent from the city.
   (B)   Consent to remove personal property may be granted at the reasonable
discretion of the city, and only in cases of hardship after:
      (1)   A city-approved environmental hazard testing and cleaning firm has
advised the city, in writing, that the item(s) of personal property can be
sufficiently cleaned to remove all harmful contamination; and
      (2)   The owner of the personal property agrees in writing that the
owner:
         (a)   Is aware of the danger of using the contaminated property;
         (b)   Will thoroughly clean the property to remove all contamination
before the property is used; and
         (c)   Releases and agrees to indemnify the city from all liability to
the owner and third parties for injuries or damages alleged to have been caused
by the contaminated property.
(Prior Code, § 131.47) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Possession of small amount; first conviction. Any person who
violates the provisions of §
131.20(A) is guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
      (2)   Possession of small amount; second conviction. Any person who,
after being convicted for possession of a small amount of marijuana under §
131.20(A), is subsequently convicted for the same offense within two years
after the first conviction is guilty of a misdemeanor.
      (3)   Possession in motor vehicle. Any person who violates the provisions
of §
131.20(D) is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 131.20)
   (C)   Any violation of §
131.21(A), (B), or (C) is a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 131.21)
   (D)   Any person convicted of violating any provision of §§
131.35 through
131.47 is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 131.48)
(Ord. 2014-03, passed 9-3-2014)
CHAPTER 132: PREDATORY OFFENDERS
Section
   
132.01   Intent
   
132.02   Definitions
   
132.03   Prohibited location of residence
   
132.04   Exceptions
   
132.99   Penalty
§ 132.01 INTENT.
   It is the intent of this chapter to serve the city’s compelling interest to
promote, protect, and improve the health, safety, and general welfare of the
city’s citizens by creating areas around locations where children are known to
regularly congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain predatory
offenders are prohibited from establishing temporary or permanent residence.
(Prior Code, § 132.1) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-22-2017)
§ 132.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DESIGNATED PREDATORY OFFENDER. A person who is required to register as a
predatory offender under section MS § 243.166, as it may be amended from time
to time.
   LICENSED CHILDCARE CENTER. A group childcare center currently licensed by
Ramsey County, Hennepin County, or the state.
   PERMANENT RESIDENCE. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for
14 or more consecutive days.
   PUBLIC PLAYGROUND. A city-owned, improved park or other outdoor area
designed, equipped, and set aside primarily for children’s play.
   TEMPORARY RESIDENCE. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for a
period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which
is not the person’s permanent address, or a place where the person routinely
abides, lodges, or resides for a period of four or more consecutive or non-
consecutive days in any month and which is not the person’s permanent
residence.
   SCHOOL. A public or nonpublic elementary or secondary school.
(Prior Code, § 132.2) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-22-2017)
§ 132.03 PROHIBITED LOCATION OF RESIDENCE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any designated predatory offender to establish a
permanent or temporary residence within 1,000 feet of any school, licensed
childcare facility, or public playground.
   (B)   For purposes of determining the minimum distance separation required
by this chapter, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line
from the outer property line of the permanent or temporary residence of the
designated predatory offender to the nearest outer property line of the school,
licensed childcare facility, or public playground.
(Prior Code, § 132.3) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-22-2017) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.04 EXCEPTIONS.
   A designated predatory offender residing within a prohibited area as
described in §
132.03 does not commit a violation of this chapter if any of the following
apply:
   (A)   The person established the permanent residence or temporary residence
and reported and registered the residence pursuant to M.S. §§ 243.166 and
243.167, as they may be amended from time to time, or a successor statute,
prior to February 14, 2017;
   (B)   The person was a minor when they committed the offense and they were
convicted as an adult;
   (C)   The person is a minor;
   (D)   The school, licensed child care center, or public playground within
1,000 feet of the person’s permanent residence was opened after the person
established the permanent residence or temporary residence and reported and
registered the residence pursuant to M.S. §§ 243.166 and 243.167, as they may
be amended from time to time, or a successor statute;
   (E)   The residence is also the primary residence of the person’s parents,
grandparents, siblings, or spouse; or
   (F)   The residence is a property purchased, leased, or contracted with and
licensed by the State Department of Corrections prior to February 14, 2017.
(Prior Code, § 132.4) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-22-2017)
§ 132.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each
day that a person maintains a permanent or temporary residence in violation of
this code shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 132.5) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-22-2017)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   HOUSING MAINTENANCE AND OCCUPANCY
      
152.   RENTAL DWELLINGS
      
153.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
      
154.   ZONING CODE
      
155.   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
      
156.   FLOOD ISSUES
      
157.   SIGNS
CHAPTER 150: BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Section
Building Movers
   
150.001   Bond
   
150.002   Insurance
   
150.003   Fee
State Building Code
   
150.015   Codes adopted by reference
   
150.016   Application, administration, and enforcement
   
150.017   Permits and fees
   
150.018   Building Code optional chapters
Electrical Requirements
   
150.030   Application of chapter
   
150.031   Electrical Inspector; qualifications and appointment
   
150.032   Electrical permits
   
150.033   Adoption of State Board of Electricity rules and regulations by
reference
Excavation
   
150.045   Excavation permit required
   
150.046   Application for permit
   
150.047   Duty of City Manager
   
150.048   Emergency action
   
150.049   Noncompletion or abandonment
   
150.050   Indemnification
   
150.051   Exemption from fee payment and insurance provisions
   
150.052   Refusal of permits
Swimming Pools
   
150.065   Definition
   
150.066   Permit requirements
   
150.067   Location requirements
   
150.068   Safety requirements
   
150.069   Lighting requirements
   
150.070   Noise
   
150.071   Inspections
   
150.072   Existing swimming pools
   
150.073   Discharge of pool water
Fences
   
150.085   Definitions
   
150.086   Zoning permits required
   
150.087   Requirements
   
150.088   Construction and maintenance
   
150.089   Prohibitions
 
   
150.999   Penalty
BUILDING MOVERS
§ 150.001 BOND.
   Any person applying for a permit to move a building into the city or
relocating a building on a lot or tract of land may be required by the City
Council to furnish the city with a surety bond to guarantee that any damaged
public property, easements, streets, or utilities will be promptly and
completely repaired or replaced in a manner satisfactory to the city at the
expense of the applicant, and the reconstruction or remodeling of the structure
to meet the requirements of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 150.001)
§ 150.002 INSURANCE.
   The applicant for a permit to move or relocate a building must provide the
City Building Official with a copy of sufficient and adequate insurance to
protect the city and the public from any and all damages which may result
either directly or indirectly from the moving or relocation of the building.
(Prior Code, § 150.002)
§ 150.003 FEE.
   At the time of filing an application for a permit to move a building, the
applicant must pay the fee for the permit as set forth in Chapter 33.
(Prior Code, § 150.003)
STATE BUILDING CODE
§ 150.015 CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The State Building Code, as adopted by the Commissioner of Labor and
Industry pursuant to M.S. §§ 326B.101 to 326B.16, as they may be amended from
time to time, including all of the amendments, rules, and regulations
established, adopted, and published from time to time by the State Commissioner
of Labor and Industry, through the Building Codes and Standards Unit, is hereby
adopted by reference with the exception of the optional chapters, unless
specifically adopted in this subchapter. The State Building Code is hereby
incorporated in this section as if fully set out herein.
(Prior Code, § 150.015) (Ord. 2023-02, passed 7-11-2023)
§ 150.016 APPLICATION, ADMINISTRATION, AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The application, administration, and enforcement of the code shall be
in accordance with State Building Code.
   (B)   The building code enforcement agency of the city is called the
Department of Building Safety.
   (C)   (1)   This code shall be enforced by the State Certified Building
Official designated by the city to administer the code (M.S. § 326B.133, Subd.
l, as it may be amended from time to time), including plumbing plan review and
inspections.
      (2)   Prior to installation of a system of plumbing other than for a
single-family dwelling with independent plumbing service, complete plumbing
plans and specifications, together with any additional information that the
Building Official may require, shall be submitted in duplicate and approved by
the Building Official. No construction shall proceed except in accordance with
the approved plans. Any alteration or extension of any existing plumbing system
shall be subject to these same requirements.
      (3)   Per M.S. § 326B.43, Subd. 2(n), as it may be amended from time to
time, the plumbing plans and specifications for the following types of projects
shall be submitted to the state for review:
         (a)   State licensed facilities as defined in M.S. § 326B.103, Subd.
13, as it may be amended from time to time;
         (b)   Public buildings as defined in M.S. § 326B.103, Subd. 11, as it
may be amended from time to time; and
         (c)   Projects of a special nature for which Department review is
requested by either the municipality or the state.
      (4)   A plumbing system installation, as described herein, shall be
subject to inspection as required by the Minn. Rules part 1300.0215.
      (5)   Fees for plumbing plan review shall be as authorized in Minn. Rules
Chapter 1300. Permit and plan review fees shall be assessed for work governed
by this chapter in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the City Council
via resolution. In addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits
issued for work governed by this code in accordance with M.S. § 326B.148, as it
may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 150.016) (Ord. 2023-02, passed 7-11-2023)
§ 150.017 PERMITS AND FEES.
   The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as authorized in
Minn. Rules Chapter 1300. Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by
this code in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the city. In addition,
a surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits issued for work governed by
this code in accordance with M.S. § 326B.148, as it may be amended from time to
time.
(Prior Code, § 150.017) (Ord. 2023-02, passed 7-11-2023)
§ 150.018 BUILDING CODE OPTIONAL CHAPTERS.
   (A)   The State Building Code, established pursuant to M.S. § 326B.101 to
326B.16, as they may be amended from time to time, allows the city to adopt by
reference and enforce certain optional chapters of the most current edition of
the State Building Code.
   (B)   The following optional provision identified in the most current
edition of the State Building Code are hereby adopted and incorporated as part
of the building code for the city: IBC Appendix Chapter J.
(Prior Code, § 150.019) (Ord. 2023-02, passed 7-11-2023)
ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 150.030 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all electrical
installations in any construction, remodeling, replacement, or repair within or
on public or private buildings and premises, except as specially provided by
this chapter and by Minnesota Statutes. The city elects to provide for
inspection of electrical installations within its jurisdiction as authorized by
M.S. § 326B.36, Subd. 6, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 150.020)
§ 150.031 ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR; QUALIFICATIONS AND APPOINTMENT.
   There is hereby created the office of Electrical Inspector. The person
chosen to fill the office of Electrical Inspector shall be of good moral
character, shall be possessed of such executive ability as is requisite for the
performance of his or her duties, and shall hold a license as a master or
journeyman electrician under M.S. § 326B.33, Subd. 1(1) or 2(b), as they may be
amended from time to time. In accordance with M.S. § 326B.36, Subd. 3, as it
may be amended from time to time, the Inspector shall give a bond in the amount
of $1,000 conditioned upon the faithful performance of his or her duties. The
Electrical Inspector shall receive as compensation a sum equal to 75% of
electrical permit fees.
(Prior Code, § 150.021)
§ 150.032 ELECTRICAL PERMITS.
   (A)   No electrical installation in any construction, remodeling,
replacement or repair, except minor repair work as defined in Minn. Rules part
3800.3500, subp. 10 shall be made without first securing a permit therefore.
   (B)   Permits shall be granted only to properly licensed electrical
contractors who are registered and bonded by the state, except that such permit
may be granted to a bona fide owner of a single family residential property,
who intends to conduct such work on his or her said property and further who
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the City Building Official or designee that
he or she has sufficient knowledge to perform the required work.
(Prior Code, § 150.022)
§ 150.033 ADOPTION OF STATE BOARD OF ELECTRICITY RULES AND REGULATIONS BY
REFERENCE.
   The State Board of Electricity Rules, Minn. Rules parts 3800.3885 to
3800.3613, revised August 2009, and any future revisions, modifications, or
amendments thereto, are hereby adopted by reference, except for fees which
shall be established by City Council resolution. With regard to said rules
adopted by reference, wherever the phrase “request for inspection” is used
therein, substitute the words “apply for electrical permit, “ and wherever the
words “the Board” referring to the State Board of Electricity, are used
therein, substitute the words “the City.”
(Prior Code, § 150.024)
EXCAVATION
§ 150.045 EXCAVATION PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to excavate, tunnel, undermine, or in any
manner cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any street,
highway, sidewalk, alley, avenue, or other public right-of-way or easement in
the city, or to place or leave any excavated material unless the person first
obtains an excavation permit from the city.
(Prior Code, § 150.030) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.046 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Written application for the issuance of an excavation permit must be made on
forms provided by the City Manager or designee. The permit will be issued only
to a contractor who complies with §§
112.50 through
112.56. The applicant must pay a fee in the amount set forth in Chapter 33 for
the issuance of the excavation permit.
(Prior Code, § 150.031)
§ 150.047 DUTY OF CITY MANAGER.
   The City Manager or designee may promulgate provisions to be included as a
part of the excavation permit as the City Manager or designee deems necessary
or advisable to protect the public from injury, to prevent damage to public or
private property, and to minimize interference with the public use of the
streets.
(Prior Code, § 150.032)
§ 150.048 EMERGENCY ACTION.
   A permit is not required prior to excavation in the event of any emergency
in which a main, conduit, or utility facility in or under any street breaks,
bursts, or otherwise is in the condition as to immediately endanger the
property, life, health, and safety of individuals. However, the persons owning
or controlling the facility shall thereafter apply for an excavation permit,
and shall not proceed with permanent repairs without first obtaining an
excavation permit.
(Prior Code, § 150.033) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.049 NONCOMPLETION OR ABANDONMENT.
   Work shall progress in an expeditious manner until completion. If work is
not performed in accordance with the permit or this subchapter, or stops or is
abandoned without due cause, the city may correct the work or fill the
excavations and repair the street. The city may not take this action until
after six-hour notice in writing to the holder of the permit of intent to do
so. The entire cost to the city of the work will be a liability of and will be
paid by the person to whom the permit was issued or the permittee’s surety.
(Prior Code, § 150.034)
§ 150.050 INDEMNIFICATION.
   The permittee will indemnify, keep, and hold the city, the City Council, and
city employees free and harmless from liability on account of injury or damage
to persons or property arising or growing out of the permittee’s negligence in
making any street excavation. In the event that a claim is made against the
city, the permittee, upon notice to it by the city, will defend the city at the
cost of the permittee. If a final judgment is obtained against the city, either
independently or jointly with the permittee, the permittee will pay the entire
judgment with all costs and hold the city harmless of any costs or damages
incurred.
(Prior Code, § 150.035)
§ 150.051 EXEMPTION FROM FEE PAYMENT AND INSURANCE PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter requiring payment of a permit fee and
evidence of public liability and property damage insurance do not apply to any
excavation work carried on by the city or its employees, and utilities
operating gas, electric, or telephone facilities within the city.
(Prior Code, § 150.036)
§ 150.052 REFUSAL OF PERMITS.
   If any person refuses or neglects to comply with the provisions of this
subchapter or of any permit, the City Manager or designee may refuse to issue
further permits to the person.
(Prior Code, § 150.037)
SWIMMING POOLS
§ 150.065 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SWIMMING POOLS. Any structure, bathing chamber, or tank including but not
limited to above and below ground swimming pools, hot tubs, or spas, used for
swimming or bathing, over 24 inches in depth, or with a surface area of more
than 150 square feet, that is constructed above or below ground. (Prior Code, §
150.050) (Ord. 2022-03, passed 5-24-2022)
§ 150.066 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Types of permits. One of the following swimming pool-related permits
may be required.
      (1)   A swimming pool permit shall be required for the construction of or
the alteration, remodeling, or addition of any improvement to a below grade
swimming pool.
      (2)   A building permit shall be required for any pump house, filter
house, or any structure erected in conjunction with a swimming pool.
      (3)   A mechanical permit shall be required for installation of a heater
for any pools, hot tubs, or spas.
      (4)   An electrical permit shall be required for all direct/hard-wired
pools, hot tubs, spas, or any other electrical components.
      (5)   A zoning permit shall be required for all above grade pools
including but not limited to hot tubs, and spas.
      (6)   A zoning permit shall be required for all fences constructed, per
the defined safety requirements in §
150.086.
   (B)   Permit applications.
      (1)   Application forms. An applicant for permits shall make application
on forms provided by the city and shall provide the City Building Official or
designee with a complete set of plans and specifications of the proposed
project, together with the explanatory data relative to the design, operation,
and maintenance of the swimming pool insofar as health and safety features are
concerned, as required by this subchapter or as requested by the City Building
Official or designee.
      (2)   Submission requirements.
         (a)   A complete application form and fee, the amount of which is
established by city ordinance;
         (b)   Two sets of dimensioned site plans (drawn to scale) which
include the following information;
         (c)   Property lines including property corners;
         (d)   The house, garage, driveway, and other permanent structures and
distance of each to the property lines;
         (e)   The location of all above and below utilities on the site
including gas, electric, sewer, water, phone, and the like. Homeowners shall be
responsible for contacting utility companies in regard to impacted utilities;
         (f)   Required setbacks from property lines;
         (g)   The proposed location of pool, hot tub, or spa, including
length, depth, and width of the pool, hot tub, or spa, and any decking and
showing distance of the pool, hot tub, or spa to the property lines;
         (h)   Detailed drawings of fence design, gate design, and latching
mechanisms;
         (i)   A copy of all pool, hot tub, or spa manufacturer build
requirements, specifications, and recommended maintenance procedures;
         (j)   Source and location of the water supply; and
         (k)   Methods to be used in securing the site during the entire term
of the permit, from beginning of excavation through completion. Such methods
may include both temporary and permanent security installations.
   (C)   Permit approvals. No permit shall be issued unless it meets the
requirements of this subchapter. No permit may be issued until the City
Building Official or designee or other responsible city staff is satisfied that
the proposed swimming pool, hot tub, or spa will not be a health hazard and is
to be constructed in such a way that its future use will not endanger the
health, lives, or safety of any persons coming in contact with the swimming
pool. All swimming pools, hot tubs, spas, apparatus(es), water supply and
drainage systems, and other features shall be constructed in conformity with
the approved plans. If any deviations from the plans are desired, a
supplementary plan covering that portion of the work involved shall be filed
for approval and shall conform to the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 150.051) (Ord. 2022-03, passed 5-24-2022)
§ 150.067 LOCATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Prohibited area. No part of a swimming pool, hot tub, or spa shall be
located closer than ten feet, as measured from the ground surface to any
overhead or underground utility line of any type. For the purpose of
determining the area in which no part of a swimming pool, hot tub, or spa can
be constructed, the centerline of any overhead or underground utility line will
be projected to the ground surface and the ten-foot prohibited area will be
measured parallel and on both sides of the projected centerline.
   (B)   Prohibited within easements. No part of a swimming pool, hot tub, or
spa shall be located within any private or public utility, drainage, or other
easement.
   (C)   Setback requirements.
      (1)   R-1 and R-2 Districts. No part of a swimming pool, hot tub, or spa
shall be located within ten feet of any side or rear lot line; nor within ten
feet of any principal structure or frost footing. No swimming pool, hot tub, or
spa may be located in the front yard of any property. The filter unit, pump,
heating unit, and any other mechanical equipment shall be located not less than
25 feet from any adjacent or nearby neighboring residential structure dwelling
and not closer than ten feet to any lot line.
      (2)   R-1A Districts. Swimming pools, hot tubs, or spas located in R-1A
Districts shall comply with the setback requirements of Chapter 154.
      (3)   R-3 and R-4 Districts. No part of a swimming pool, hot tub, or spa
shall be located within 50 feet of any side or rear lot line; nor within ten
feet of any principal structure or frost footing. No swimming pool, hot tub, or
spa shall be located in the front yard (as defined in Chapter 154) of any
multiple dwelling. The filter unit, pump, heating unit, and any other
mechanical equipment shall be located at least 50 feet from any adjacent or
nearby residential structure and not closer than 40 feet to any lot line.
(Prior Code, § 150.052) (Ord. 2022-03, passed 5-24-2022) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.068 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All pools, hot tubs, or spas shall be provided with required
safeguards to prevent children from gaining uncontrollable access. A successful
barrier shall be considered one which prevents a child from getting over,
under, or through and keeps the child from gaining access to the pool, hot tub,
or spa except when supervising adults are present. Permanent fences shall meet
all requirements of §
150.087. Temporary fencing may be exempted from some of the requirements of §
150.087 upon approval of the City Manager or designee, but for a period of no
more than the duration of the applicable permit, or 180 days, whichever is
less.
      (1)   Safeguards shall include a fence at least six feet in height,
unless exempted per §
150.068(C).
      (2)   Openings in the barrier (i.e., spaces between fence pickets,
railing balusters, and the like) shall not allow passage of a four-inch sphere.
      (3)   All fence openings or points of entry into the enclosure area shall
be equipped with a gate, and all gates must be equipped with self-closing and
self-latching devices placed so as to be inaccessible to small children. The
gates shall be locked at all times when the pool, hot tub, or spa is not in
direct use.
   (B)   Suction outlets shall be designed and installed in accordance with
ANSI/APSP-7.
   (C)   The following shall be considered fencing exemptions or modifications
for spas, hot tubs, and certain above ground pools as specified:
      (1)   Exempted. Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover which comply with
ASTM F1346 (per § 303 of the International Property Maintenance Code (2018)
shall be exempted from any required fencing of this subchapter.
      (2)   Modified. Above ground pools with sides or attached fences which
are four feet in height around the entire circumference, insurmountable, with
an access ladder or steps capable of being secured, locked, removed, or
otherwise protected to prevent access, shall require a fence of no less than
four feet in height rather than the required six feet of division (A) above,
while meeting all other safety fence requirements.
(Prior Code, § 150.053) (Ord. 2022-03, passed 5-24-2022) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.069 LIGHTING REQUIREMENTS.
   Lighting used in connection with swimming pools must be adjusted in a manner
as not to interfere with the reasonable use of adjacent property.
(Prior Code, § 150.054) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.070 NOISE.
   Unreasonably loud noise in connection with the operation or use of a pool is
prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 150.055) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.071 INSPECTIONS.
   The County Health Inspector or City Manager or designee is authorized to
conduct any inspections necessary to ensure compliance with all provisions of
this subchapter and has the right of entry at any reasonable hour to the
swimming pool for this purpose.
(Prior Code, § 150.056)
§ 150.072 EXISTING SWIMMING POOLS.
   No swimming pool, hot tub, or spa or any other structure erected in
conjunction with a pool existing as of June 3, 1982, will be required to be
moved so as to comply with the location requirements of §
150.067. All other requirements contained in this subchapter are applicable to
existing swimming pools, and structures erected in conjunction with the pools.
(Prior Code, § 150.057)
§ 150.073 DISCHARGE OF POOL WATER.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm
drain system any pool, hot tub, or spa water unless dechlorinated to less than
one ppm of chlorine.
(Prior Code, § 150.058) Penalty, see §
150.999
FENCES
§ 150.085 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FENCE. A partition, structure, wall, or gate erected as a dividing marker,
barrier, enclosure, or visual obstruction, but excluding buildings and bushes,
hedges, trees, and other living landscaping.
   LOT. An area of land intended for occupancy or use as permitted in the
Zoning Code, and otherwise meeting the requirements of the Zoning Code.
   LOT LINE. The boundary line of a lot, except that where any portion of a lot
extends into the public right-of-way, line will be treated as the LOT LINE.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. The boundary of a lot which abuts a public or private
street, and in the case of a corner lot, it is the boundary to the front of the
building’s principal entrance.
   LOT LINE, REAR. The boundary of a lot which is opposite the front lot line.
If the REAR LOT LINE is less than ten feet in length, or if the lot forms a
point at the rear, the REAR LOT LINE will be deemed to be a line ten feet
within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot
line, for the purposes of determining setbacks.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a
rear lot line.
   YARD. The portion of a lot between a lot line, and a building on the lot.
   YARD, EXTERIOR SIDE. A side yard which abuts a street or public right-of-way
along the side lot line.
   YARD, FRONT. The area extending along the full width of the lot between side
lot lines from the street right-of-way line to the principal building on the
lot.
   YARD, INTERIOR SIDE. A side yard which abuts an adjacent side yard or
backyard along the side lot line.
   YARD, REAR. The area extending along the full width of the lot between the
side lot lines from the rear lot line to the principal building on the lot.
   YARD, SIDE. The area extending along the full depth of the lot between the
front and rear lot lines form the side lot line to the principal building on
the lot.
(Prior Code, § 150.070)
§ 150.086 ZONING PERMITS REQUIRED.
   A zoning permit is required for the construction or alteration of a fence,
and for any additions to a fence. The permit must be obtained in the name of
the owner of the property on which the fence is or will be located.
Applications must be made on forms provided by the city. Permit fees must be
paid in accordance with §
33.060.
(Prior Code, § 150.071) (Ord. 2022-07, passed 10-11-2022)
§ 150.087 REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Location. Any fence constructed or altered after June 3, 1982, must be
located entirely upon the private property of the owner to whom the building
permit was issued. Ownership of the fence passes with ownership of the
property. The fence must be setback a distance from the owner’s property line
sufficient to avoid encroachment onto adjoining private or public property or a
public right-of-way. The applicant represents that the fence will be entirely
on the property of the fence applicant. At its sole discretion, the city may
require the applicant for the permit to locate and mark the property line
abutting the public property by having a registered surveyor place permanent
survey pins or stakes on the property line.
   (B)   Fence size. All fence and wall heights shall be measured from the
finished grade, except that the height of a railing, wall, fence, or screening
affixed to a deck constructed on the ground but raised above ground level, will
be measured from the elevation of the raised deck for that portion which is
affixed to the raised deck. The grade at the fence line shall not be altered in
any way that artificially increases the maximum permitted height of the fence.
Required fence height shall be measured and applied only at each post, and no
section of fence between posts shall exceed the height of the higher of the two
posts between which such fence is constructed.
   (C)   Fence uses.
      (1)   Residential uses.
         (a)   Front yards. No fence, fence post, or post cap shall be over
four feet, four inches in height within a required front yard setback.
         (b)   Side yards. No fence, fence post, or post cap shall be over six
feet, six inches in height. A fence up to six feet, six inches in height shall
be allowed on corner lots along the corner side behind the nearest front corner
of the principal building.
         (c)   Rear yards. No fence, fence post, or post cap, shall be over six
feet, six inches in height.
         (d)   Exemption. Through the approval of a conditional use permit
(CUP), fence heights as listed in divisions (C)(1)(a) through (C)(1)(c) above
may be increased for the following types of fencing.
            1.   Sport court fencing. Chain link fencing surrounding the sport
court may extend up to ten feet in height above the sport court surface
elevation, and shall be located in the rear yard only.
            2.   School parking lot/recreational fencing. Chain link fencing
surrounding the parking lot and/or associated with recreational space on a
school property within a residentially zoned property shall not be bound by the
restrictions of this section.
      (2)   Commercial/industrial uses.
         (a)   Front yards. No fence shall be over seven feet in height within
a required front yard setback.
         (b)   Side yards. No fence shall be over seven feet in height.
         (c)   Rear yards. No fence shall be over six feet, six inches in
height.
         (d)   Exemption. Through the approval of a conditional use permit
(CUP), fence heights as listed in divisions (C)(2)(a) through (C)(2)(c) above
may be increased for the following types of fencing.
            1.   Sport court fencing. Chain link fencing surrounding the sport
court may extend up to ten feet in height above the sport court surface
elevation, and shall be located in the rear yard only.
            2.   Loading docks. The height of screening (fencing) for loading
docks within view from a public street or adjacent residential or public
property shall not be less than ten feet in height, and shall have a minimum
opacity of 90%, unless otherwise approved by the City Council through the site
plan review process. Fencing/screening materials used for screening of loading
docks shall be comprised of a wall or fence that is harmonious with the primary
structure.
            3.   Trash containers. Trash dumpsters and other trash containers
shall be screened on all four sides, using an enclosure that is a minimum of
one foot above the top of the container. The trash enclosure shall be
constructed of materials that are harmonious with those of the principal
structure, and shall have a minimum opacity of 90%. A gate or door of the trash
enclosure shall be closed at all times except as needed to access the trash
container.
   (D)   Traffic view.
      (1)   Vision triangle at streets. No fence shall be placed in such a
manner as to materially impede vision between a height of two and one-half feet
and ten feet above the centerline grades of the intersection of two streets,
such that a clear line of vision is possible of the intersecting street from a
distance of 25 feet along the edge of each street, and the third side being a
line connecting the other sides, unless otherwise required or approved by the
Zoning Administrator or other authorized agent. All distances from county,
state, and U.S. highways shall be approved by the applicable permitting
authority as needed.
      (2)   Vision triangle at alleys and driveways. No fence shall be placed
in such a manner as to materially impede vision between a height of two and
one-half feet and ten feet above the centerline grades of the intersection of a
street and alley or driveway, such that a clear line of vision is possible of
the intersecting street from a distance of 15 feet along the edge of the street
and along the alley or driveway, and a third line connecting the other sides,
unless otherwise required or approved by the Zoning Administrator or other
authorized agent. All distances from county, state, and U.S. highways shall be
approved by the applicable permitting authority as needed.
   (E)   Swimming pool fencing. Fences or walls intended to serve as a swimming
pool barrier shall comply with the provisions as outlined in §
150.068.
(Prior Code, § 150.072) (Ord. 2022-07, passed 10-11-2022) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.088 CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   Every fence must be constructed in a substantial manner and of substantial
material, reasonably suitable for the purpose for which the fence is intended
as listed in the criteria below. Any fence which is dangerous by reason of its
construction or state of disrepair or is otherwise injurious to public safety,
health, or welfare is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
   (A)   Fences and walls shall be constructed in a manner and of such
materials that do not adversely affect the appearance of the neighborhood or
adjacent property values. Fences shall not be constructed from poultry netting
(chicken wire), welded wire, snow fence, branches, or materials originally
intended for other purposes, unless upon the showing of a high degree of
architectural quality achieved through the use of such materials, and prior
approval is granted by the City Manager or designee or other authorized agent.
   (B)   Fences and walls hereafter erected shall be durable, weather
resistant, rust-proof, and easily maintained.
   (C)   Fences shall have structural supports (posts/footings) as required by
the Building Official.
   (D)   Fences and walls shall be constructed of new or like new materials.
   (E)   The finished appearance of fences and walls shall be constructed with
the higher quality finish directed toward the exterior of the property if the
visual quality of the fence or wall is not the same on both sides.
   (F)   The framing and posts of wood, chain link, picket, stockade, and
decorative metal fences shall face the inside of the parcel area fenced. The
side of the fence considered to be the face (facing as applied to fence posts)
shall face the abutting property.
   (G)   No more than two types of related fencing materials shall be used in
any fence and wall.
   (H)   Both sides of any fence or wall shall be maintained in a condition of
reasonable repair and appearance by its owner and shall not be allowed to
become and remain in a condition of disrepair or danger, or constitute a
nuisance, public or private.
   (I)   The property owner is responsible for providing proof of property line
location.
   (J)   Retaining walls shall not be placed within any drainage, utility, or
ponding easements unless also reviewed and approved by the City Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 150.073) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.089 PROHIBITIONS.
   It is unlawful for any person to construct and maintain, or allow to be
constructed or maintained upon any property located within the city limits, any
barbed wire fence, unless otherwise authorized herein, spiked fence, or any
fence which is charged or connected with electrical current in a manner as to
transmit current to a person or animal which might come in contact with the
fence.
(Prior Code, § 150.074) (Ord. 2013-01, passed 9-10-2013) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   A violation of §§
150.015 through
150.018 is a misdemeanor. (See M.S. § 326B.082, Subd. 16, as it may be amended
from time to time).
(Prior Code, § 150.018)
   (C)   Any violation of §§
150.030 through
150.033, including a failure to file a permit when required, shall be a
misdemeanor violation subject to all penal provisions of this code and the
State Electrical Act. Any person who shall commence work of any kind for which
a permit is required under the provisions of this code without having first
received the necessary permit therefore shall, when subsequently receiving such
permit, be required to pay double the fees provided in this code.
(Prior Code, § 150.023) (Ord. 2023-02, passed 7-11-2023)
CHAPTER 151: HOUSING MAINTENANCE AND OCCUPANCY
Section
   
151.01   Purpose
   
151.02   Applicability
   
151.03   Adoption of Property Maintenance Code
   
151.04   Definitions
   
151.05   Responsibilities of owners and occupants
   
151.06   Rubbish and recyclables
   
151.07   Wood storage
   
151.08   Storm and screen doors and windows
   
151.09   Equipment and facilities
   
151.10   General requirements
   
151.11   Maximum occupancy; minimum space; access
   
151.12   Appeal
   
151.13   Access to multi-unit housing structures by United States Census Bureau
employees
§ 151.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety,
and general welfare. These general objectives include, among others, the
following:
      (1)   Protect the character and stability of residential areas within the
city;
      (2)   Correct and prevent housing conditions likely to adversely affect
the well-being of persons occupying dwellings within the city;
      (3)   Provide minimum standards for cooling, heating, sanitary equipment,
light, and ventilation; and
      (4)   Prevent the overcrowding, skims, and blight, and preserve the value
of land and buildings.
   (B)   It is not the intention of the city to intrude upon the contractual
relationship between tenant and landlord, to intervene as an advocate of either
party, to act as an arbiter, or to deal with complaints covered by this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 150.085) (Ord. 08-003, passed 4-22-2008)
§ 151.02 APPLICABILITY.
   Every building and its premises used in whole or in part as a home or
residence, or as a residential accessory structure. If a provision of this
subchapter is in conflict with state codes, the state codes will govern.
(Prior Code, § 150.086) (Ord. 08-003, passed 4-22-2008)
§ 151.03 ADOPTION OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
   The International Property Maintenance Code, the most current edition, as
published by the International Code Council, is adopted by reference in its
entirety, except as modified or amended in this subchapter. Nothing in this
subchapter or the International Property Maintenance Code shall be construed to
cancel, modify, or set aside any other provision of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 150.087) (Ord. 08-003, passed 4-22-2008)
§ 151.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure subordinate to a principal dwelling not
authorized to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants.
   APARTMENT BUILDING. A multiple dwelling structure designed to accommodate
three or more apartments.
   COMPLIANCE OFFICIAL. The City Manager and designated agents authorized to
administer and enforce this chapter.
   COMPOSTING. Accumulation of yard waste to be decomposed.
   DUMPSTER. A non-flexible container which has a holding capacity exceeding
five cubic yards and used for temporary storage of special pick-up refuse. A
DUMPSTER is a metal, composite, or other hard-side container for refuse
disposal which exceeds five cubic yards capacity.
   DUMPSTER, COMPACT. A container which has a holding capacity not exceeding
five cubic yards and used for temporary storage of special pick-up refuse. A
COMPACT DUMPSTER is a metal, composite, or other hard-side container for refuse
disposal which does not exceed five cubic yards capacity.
   DUMPSTER, FLEXIBLE. A flexible container which has a holding capacity not
exceeding five cubic yards and used for temporary storage of special pick-up
refuse. A FLEXIBLE DUMPSTER is commonly referred to, or known as, a DUMPSTER
BAG, SOFT-SIDE DUMPSTER, or WASTE REMOVAL BAG and used in lieu of a metal
front, or rear-load, or roll-off dumpster.
   DWELLING. Building, or portion thereof, designed or used predominantly for
residential occupancy of a continued nature, including one-family dwellings,
two-family dwellings, apartment buildings, and rooming units, but excluding
hotels and motels.
   DWELLING, DWELLING UNIT, PREMISES, or STRUCTURE. Deemed to be followed by
the words “or any part thereof.”
   DWELLING UNIT. A single residential accommodation intended for use as a
domicile for one family. Where a private garage is structurally attached, it
will be considered as part of the building in which the DWELLING UNIT is
located.
   FAMILY or HOUSEHOLD. One person, or two or more persons each related to the
others by blood, marriage, adoption, or foster care, or a group of not more
than the owner of a residence plus three persons not so related occupying the
residence and maintaining a common household and using common cooking and
kitchen facilities.
   FIREPLACE. An architectural structure, within a wall or free-standing,
designed to contain a fire.
   GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, or consumption of food.
   HABITABLE BUILDING. Any building or part thereof that meets minimum
standards for a dwelling.
   HABITABLE ROOM. Room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for
living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, toilet
rooms, laundries, furnace rooms, unfinished basements (those without required
ventilation, required electric outlets, and required exits), pantries, utility
rooms of less than 50 square feet of floor space, foyers, communicating
corridors, stairways, closets, storage spaces, workshops, and hobby and
recreation areas in parts of the structure below ground level or in attics.
   HEATED WATER. Water heated to a temperature of not less than 120°F, or the
lesser temperature required by government authority, measured at faucet outlet.
   KITCHEN. A space which contains a sink with counter working space, adequate
space for installing cooking and refrigeration equipment, and adequate space
for the storage of cooking utensils.
   MANAGED NATURAL LANDSCAPES. Planned, intentional, and maintained planting of
native or nonnative grasses, wildflowers, forbs, ferns, shrubs, or trees,
including but not limited to rain gardens, meadow vegetation, and ornamental
plants. Managed natural landscapes are expected to avoid the use of pesticides.
Managed natural landscapes do not include turf-grass lawns left unattended for
the purpose of returning to a natural state.
   NATIVE VEGETATION. Those non-turf grass indigenous trees, shrubs,
wildflowers, grasses, and other plants that have naturally adapted themselves
to the climate and soils of the area but require cultivation and maintenance to
remain viable.
   NATIVE HABITAT. Specially uncultivated valued and sensitive habitat
whereupon native vegetation exists in a pristine state and provides habitat for
a variety of species native to the area. Such vegetation shall maintain itself
in a stable condition with minimal human intervention.
   NOXIOUS WEEDS. An annual, biennial, or perennial plant designated by the
State Commissioner of Agriculture or the Council as injurious to public health,
the environment, public roads, crops, livestock, or other property.
   OCCUPANT. Any person (including owner or operator) living, sleeping,
cooking, and eating in a dwelling unit or living and sleeping in a rooming
unit.
   OPERATOR. The owner or agent who has charge, care, control, or management of
a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
   OWNER. Any person who owns a dwelling. Any person representing an owner must
comply with the provisions of this subchapter to the same extent as the owner.
   PERMISSIBLE OCCUPANCY. The maximum number of persons permitted to reside in
a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or joint
venture, or organization of any kind.
   PREMISES. A parcel of land which includes a dwelling.
   RANK VEGETATION. Uncultivated vegetation growing at a rapid rate due to
unplanned, unintentional, or accidental circumstances.
   RECYCLABLES. Materials which may be recycled or reused through recycling
processes, including metal beverage containers, glass, newsprint, plastic
bottles with necks, corrugated cardboard, magazines, catalogs, phone books, and
any other materials designated as RECYCLABLES by City Council resolution.
   REFUSE. All putrescible and non-putrescible waste solids, including garbage
and rubbish.
   RENTAL UNIT. A dwelling or dwelling unit let for rent or lease.
   REPAIR. To restore to a sound and acceptable state of operation,
serviceability, or appearance.
   RODENT HARBORAGE. Any place where rodents can live, nest, or seek shelter.
   ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit
used, or intended to be used, for living and sleeping, but not for cooking and
eating purposes.
   RUBBISH. The miscellaneous waste materials resulting from housekeeping,
mercantile enterprises, trades, manufacturing, offices including garbage,
refuse, and trash.
   SAFETY. The condition of being reasonably free from danger and hazards which
may cause accidents or disease.
   SUPPLIED. Paid, furnished, or provided by, or under the control of, an owner
or operator.
   TEMPORARY STORAGE CONTAINER. A fully enclosed storage unit or container
without a permanent foundation and not exceeding 128 square feet, designed to
be capable of relocation via towing, hauling or attachment to a vehicle from
one site to another.
   TOILET. A toilet, with a bowl and trap made in one piece, which is connected
to the city water and sewer systems or other approved water supply.
   TRASH. Non-recyclable material that is designated for landfill or
incinerator disposal by the hauler. The term does not include hazardous waste
as defined in M.S. §
116.06, Subd. 11, as it may be amended from time to time, or construction
debris as defined in M.S. § 115A. 03, Subd. 7, as it may be amended from time
to time.
   TURF GRASS. Cultivated vegetation consisting of a highly maintained surface
of dense grass underlain by a thick root system.
   VEGETABLE GARDEN. A specific area on the property for the growth and harvest
of any herbaceous plant whose fruit, seeds, roots, tubers, bulbs, stems,
leaves, or flower parts are used as food.
   WEEDS. Unsuitable, unwanted, or uncultivated vegetation, often causing
injury or competition to the desired vegetation type.
   YARD WASTE. Grass, grass clippings, bushes, shrubs, tree branches less than
four inches in diameter, and clippings from bushes and shrubs that come from
residential, commercial/retail, institutional, or industrial sources as part of
maintaining yards or other private or public lands. YARD WASTE does not include
construction, renovation, and demolition wastes, or clean wood.
(Prior Code, § 150.088) (Ord. 08-003, passed 4-22-2008; Ord. 2025-02, passed 4-
22-2025)
§ 151.05 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS.
   No owner or other person may occupy or let to another person any dwelling,
unless it and the premises are clean, sanitary, fit for human occupancy, and
comply with all applicable requirements of the city code and state and federal
laws and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 150.089) (Ord. 08-003, passed 4-22-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.06 RUBBISH AND RECYCLABLES.
   (A)   Storage location. Every occupant shall store and dispose of or recycle
all refuse, rubbish, and recyclables in a clean, sanitary, and safe manner as
prescribed by city ordinances. Every owner of an apartment building shall
supply facilities for the sanitary and safe storage and/or disposal or
recycling of refuse and recyclables. Except as provided in division (C) below,
the storage of rubbish, recyclables, and yard waste collection containers shall
be in the side or rear yard setback of the property, adjacent to a structure on
the property from which collection is conducted, or in the setback from which
collection is conducted, if appropriately permitted screening or fencing has
been achieved per §
150.088, and where the proposed location maximizes the potential setback from
the street.
   (B)   Refuse, recycling, and other waste containers. Collection containers
and dumpsters for multiple family residential, commercial, industrial and
institutional uses shall be screened on all four sides using an enclosure that
is a minimum of one foot above the top of the container. The rubbish enclosure
shall be constructed of materials that are harmonious with those of the
principal structure and have a minimum opacity of 90% opacity. A gate or door
of the rubbish enclosure shall be closed at all times except as needed to
access the container(s). No exterior container or enclosure shall exceed the
maximum height for fencing in the applicable zoning district.
   (C)   Front yard containers. Rubbish and recycling containers may be kept in
a front yard if within an approved and permitted screening structure, per §
150.088. Such screening structure shall provide a screening effect with no more
than a one-inch gap between any board or component of the structure, and be of
a height not less than three inches above the tallest container to be kept
within. The screening structure shall be placed no closer than three feet from
the property line and no closer than 15 feet from the road from which
collection is made. The structure shall be sized to accommodate only those
rubbish and recycling containers regularly serviced and emptied by the contract
hauler serving the property, but in no case shall exceed 36 square feet in
total area. The design, materials, and location shall be subject to review
prior to city issuance of the required zoning permit.
   (D)   Screening structures. Screening structures allowed in the front yard
pursuant to division (C) above may consist of prefabricated structures
generally available from home improvement outlets, including those that may
vary from the strict requirements of division (C) above, provided they
accomplish the intended screening effects.
(Prior Code, § 150.090) (Ord. 2022-03, passed 5-24-2022; Ord. 2023-01, passed
7-11-2023; Ord. 2024-01, passed 4-9-2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.07 WOOD STORAGE.
   Wood used as a fuel source for internal heat via fireplace or other wood
burning heating source and/or recreational fires, may only be stacked in side
and rear yards, and shall not be stacked in the front yard.
(Prior Code, § 150.091) (Ord. 08-003, passed 4-22-2008; Ord. 2022-03, passed 5-
24-2022) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.08 STORM AND SCREEN DOORS AND WINDOWS.
   The owner of a rental unit is responsible for providing and hanging all
screens and storm doors and storm windows required under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 150.092) (Ord. 08-003, passed 4-22-2008)
§ 151.09 EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES.
   No person may occupy, or let to another for occupancy, any dwelling or
dwelling unit which does not comply with all of the following.
   (A)   Sump pumps.
      (1)   Purpose. The discharge of water from roofs, surfaces, ground water
sump pumps, footing tile, swimming pools, or other flow of precipitation into
the city system results in flooding and overloading of the sanitary sewer
system. When this water is discharged into the sanitary sewer system, it is
treated at the sewage treatment plant, resulting in very large and needless
expenditures. The City Council, therefore, finds it in the best interest of the
city to prohibit such discharges.
      (2)   Discharge prohibited. No water from any roof, surface, ground water
sump pump, footing tile, swimming pool, or other flow of storm water shall be
discharged into the sanitary sewer system. Dwellings and other buildings and
structures which require, because of infiltration of water into basements,
crawl spaces, and the like, a sump pump discharge system, may have a
permanently installed discharge line which shall not at any time discharge
water into the sanitary sewer system. A permanent installation shall be one
which provides for year round discharge capability to either the outside of the
dwelling, building, or structure, or is connected to city storm sewer or
discharge through the curb and gutter to the street. Inside piping shall be
rigid pipe with fixed joints, PVC, or equivalent.
      (3)   Disconnection. Before December 31, 1999, any person, firm, or
corporation having a roof surface, ground water sump pump, footing tile, or
swimming pool now connected and/or discharging into the sanitary sewer system
shall be disconnected from the sanitary sewer and redirected in an effective,
professional manner. Unless inspected prior to then, they may have 45 days to
make the disconnection.
      (4)   Inspection. Every person owning improved real estate that
discharges into the city’s sanitary sewer system shall allow an employee of the
city or a designated representative of the city to inspect the buildings to
confirm that there is no sump pump or other prohibited discharge into the
sanitary sewer system. In lieu of having the city inspect his, her, or their
property, any person may furnish a certificate from a licensed plumber
certifying that his, her, or their property is in compliance with this chapter.
      (5)   Correction period; reinspection. Properties which fail during the
first inspection shall be re-inspected within 45 days to allow corrections to
be completed. If property fails the re-inspection, the $100 per month surcharge
shall be imposed on every sewer bill until compliance is achieved.
      (6)   Future inspections. Each sump pump or sump pump basket installation
identified will be re-inspected periodically.
      (7)   New construction. All new dwellings with sumps for which a building
permit is issued after adoption of this chapter, shall have a pump and shall be
piped to the outside of the dwelling, in accordance with this chapter, before a
certificate of occupancy is issued.
      (8)   Surcharge. A surcharge of $100 per month is hereby imposed on every
sewer bill mailed, after a 30-day grace period following inspection or
confirmed attempt at inspection, to property owners who are not in compliance
with this chapter or who have refused to allow their property to be inspected
to determine if there is compliance. All properties found during periodic re-
inspection to have violated this chapter will be subject to the $100 per month
surcharge for all months between the two most recent inspections.
      (9)   Winter discharge. The City Manager’s office is authorized to issue
a permit to allow a property owner to discharge surface water into the sanitary
sewer system. The permit shall authorize such discharge only from November 15
to March 15 and a property owner is required to meet at least one of the
following criteria in order to obtain a permit.
         (a)   The freezing of the surface water discharge from the sump pump
or footing drain is causing a dangerous condition, such as ice buildup or
flooding, on either public or private property.
         (b)   The property owner has demonstrated that there is a danger that
the sump pump discharge pipes will freeze up and result in either failure or
damage to the sump pump unit or cause basement flooding.
         (c)   The water being discharged from the sump pump or footing drain
cannot be readily discharged into a storm drain or other acceptable drainage
system.
   (B)   Manual and automatic check valves. Check valves if necessary to
prevent sewer back-flow. Prior to the closing of the sale of a dwelling, the
seller shall request that a sanitary sewer line to the main street line be
inspected for manual and automatic check valves. If the Compliance Officer
determines that both manual and automatic check valves are necessary to prevent
back-flow, the situation must be corrected before the dwelling is considered in
compliance to be sold.
(Prior Code, § 150.093) (Ord. 08-003, passed 4-22-2008)
§ 151.10 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   No person may occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or
dwelling unit which does not comply with the following.
   (A)   Fence maintenance. Fences may consist only of metal, wood, masonry, or
other decay resistant material, maintained in good condition both in appearance
and in structure, solely on the owner’s property, with all wood material other
than decay resistant varieties with paint or other preservatives. Painting is
required if 25% or more of the exterior surface is unpainted or determined by
the Compliance Official to be paint blistered, and repair is required if 25% or
more of the exterior surface of the pointing of any brick, block, or stone wall
is loose or has fallen out. Posts and framework must face the owner’s property,
with the finished material facing the street or adjacent property.
   (B)   Accessory structure maintenance. Painting is required if 25% or more
of the exterior surface is unpainted or determined by the Compliance Official
to be paint blistered, the surface must be painted and repair is required. If
25% or more of the exterior surface of the pointing of any brick, block, or
stone wall is loose or has fallen out.
   (C)   Grading and drainage. Every yard, court, passageway, and other
portions of the premises must be graded and drained so as to be free of
standing water. Draining cannot impact neighboring properties as specified in §
154.177(H).
   (D)   Unit below grade. No space located more than four feet below grade may
be used as a habitable room of a dwelling unless approved by the Building
Official.
   (E)   Yard cover. Every yard of premises on which a dwelling stands must be
covered by lawns and/or ground cover of vegetation, gardens, hedges, shrubbery,
or related decorative materials and must be maintained. Once an area has been
converted to turf grass, the land owner shall not allow the turf grass to
exceed the height of six inches or be allowed to go to seed. No land owner may
permit or maintain on the land any growth of weeds, grass, brush, or other rank
vegetation to exceed the height of six inches, any accumulation of dead weeds,
grass or brush, or any noxious weeds or plants as defined by the State
Department of Agriculture. The planned, intentional, and maintained planting of
native or nonnative grasses, wildflowers, forbs, ferns, shrubs, or trees,
including but not limited to rain gardens, meadow vegetation, and ornamental
plants, known as managed natural landscapes, shall be allowed. Managed natural
landscapes do not include turf-grass lawns left unattended for the purpose of
returning to a natural state.
      (1)   Managed natural landscapes exceeding six inches shall not be any
closer to a fire source than 25 feet.
      (2)   Setback requirements for surfaces covered by managed natural
landscapes shall be a minimum of three feet from a side yard property line. No
vegetative growth greater than 18 inches in height five feet from any public
roadway adjacent to the front yard, and for corner houses, a public roadway
adjacent to the side yard.
      (3)   Managed natural landscapes existing prior to the adoption of this
section that do not conform to the standards of this section shall be
considered legal nonconformities. Expansion of the nonconformity shall not be
allowed, but alterations may be made to make the landscape more conforming.
   (F)   Composting. Composting is permitted only if:
      (1)   It is conducted in enclosed containers not over five feet in height
with an aggregate volume of not more than 100 cubic feet, made of durable
material such as wood, block, or sturdy metal fencing located at least five
feet from lot lines and no closer than 20 feet from any habitable building,
other than the resident’s own home, and no closer than two feet from any alley;
      (2)   Only organic yard materials, such as grass clippings, leaves,
flowers, weeds, sawdust, wood ash, plant trimmings, straw, and commercial
composting material, are put in the compost containers;
      (3)   No meat, bones, fat, oils, dairy products, or other kitchen wastes,
whole branches, logs, plastics, synthetic fibers, human or pet wastes, or
diseased plants are put in the containers; and
      (4)   Composting is managed to minimize odor and promote effective
composition.
   (G)   Trees and brush. Trees and brush must be trimmed so as not to
interfere with public walkway or right-of-way access or driving sightlines.
   (H)   Discontinuance of service or facilities. No owner, operator, or
occupant may cause any service, facility, equipment, or utility required under
this chapter to be removed from, shut off or discontinued, for any occupied
dwelling, except for temporary emergencies and temporary interruptions
necessary for repairs or alterations.
   (I)   Dumpsters. Dumpsters are permitted for no more than 120 days in a
calendar year, or for the duration of an associated building permit, whichever
is longer, and must be maintained in good repair and appearance. The height of
the materials in the dumpster shall not exceed the height of the dumpster. No
dumpster shall be placed closer than five feet from any side or rear property
line.
   (J)   Flexible and compact dumpsters. A flexible dumpster or compact
dumpster, as defined by the chapter, may be placed and used on a property
subject to the following requirements.
      (1)   No liquid waste shall be placed into a flexible dumpster or compact
dumpster for disposal. Only rubbish that is of a solid physical form or matter
shall be placed or disposed into the flexible dumpster or compact dumpster,
such as construction or demolition debris, discarded household goods or wares,
cardboard or packaging waste, or the like.
      (2)   A flexible dumpster or compact dumpster shall not exceed a five
cubic yard capacity.
      (3)   No flexible dumpster or compact dumpster shall be placed within the
roadway surface of any street and shall be located behind the street curb. No
flexible dumpster or compact dumpster shall be placed within or as to block any
portion of a sidewalk, path, or trail.
      (4)   Flexible or compact dumpsters shall be placed no closer than five
feet from any side or rear property line.
      (5)   No flexible dumpster or compact dumpster shall be placed within 15
feet of a water/fire hydrant.
      (6)   No flexible dumpster or compact dumpster shall remain on a property
more than 14 days from the date it was placed outdoors at the property. The
flexible dumpster or compact dumpster shall be collected by a waste hauler or
otherwise removed within one week of the container being filled to its
capacity.
      (7)   No more than two flexible or compact dumpsters shall be kept on any
property at any one time, nor may any individual residential property keep such
flexible dumpsters or compact dumpsters for more than 120 days in any calendar
year.
      (8)    All rubbish shall be completely and securely placed within the
container; no material shall be sticking out or exceeding above the top of the
container sides. No rubbish placed in the container shall exceed outside the
container beyond the plane of the street curb line. It is the responsibility of
the property owner/occupant to ensure any refuse that falls or is blown out of
the container is promptly collected/picked up and properly stored as any refuse
is required to be stored.
   (K)   Temporary storage containers. A single temporary storage container, as
defined by the chapter, may be placed and used on a property subject to the
following requirements:
      (1)   Must be placed on an improved surface as defined in code.
      (2)   Duration may not exceed 30 days.
      (3)   Shall be placed no closer than five feet from any side or rear
property line.
      (4)   Shall not be placed within or as to block any portion of a
sidewalk, path, or trail.
      (5)   Shall not be placed within 15 feet of a water/fire hydrant.
(Prior Code, § 150.094) (Ord. 08-003, passed 4-22-2008; Ord. 2022-03, passed 5-
24-2022; Ord. 2023-01, passed 7-11-2023; Ord. 2025-02, passed 4-22-2025)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.11 MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY; MINIMUM SPACE; ACCESS.
   No person may occupy, or permit to be occupied, any dwelling which does not
comply with the following maximum occupancy requirements.
 
            One-Two Occupants Three-Five Occupants Six or More Occupants
Bedroom     70 square feet    50 square feet per   50 square feet per person
                              person
Dining Room No requirement    80 square feet       100 square feet
Living Room No requirement    120 square feet      150 square feet
 
(Prior Code, § 150.095) (Ord. 08-003, passed 4-22-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.12 APPEAL.
   When it is alleged by the owner or resident agent that the compliance order
is based upon the erroneous interpretation of this chapter, other applicable
city code provisions or the International Property Maintenance Code, the owner
or resident agent may appeal the compliance order to the City Council. Such
appeal shall be in writing, must specify the grounds for the appeal, and must
be filed with the city within five business days after service of the
compliance order.
(Prior Code, § 150.096) (Ord. 08-003, passed 4-22-2008)
§ 151.13 ACCESS TO MULTI-UNIT HOUSING STRUCTURES BY UNITED STATES CENSUS BUREAU
EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   Declaration and purpose.
      (1)   The United States Constitution directs a decennial census count of
all persons living in the United States.
      (2)   Complete, accurate census data is of critical importance to all
residents of the city for equal political representation, fair distribution of
federal and state funding, and sound planning and investment infrastructure,
real estate, business development, and public policy and programming.
      (3)   During the decennial census, the United States Census Bureau
conducts non-response follow-up operations (NRFU), when employees of the United
States Census Bureau visit households that have not yet submitted a census
form.
      (4)   Renters and others who live in multi-unit housing structures have
historically been at higher risk of being undercounted in the decennial census,
with the number of renter households in an area being the most influential
variable affecting an area’s census self-response rate; in other words, the
more renters in an area, the lower the self-response rate of that area.
      (5)   The risk of an undercount is compounded in areas with high
concentrations of communities that have been consistently undercounted in the
past and who are more likely to be renters, including low income households,
communities of color, Native American/American Indian communities, immigrants
and refugees, and young people.
      (6)   Multi-unit housing structures can be difficult for Census Bureau
employees to enter due to security barriers.
      (7)   It is critical that Census Bureau employees have access to multi-
unit housing structures during the decennial census, so they can reach
households that have not yet participated.
      (8)   13 U.S.C. § 223 authorizes Census Bureau employees to access “any
hotel, apartment house, boarding or lodging house, tenement, or other
building.”
   (B)   Prohibition. It is unlawful for a person, either directly or
indirectly, to deny access to an apartment building, dormitory, nursing home,
manufactured home park, other multi-unit structure used as a residence, or an
area in which one or more single-family dwellings are located on private
roadways, to employees of the United States Census Bureau who display current,
valid Census Bureau credentials and who are engaged in official census counting
operations during the Census Bureau’s standard operational hours of 9:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m. (local time) during the decennial census.
   (C)   Access and permissions. Census Bureau employees granted access must be
permitted to leave census materials in an orderly manner for residents at their
doors, except that the manager of a nursing home may direct that the materials
be left at a central location within the facility.
   (D)   Exemptions. This section does not prohibit:
      (1)   Denial of admittance into a particular apartment, room,
manufactured home, or personal residential unit;
      (2)   Denial of permission to visit certain persons for valid health
reasons, in the case of a nursing home or a Registered Housing with Services
Establishment providing assisted-living services meeting the requirements of
M.S. § 292(1), as it may be amended from time to time;
      (3)   Limiting visits to a reasonable number of census employees;
      (4)   Requiring a prior appointment or notification to gain access to the
structure; or
      (5)   Denial of admittance to or expulsion of an individual employee from
a multi-unit housing structure for good cause.
(Prior Code, § 150.097) (Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-10-2020)
CHAPTER 152: RENTAL DWELLINGS
Section
   
152.01   Purpose
   
152.02   Applicability
   
152.03   Adoption of Property Maintenance Code
   
152.04   Compliance official
   
152.05   Definitions
   
152.06   Responsibilities of owner and landlord
   
152.07   Responsibilities of occupant or renter
   
152.08   License required
   
152.09   License application
   
152.10   License fees
   
152.11   Issuance of license
   
152.12   Inspections
   
152.13   Conduct on licensed premises
   
152.14   Condition of licensed premises
   
152.15   Hearing procedure
§ 152.01 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare of the community at large and the residents of rental dwellings in the
city and to ensure that rental housing in the city is decent, safe, and
sanitary and is so operated and maintained as not to become a nuisance to the
neighborhood or to become an influence that fosters blight and deterioration or
creates a disincentive to reinvestment in the community. The operation of
rental residential properties is a business enterprise that entails certain
responsibilities. Owners and operators are responsible to take such reasonable
steps as necessary to ensure that the citizens of the city who occupy such
units may pursue the quiet enjoyment of the normal activities of life in
surroundings that are: safe, secure, and sanitary; free from noise, nuisance,
or annoyances; and free from unreasonable fears about safety of persons and
security of property.
(Prior Code, § 150.120) (Ord. 08-003, passed 4-22-2008)
§ 152.02 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter applies to all rental dwellings in the city, including any
accessory structures on the premises upon which the rental dwelling is located,
such as garages and storage buildings. This chapter does not apply to State
Department of Health licensed rest homes, convalescent care facilities,
licensed group homes, nursing homes, or condominium units as defined and
governed by M.S. Chapters 515, 515A, and 515B, as they may be amended from time
to time.
(Prior Code, § 150.121) (Ord. 08-003, passed 4-22-2008)
§ 152.03 ADOPTION OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
   The International Property Maintenance Code, current edition, as published
by the International Code Council, is adopted by reference in its entirety,
except as modified or amended in this chapter. Nothing in this chapter or the
International Property Maintenance Code shall be construed to cancel, modify,
or set aside any other provision of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 150.122) (Ord. 08-003, passed 4-22-2008)
§ 152.04 COMPLIANCE OFFICIAL.
   The City Manager or designee is authorized and directed to enforce all
provisions of this chapter, subject to review by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 150.123) (Ord. 08-003, passed 4-22-2008; Ord. 2025-02, passed 4-
22-2025)
§ 152.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Terms
defined herein shall apply specifically to this
Chapter 152. Terms used in this chapter that are not defined shall refer to the
adopted Building Code, Property Maintenance Code, or Zoning Code as applicable.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure subordinate to a principal dwelling not
authorized to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants.
   APARTMENT BUILDING. A multiple dwelling structure designed to accommodate
three or more apartments.
   BATHROOM. A group of fixtures consisting of a water closet, lavatory, and
bathtub or shower. Such fixtures are located together on the same floor level.
   BUILDING. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any
use or occupancy.
   CLEAN. The absence of rubbish, garbage, vermin or other unsightly, offensive
or extraneous matter.
   COMPLIANCE OFFICIAL. The City Manager and designated agents authorized to
administer and enforce this chapter.
   COMPOSTING. Accumulation of yard waste to be decomposed.
   CONDEMN. To adjudge/declare officially unfit for occupancy or use.
   DWELLING. Building, or portion thereof, designed or used predominantly for
residential occupancy of a continued nature, including one-family dwellings,
two-family dwellings, apartment buildings, and rooming units, but excluding
hotels and motels.
   DWELLING, DWELLING UNIT, PREMISES, or STRUCTURE. Deemed to be followed by
the words “or any part thereof.”
   DWELLING UNIT. A single residential accommodation intended for use as a
domicile for one family. Where a private garage is structurally attached, it
will be considered as part of the building in which the DWELLING UNIT is
located.
   EGRESS WINDOW. A window or other opening located such that the sill height
of the opening is not more than:
      (1)   Forty-four inches above or below the finished ground level adjacent
to the opening; and
      (2)   Cannot be over 44 inches from the finished floor to the clear
opening.
   EXIT. A continuous and unobstructed means of egress to a public way and
shall include intervening doors, doorways, corridors, ramps, stairways, smoke-
proof enclosures, horizontal exits, exit passageways, exit access, exit
enclosures, exit discharge, exit courts and yards.
   EXTERIOR DOORWAY. Door providing access to the exterior of a home or single
unit within a multi-unit structure. The required capacity of each door opening
shall be sufficient for the occupant load thereof and shall provide a minimum
clear opening width of 32 inches (813 mm). The clear opening width of doorways
with swinging doors shall be measured between the face of the door and the
stop, with the door open 90 degrees. Such doors shall not utilize deadbolt
locks with a keyed method of locking/unlocking from the interior of the
structure or unit.
   EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents, vermin or
other pests by a licensed company/agency, eliminating their harborage places;
by removing or making inaccessible materials that serve as their food; by
poison spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other approved pest elimination
methods.
   FAMILY or HOUSEHOLD. One person, or two or more persons each related to the
others by blood, marriage, adoption, or foster care, or a group of not more
than the owner or a residence plus three persons not so related, occupying the
residence and maintaining a common household and using common cooking and
kitchen facilities.
   FUNCTIONING. In such physical condition as to safely perform the service or
services for which an item is designed or intended.
   GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, or consumption of food.
   GUARD RAIL. A building component or a system of building components located
at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the
possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.
   HABITABLE BUILDING. Any building or part thereof that meets minimum
standards for a dwelling.
   HABITABLE ROOM. Room or enclosed floor space used, or intended to be used,
for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms toilet
rooms, laundries, furnace rooms, unfinished basements, (those without required
ventilation, required electric outlets and required exits), pantries utility
rooms of less than 50 square feet of floor space, foyers, communicating
corridors, stairways, closets, storage spaces, and workshops, hobby and
recreation areas in parts of the structure below ground level or in attics.
   HALLWAY. A corridor or a passageway free from all obstructions, providing
egress from a location to another location within a building and not within the
exclusive control of one individual.
   HEATED WATER. Water heated to a temperature of not less than 120°F, or such
lesser temperature required by government authority, measured at faucet outlet.
   HOUSEKEEPING UNIT. A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable space
equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating which
does not contain, within such a unit, a toilet, lavatory, and bathtub or
shower.
   IMMINENT DANGER. A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening
injury or death at any time.
   INFESTATION. The presence within or around a dwelling or dwelling unit of
any insect, bird, rodent, vermin or other pest.
   KITCHEN. A space which contains a sink with counter working space, adequate
space for installing cooking and refrigeration equipment, and adequate space
for the storage of cooking utensils.
   LABELED. Devices, equipment, appliances, or materials to which has been
affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally
recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization
concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the
production of the above-labeled items and by whose label the manufacturer
attests to compliance with applicable nationally recognized standards.
   LET. To permit, provide or offer possession or occupancy of a dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premise or structure by a person who is
or is not the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten
lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement
of contract for the sale of land.
   OCCUPANT. Any person (including owner or operator) living, sleeping,
cooking, and eating in a dwelling unit or living and sleeping in a rooming
unit.
   OPENABLE AREA. That part of a window, skylight or door which is available
for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
   OPERATOR. The owner or agent who has charge, care, control, or management of
a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
   OWNER. Any person who owns a dwelling. Or, any person or entity that holds
an ownership stake of any kind, and/or any person representing any such owner.
Any such owner must comply with the provisions of this chapter to the same
extent as the OWNER.
   OWNER. Any person who owns a dwelling. Any person representing an owner must
comply with the provisions of this chapter to the same extent as the OWNER.
   PERMISSIBLE OCCUPANCY. The maximum number of persons permitted to reside in
a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation or joint
venture, or organization of any kind.
   PREMISES. A parcel of land which includes a dwelling.
   RECYCLABLES. Materials which may be recycled or reused through recycling
processes, including metal beverage containers, glass, newsprint, plastic
bottles with necks, corrugated cardboard, magazines, catalogs, phone books, and
any other materials designated as recyclables by City Council resolution.
   REFUSE. All putrescible and non-putrescible waste solids including garbage
and rubbish.
   RENTAL UNIT. A dwelling or dwelling unit let for rent or lease in exchange
for monetary payment or which is occupied by someone other than the owner for a
period longer than six months.
   REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT. To remove an existing or portion of a system and to
construct or install a new item of a quality similar to that of the existing
item when it was new. Replacement ordinarily takes place when repair of the
item is impractical.
   RESIDENCE OR RESIDENTIAL USE. A dwelling unit that is intended for occupancy
as a domicile for an individual, family, or groups of individuals as specified
in this chapter, for no less than 30 consecutive days, whether owned or rented.
   RODENT HARBORAGE. Any place where rodents can live, nest, or seek shelter.
   ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit
used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking and
eating purposes.
   SAFETY. The condition of being reasonably free from danger and hazards which
may cause accidents or disease.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL UNIT. A form of transient occupancy, similar to motels or
other such uses, in a residential zoning district for which occupancy of a
residential building, room, or suite of rooms is offered, rented, or used, for
periods of fewer than 30 consecutive days.
   STORY. The lowest story in a building which qualifies as a story, as defined
herein, except that a floor level in a building having only one floor level
shall be classified as a first story, provided such floor level is not more
than four feet below grade, as defined herein, for more than 50% of the total
perimeter, or more than eight feet below grade, as defined herein, at any
point.
   SUPPLIED. Paid, furnished, or provided by, or under the control of, an owner
or operator.
   TENANT. A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the
legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.
   TOILET. A toilet, with a bowl and trap made in one piece, which is connected
to the city water and sewer systems, or other approved water supply.
   TOILET ROOM. A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or
shower.
   UNSAFE. A condition or a combination of conditions which are dangerous or
hazardous to persons or property.
   UNSANITARY. Conditions which are dangerous or hazardous to the health of
persons.
   VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or
unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space.
   WASH BASIN. A plumbing fixture dedicated to handwashing.
   WATER CLOSET. A toilet, with a bowl and trap made in one piece, which is
connected to the city water and sewage system or other approved water supply
and sewer system.
   WORKMANLIKE. Executed in a skilled and professional manner including
obtaining all necessary city/state permits, inspections, approvals of the
authority having jurisdiction, adherence to all applicable codes, installation
to manufacturer's specifications, the use of proper materials for designed
purposes, installation to current architectural or engineering standards,
surfaces (material, color, texture) to conform to current surrounding areas,
and all work shall be generally plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged and
without marring adjacent work.
(Prior Code, § 150.124) (Ord. 08-003, passed 4-22-2008; Ord. 2025-02, passed 4-
22-2025; Ord. 2025-05, passed 10-28-2025; Ord. 2025-06, passed 10-28-2025)
§ 152.06 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNER AND LANDLORD.
   (A)   Owner responsible. Every owner of a rental dwelling is responsible for
violations of duties and obligations imposed by this chapter even if the duty
or obligation is also imposed on the occupant(s) of the rental dwelling, or
even if the owner, by agreement, has imposed on the occupant(s) the duty of
making sure that the rental dwelling complies with the requirements of this
subchapter, applicable provisions of the city code, and the International
Property Maintenance Code.
   (B)   Cleanliness. Every owner of a rental dwelling is responsible for
keeping that part of the premises which he or she occupies or controls in a
clean, sanitary, and safe condition, free of rodent harborage, as rodents are
defined in the city code related to nuisances, in conformance with this
subchapter, applicable provisions of the city code, and the International
Property Maintenance Code, including any shared or common areas in a multiple-
family dwelling.
   (C)   Obtain license. The owner or resident agent must obtain a license and
pay all license fees as required by this chapter before the rental dwelling may
be rented. Failure to obtain the required license shall cause the city to take
the steps to remove the rental opportunity established in §
152.14.
   (D)   Drives, parking, sidewalks. The owner of an apartment building must
provide and maintain effective illumination in all exterior parking lots and
walkways, parking areas, and driveways. Unless agreed upon, the owner of a
property adjacent to walkways must use due diligence to keep the walk safe for
pedestrians. No such owner or occupant may allow snow, ice, dirt, or rubbish to
remain on the walk longer than 12 hours after it has been deposited.
   (E)   Discontinuance of service or facilities. No owner, operator, or
occupant may cause any service, facility, equipment, or utility required under
this chapter to be removed from, shut off, or discontinued, for any occupied
dwelling, except for temporary emergencies and temporary interruptions
necessary for repairs or alterations.
(Prior Code, § 150.125) (Ord. 08-003, passed 4-22-2008; Ord. 2024-01, passed 4-
9-2024; Ord. 2025-06, passed 10-28-2025)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.07 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OCCUPANT OR RENTER.
   (A)   Access by owner. Every occupant of a rental dwelling shall give the
owner or resident agent access to his or her unit, and that part of the
premises which he or she occupies or controls, at reasonable times for the
purpose of inspections and maintenance, and making necessary repairs or
alterations on the premises.
   (B)   Cleanliness. Every occupant of a rental dwelling is responsible for
keeping his or her unit, and any part of the premises which he or she occupies
of controls, in a clean, sanitary, and safe condition, free of rodent
harborage, as rodents are defined in the city code related to nuisances, in
conformance with this subchapter, applicable provisions of the city code, and
the International Property Maintenance
Code.
   (C)   Disposal of rubbish, recyclables, and other waste. Every occupant of a
rental dwelling shall store and dispose of all his or her rubbish, garbage and
waste in a clean, sanitary and safe manner. All rubbish, garbage, and waste
must be collected by a hauler who is licensed by the city as required by §§
115.050 through
115.054. The storage of refuse and recyclable collection containers shall not
be kept in the front yard setback without approved screening or fencing in
accordance with §§
150.085 through
150.089.
(Prior Code, § 150.126) (Ord. 08-003, passed 4-22-2008; Ord. 2022-03, passed 5-
27-2022; Ord. 2024-01, passed 4-9-2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.08 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   License required. It is unlawful to operate a rental dwelling in the
city without first having obtained a license from the city. An owner must
obtain a license for each rental dwelling. If the rental dwelling contains two
or more units, and has a common owner and a common property identification
number, the owner may obtain a single license for the rental dwelling. Failure
to obtain the required license shall cause the city to take steps to remove the
rental opportunity established in §
152.14.
   (B)   Number of licensed rental units per owner. The city shall not issue
any license for the rental of any additional single-family detached residences
to an individual who already has (or is applying for in the current license
year) any ownership interest in four or more rental or non-homestead single-
family residences in the city. A license applicant shall disclose by affidavit
all single-family detached rental dwellings in the city in which the applicant
holds any ownership interest. An ownership interest shall include fee interest,
partial or whole financial interest in any corporate or business form, or other
contractual arrangement that owns single-family detached rental properties, any
partial or whole financial interest in any trust or other organization that
owns single-family detached rental properties, or any other interest of the
kind.
   (C)   Number of licensed rental units in the city. The total number of
single-family detached rental licenses shall not exceed 80, being approximately
4% of the total number of single-family detached houses in the city as
determined by the city based on the city's available data. In addition, the
number of licensed rental single-family detached units shall not exceed the
following number in each of four subareas of the city, the subareas being
defined as follows:
      (1)   Subarea 1 shall be all single-family homes lying north of 37th
Avenue NE. A maximum of eight such licenses may be issued in this subarea.
      (2)   Subarea 2 shall be all single-family homes lying south of 37th
Avenue NE and north of 33rd Avenue NE. A maximum of 31 such licenses may be
issued in this subarea.
      (3)   Subarea 3 shall be all single-family homes lying south of 33rd
Avenue NE and north of 29th Avenue NE. A maximum of 31 such licenses may be
issued in this subarea.
      (4)   Subarea 4 shall be all single-family homes lying south of 29th
Avenue NE. A maximum of ten such licenses may be issued in this subarea.
   (D)   Exceptions.
      (1)   The City Manager or designee may issue a long-term rental license
exceeding the thresholds of division (C) to an owner of a single-family
detached unit for a temporary rental period upon appeal by said owner of a
currently homesteaded single-family home where the City Manager finds a
sufficient hardship for said temporary period. A hardship shall be a unique
situation created by circumstances expected to be limited in time, with a
reasonably foreseeable end date, in which sale of the property would create a
burden on the owner, and in which the owner has a reasonable expectation of
returning the property to homestead status once the hardship is resolved.
Hardship situations may include such circumstances as military deployment,
physical or health issue, temporary business or study leave, or similar events.
      (2)   The licensing limits of this section shall not apply to bona fide
housing programs of any agency of the State of Minnesota or of the Metropolitan
Council.
(Prior Code, § 150.127) (Ord. 08-003, passed 4-22-2008; Ord. 2025-05, passed
10-28-2025)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.09 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   The owner of a rental dwelling must submit an application for a
license on forms and in the format provided by the city. The owner must give
notice, in writing, to the city within five business days of any changes to the
information contained in the license application. The application must include:
      (1)   The owner’s name, address, and telephone number, owning partners if
a partnership, corporate officers if a corporation;
      (2)   The name and address of a person residing or having a business
office in Hennepin or Ramsey County, and appointed by the owner as an agent for
purposes of notices under this chapter and for services of process upon the
owner;
      (3)   The name and address of any managing operator or agent;
      (4)   The name and address of the contract for deed vendor if the rental
dwelling is owned under a contract for deed;
      (5)   The legal address of the rental dwelling;
      (6)   The type and number of units within the rental dwelling;
      (7)   The height and the multiple dwelling in stories;
      (8)   The type of structure to be licensed (i.e., single-family, duplex,
triplex); and
      (9)   The exterior finish of the building.
      (10)   The name and contact information for the party responsible for
exterior maintenance of the property.
      (11)   The applicant must provide proof that the property meets the
requirements established in § 150.16, including all required I and I
inspections.
      (12)   If the license application is for rental of a single-family
detached dwelling: For the applicant and for any other persons or entities with
a financial or ownership interest in the proposed rental dwelling, a complete
listing of all other non-homestead single-family real estate in which any such
person or entity has a financial or ownership interest of any kind, along with
the manner and amount of each said ownership interest.
   (B)   Upon approval by the City Council, the City Clerk will issue a license
to the owner of the rental dwelling. A license is personal to the owner of a
specified rental dwelling. No license may be transferred to a purchaser of a
multiple dwelling or to any other person or entity. If a rental dwelling is
sold, the purchaser may not own or operate the rental dwelling without first
obtaining the license provided for in this chapter. A license will be valid for
one year. If a license is issued during the year, the license will be prorated
accordingly at the renewal time.
   (C)   All owners of residential rental properties are required to register
their properties according to §
152.08, however, the following property owners are exempt from the registration
fee and the requirement to post a registration inspection:
      (1)   Per M.S. § 273.124(1c), owners of residential rental properties
where all renters residing in the rental property are related to the owner as
parent, stepparent, child, stepchild, grandparent, grandchild, brother, sister,
uncle, aunt, nephew, or niece and the owner or agent that each of the renters
is one of these relations. This relationship may be by blood or marriage. This
exemption does not provide for any of the exempted occupants to receive
compensation, in any form, from allowing occupancy to anyone not covered under
this exemption, nor does it apply to non-family members residing as a guest or
invitee of an exempted individual listed above.
      (2)   Owners of residential rental property licensed by the State of
Minnesota as a group home and used as such. The owner or agent must provide the
current license number on the registration form.
      (3)   In all cases, property owners meeting the criteria of this
exemption are required to complete the affidavit of rental license exemption
prior to owner leaving occupancy of the property.
      (4)   In all cases, an owner must notify the city in writing within 30
days if an exemption, as described in this section, is no longer applicable.
(Prior Code, § 150.128) (Ord. 08-003, passed 4-22-2008; Ord. 2025-06, passed
10-28-2025)
§ 152.10 LICENSE FEES.
   The owner must pay an annual license fee, the amount of which will be
determined by the City Council. The fee schedule is located in
Chapter 33 of this city code. The owner must submit the required fee along with
the application for a new or renewal license. Applications for renewal license
submitted after the license term expiration are subject to a penalty fee, which
shall be determined from the time by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 150.129) (Ord. 08-003, passed 4-22-2008; Ord. 2025-06, passed
10-28-2025)
§ 152.11 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Preliminary inspection and investigation. Prior to issuing a license,
the City Manager or designee will inspect the rental dwelling to determine
compliance with this chapter, the city code and the International Property
Maintenance Code. The City Clerk will review the application for completeness
and determine whether all real estate taxes and municipal utilities are paid
and current.
   (B)   Compliance order. If the rental dwelling is not in full compliance
with this subchapter, the city will provide the owner or resident agent with a
compliance order pursuant to §
152.12. If the owner corrects the items in the compliance order within the
specified period of time, the city will issue a license to the owner.
   (C)   Unsafe or dangerous conditions. No owner or resident agent may operate
a rental dwelling, regardless of the type of license issued, if the City
Manager or designee determines that a condition exists in or on the rental
dwelling or premises that is unsafe or poses an imminent danger to the health
or safety of the tenants or the public. Any determination by the City Manager
or designee is subject to suspension or revocation of the license, criminal
prosecution and any civil remedies available to the city.
   (D)   Posting of license. The owner shall post a copy of the license in the
rental dwelling in a conspicuous place. In multiple dwelling units requiring a
single license, the license shall be posted in a common area of the building
such as a corridor, hallway, or lobby. The posted license shall be framed with
clear glass or plastic.
   (E)   Renewal of license. An owner may continue to rent a dwelling after the
expiration day of the license provided the owner has filed with the city on or
before June 30, the appropriate renewal license application and license fee.
The issuance of a license under this chapter shall be considered a privilege
and not an absolute right of the owner and shall not entitle the owner to an
automatic renewal of the license. Allowing the owner to continue to rent while
the renewal is being processed does not obligate the city to automatically
renew the license. Failure to submit the renewal license application and
license fee by June 30 will result in late penalties established in
Chapter 33 of this city code.
   (F)   Transfer of license. Licenses are not transferable. Any change in the
ownership of the rental dwelling requires a new license.
   (G)   Resident agent required. Owners of rental dwellings with five or more
individual units appoint a resident agent who shall reside within the rental
dwelling to be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of the rental
dwelling and common areas and to handle licensing issues with the city. Owners
of rental dwellings containing fewer than five units who do not reside within
the counties of Ramsey, Hennepin, Anoka, Carver, Dakota, Scott, Washington,
Wright, Chisago, Isanti, or Sherburne shall appoint an agent that resides
within one of these counties that shall be the responsible resident agent.
   (H)   Register of occupancy. The owner, or his, her, or their resident
agent, shall keep a current register of occupancy for each rental dwelling.
This register of occupancy may be reviewed by the city at the time. Said
register of occupancy shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:
      (1)   Address(es) of the rental dwelling;
      (2)   Number of bedrooms of each unit;
      (3)   Number of units in each building; and
      (4)   Number of adults and children (under 18) currently occupying each
unit.
(Prior Code, § 150.130) (Ord. 08-003, passed 4-22-2008; Ord. 2025-06, passed
10-28-2025)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.12 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Inspections. The city will inspect all rental dwellings periodically
to determine compliance with this chapter, the city code and the International
Property Maintenance Code. After each inspection, the city shall provide the
owner or resident agent with a compliance order pursuant to this section. The
owner or resident agent must correct the violations within the time period
specified in the compliance order. If the violations are not corrected, the
city may suspend or revoke the license under this section, unless it is the
initial license period, in which case, the license is valid until the end of
the owner’s existing lease with the current tenant as noted in this section.
The city may, however, immediately suspend or revoke a license if an unsafe or
dangerous condition exists as described in §
152.11(C).
   (B)   Occupant initiated inspections. An occupant who believes that his or
her rental dwelling is not in compliance with the provision of this chapter,
city code, or the International Housing Maintenance Code may provide written
notice to the owner or resident agent of the rental dwelling specifying the
alleged deficiency. If the owner or resident agent does not take action to
correct the alleged problem the occupant may contact the city and request an
inspection of the rental dwelling by the City Manager or designee upon showing
proof that the owner or resident agent had been properly notified and has been
given a reasonable time in which to correct deficiencies. If the inspection by
the city substantiates the claim of non-compliance made by the occupant, the
city inspector shall issue a compliance order to the owner or resident agent
establishing the scope of work and timeframe for completion. The cost of the
inspection to affirm the work identified in the compliance order shall be paid
by the owner in the amount established in the city fee schedule.
(Prior Code, § 150.131) (Ord. 08-003, passed 4-22-2008; Ord. 2025-06, passed
10-28-2025)
§ 152.13 CONDUCT ON LICENSED PREMISES; VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Owner responsible. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or
resident agent to see that persons occupying the rental dwelling conduct
themselves in such a manner as not to cause the premises to be disorderly. This
section applies to all licenses. For purposes of this section, a rental
dwelling is disorderly at which any of the following activities occur:
      (1)   Violation of M.S. Chapter 609, Criminal Code, as it may be amended
from time to time;
      (2)   Violation of M.S. Chapter 152, Drugs; Controlled Substances, as it
may be amended from time to time;
      (3)   Violation of M.S. Chapter 340A, Liquor, as it may be amended from
time to time;
      (4)   Violation of M.S. Chapter 624, Crimes; Fireworks; Firearms, as it
may be amended from time to time; or
      (5)   Violation of any of the provisions contained in Titles IX or XIII
of this code.
   (B)   City enforcement. The City Manager or designee is responsible for
enforcement of this section.
   (C)   First violation. Upon determination by the City Manager or designee
that a licensed premises was used in a disorderly manner, as described in
division (A) above, the City Manager or designee must give notice to the
licensee of the violation and direct the licensee to take steps to prevent
further violations.
   (D)   Second violation. If another occurrence of disorderly use of the
licensed premises occurs within six months of an incident for which a notice in
division (C) above was given, the City Manager or designee must notify the
licensee of the violation and must also require the licensee to submit a
written report of the actions taken, and proposed to be taken, by the licensee
to prevent further disorderly use of the premises. This written report must be
submitted to the City Manager or designee within five days of receipt of the
notice of disorderly use of the premises and must detail all actions taken by
the licensee in response to all notices of disorderly use of the premises
within the preceding six months.
   (E)   Third violation.
      (1)   If another instance of disorderly use of the licensed premises
occurs within one year after any two previous instances of disorderly use for
which notices were given to the licensee pursuant to this section, the rental
dwelling license for the premises may be denied, revoked, suspended or not
renewed. Written notification will be issued by the City Manager or designee.
Such written notice must specify all violations of this section, and must state
the date, time, place, and purpose of the hearing. The hearing must be held no
less than ten days and no more than 60 days after giving such notice.
      (2)   Following the hearing, the City Council may deny, revoke, suspend,
or decline to renew the license for all or any part or parts of the licensed
premises or may grant a license upon such terms and conditions as it deems
necessary to accomplish the purposes of this section.
   (F)   No adverse action pending eviction. No adverse license action shall be
imposed where the instance of disorderly use of the licensed premises occurred
during the pending of eviction proceedings (unlawful detainer) or within 30
days of notice given by the licensee to a tenant to vacate the premises where
the disorderly use was related to conduct by that tenant or by other occupants
or guests of the tenant’s unit. Eviction proceedings are not a bar to adverse
license action, however, unless they are diligently pursued by the licensee.
Further, an action to deny, revoke, suspend, or not renew a license based upon
violations of this section may be postponed or discontinued at any time if it
appears that the licensee has taken appropriate measures which will prevent
further instances of disorderly use.
   (G)   Finding of disorderly conduct. A determination that the licensed
premises have been used in a disorderly manner as described in division (A)
above shall be made upon a fair preponderance of the evidence to support such a
determination. It is not necessary that criminal charges be brought in order to
support a determination of disorderly use nor does the fact of dismissal or
acquittal of such a criminal charge operate as a bar to adverse license action
under this section.
   (H)   Service of notices. All notices given by the city under this section
must be personally served on the licensee, sent by certified mail to the
licensee’s last known address or, if neither method of service effects notice,
by posting on a conspicuous place on the licensed premises.
   (I)   Enforcement actions. Enforcement actions provided in this section are
not exclusive, and the City Council may take any action with respect to a
licensee, a tenant, or the licensed premises as is authorized by the city code,
state, or federal law.
(Prior Code, § 150.132) (Ord. 08-003, passed 4-22-2008; Ord. 2025-06, passed
10-28-2025)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.14 CONDITION OF LICENSED PREMISES.
   (A)   Compliance order. Whenever the City Manager or designee determines
that the condition of any rental dwelling or the premises surrounding it fails
to meet the provisions of this chapter, other applicable city code provisions,
or the International Property Maintenance Code, he or she may issue a
compliance order setting forth the specific violations and ordering the owner
to correct such violations. Failure to meet the expectations stated within a
compliance order issued for a violation of any section of city code may result
in the City Council denying, suspending, revoking or not renewing a rental
license consistent with the procedures established in §
152.15.
   (B)   Contents of the compliance order. The compliance order shall:
      (1)   Be in writing;
      (2)   Describe the location and nature of the violations;
      (3)   Set forth a reasonable time for the correction of the violations by
the owner or resident agent; and
      (4)   Be served upon the owner and resident agent either personally or by
certified mail. A copy of the compliance order shall also be provided to the
occupants of the rental dwelling.
   (C)   License action. If the violations listed in the compliance order are
not remedied by the owner or resident agent within the specified time given in
the order, the license for the rental dwelling may be denied, suspended,
revoked, or not renewed by the city. An administrative fine in an amount set
forth from time to time by the City Council by resolution may also be imposed.
If the city decides that it will be denying, suspending, revoking, or not
renewing a license or imposing an administrative fine pursuant to this chapter,
the city shall send a notice of the proposed action to the owner and resident
agent of the rental dwelling.
   (D)   Appeal. When it is alleged by the owner or resident agent that the
compliance order is based upon the erroneous interpretation of this chapter,
other applicable city code provisions, or the International Property
Maintenance Code, the owner or resident agent may appeal the compliance order
to the City Council. Such appeal shall be in writing, must specify the grounds
for the appeal, and must be filed with the city within five business days after
service of the compliance order.
(Prior Code, § 150.133) (Ord. 08-003, passed 4-22-2008; Ord. 2025-06, passed
10-28-2025)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.15 HEARING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Scheduling of hearing. If the city makes a determination that it will
be denying, suspending, revoking, or not renewing a license pursuant to this
subchapter, or if the owner or resident agent is appealing the compliance order
pursuant to §§
152.12,
152.13, or
152.14, the City Council shall conduct a hearing on the matter. The hearing
shall be scheduled at the next regular City Council meeting following the date
of the notice or receipt of the owner’s notice of appeal of a compliance order.
   (B)   Hearing. At the hearing, the City Council shall hear all relevant
evidence and arguments and shall review all testimony, documents, and other
evidence submitted. The owner or resident agent shall have the opportunity to
address the City Council at the hearing.
   (C)   Findings. After the hearing is concluded, the City Council shall make
findings on whether to uphold the compliance order or to revoke, suspend, deny,
or not renew the license, or impose an administrative fine. The City Council
shall issue a written decision within 30 days following the date of the hearing
and shall send a copy of its decision to the owner and resident agent by mail.
The decision shall specify the rental dwelling or units to which it applies.
   (D)   No occupancy. If a license is revoked, suspended, denied, or not
renewed by the City Council, it shall be unlawful for the owner or the resident
agent to thereafter permit the occupancy of the rental dwelling or the unit. A
notice of the action shall be posted by the City Manager or designee on the
rental dwelling or the unit in order to prevent any further occupancy. No
person shall reside in, occupy, or cause to be occupied that rental dwelling or
unit until a license is obtained or reinstated by the owner.
   (E)   Appeal. An owner may appeal the decision of the City Council as
allowed under §
152.14(D).
(Prior Code, § 150.134) (Ord. 08-003, passed 4-22-2008; Ord. 2025-06, passed
10-28-2025)
CHAPTER 153: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
   
153.01   Preliminary plat
   
153.02   Required information
   
153.03   Procedure
   
153.04   Final plat
   
153.05   Design standards
   
153.06   Required improvements and fees
   
153.07   Agreement and security
   
153.08   Subdivision without platting
   
153.09   Building permit
   
153.10   Conveyance by metes and bounds forbidden
   
153.11   Variances
   
153.12   Public land dedication requirements
§ 153.01 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   Any person requesting approval of any subdivision of land must prepare and
submit to the city a preliminary plat, clearly and legibly drawn to a scale of
one inch equals 100 feet, containing the information required in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 151.01)
§ 153.02 REQUIRED INFORMATION.
   (A)   Identification and description. The preliminary plat must use a
proposed name which is not the same as, or deceptively similar to, the name of
any plat previously recorded in Ramsey or Hennepin County. The plat must show
the location by section, township, and range, and any other information as to
definitely establish the location of the property, the name and addresses of
the owners, subdivider, surveyors, and designer of the plat, the graphic scale,
the northpoint, the date of preparation, the existing zoning classifications,
the approximate acreage, streets, utilities, permanent buildings and
structures, sewers, watermains, culverts, and other underground facilities
within the tract and to a distance of 100 feet beyond the tract and the
location of catch basins, manholes, and hydrants. The plat must also show
boundary lines of adjoining land within 100 feet in every direction and
ownership of that land. If requested by the city, it must include topographical
survey data.
   (B)   Design features. The preliminary plat must contain the following
design information:
      (1)   Streets. Layout and centerline gradients of proposed streets
showing right-of-way width and names of streets, alleys, and sidewalks;
      (2)   Easements. Location and width of proposed drainage and utility
easements;
      (3)   Drainage. Typical cross-sections of proposed improvements upon
streets and alleys together with an indication of the proposed storm water
runoff showing drainage from other areas that contribute storm waters to the
proposed plat;
      (4)   Lots. Lot numbers, dimensions, and size in square feet;
      (5)   Dimensions. Minimum front, rear, and side setback lines, and street
and building lines, indicating dimensions;
      (6)   Public use areas. Areas in addition to streets, alleys, pedestrian
ways, and utility easements, intended to be dedicated to or reserved for public
use;
      (7)   Elevations. Front and rear grade elevations for each lot; and
      (8)   Additional information. Any additional information as deemed
necessary by the city.
(Prior Code, § 151.02)
§ 153.03 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Copies of preliminary plat. Four copies of the preliminary plat, along
with any additional information required will be filed with the City Manager or
designee and a filing fee as provided in Chapter 33 will be paid.
   (B)   Planning Commission. The City Manager or designee will refer the
preliminary plat to the Planning Commission for review.
   (C)   Public Works Director. The City Manager or designee will refer copies
of the preliminary plat to the Public Works Director and to utility companies
for examination and report to the Planning Commission as to existing and
required easements.
   (D)   Public hearing. The Planning Commission will review the preliminary
plat and related information and conduct a public hearing within 60 days after
receipt of the complete preliminary plat. All property owners of record on the
city tax rolls who live within 350 feet of the land to be subdivided will be
notified by mail at least ten days prior to the hearing. A notice of hearing
identifying the land to be subdivided will be published at least ten days prior
to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, all interested persons will be
heard. The Planning Commission will make its report to the City Council.
   (E)   City Council. The City Council will consider the preliminary plat
within 30 days following issuance of the report of the Planning Commission. If
the preliminary plat is approved, the final plat may be submitted.
(Prior Code, § 151.03)
§ 153.04 FINAL PLAT.
   The final plat must be prepared and certified to by a registered surveyor in
compliance with this code, state law, and the requirements of the county. The
final plat must show all required monuments in place before it is signed on
behalf of the city. The owner must provide the City Council with a
certification showing that all taxes currently due on the property to be
subdivided have been paid in full. The owner must provide the City Attorney
with satisfactory evidence of title to the land to be subdivided. The City
Council shall act on the final plat within 30 days after it was filed with the
City Manager or designee. If the final plat is approved by City Council
resolution, the subdivider must record it with the County Recorder or Registrar
of Titles within 30 days after the date of approval; otherwise the approval of
the final plat will be deemed void. After recording, the owner will furnish the
City Manager or designee with a print of the final plat showing evidence of the
recording.
(Prior Code, § 151.04)
§ 153.05 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Streets. The arrangements, character, extent, width, grade, and
location of all streets must conform to the city pattern and must be considered
in their relation to existing and planned streets, to reasonable circulation of
traffic, to topographical conditions, to runoff of storm water, to public
convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses
of the land to be served by the streets. The arrangement of streets in new
subdivisions must make provision for the appropriate continuation of the
streets in adjoining areas. All right-of-way widths must be a minimum of 60
feet unless the City Council deems a different width to be advisable to conform
to the other streets in the area. Private streets and half streets are
prohibited.
   (B)   Easements. Easements at least ten feet wide, centered on rear and
other lot lines, must be provided for utilities, where necessary. They must
have continuity of alignment from block to block, and at deflection points, and
easements for pole-line anchors must be provided where necessary. Where a
subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel, or stream,
there must be provided a right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines
of the watercourse, together with the further width or construction or both, as
will be adequate for storm water runoff.
   (C)   Blocks. Blocks must accommodate the size of residential lots required
in the area by the Zoning Code and must provide for convenient access,
circulation, control, and safety of street traffic. Pedestrian crossings may be
required by the City Council in locations deemed necessary to public health,
convenience, and necessity.
   (D)   Lot requirements.
      (1)   Access. All lots must abut by their full frontage on a public
street.
      (2)   Size. The minimum dimensions for single-family lots are:
         (a)   Seventy-five feet at the building setback line;
         (b)   Sixty feet at the front lot line;
         (c)   Thirty feet at the rear lot line;
         (d)   One hundred ten feet in average depth; and
         (e)   Nine thousand square feet in area.
      (3)   Corner lots. Minimum corner lot widths must be no less than 15 feet
greater than interior lot widths.
      (4)   Butt lots. Butt lots must be platted at least five feet wider than
the average width of interior lots in the block.
      (5)   Side lot lines. Side lines of lots must be substantially at right
angles or radial to the street line.
      (6)   Water courses. Lots abutting upon marsh areas, a water course,
drainage way, channel, or stream must have an additional depth or width, as
required, to assure house sites that are not subject to flooding ground water
seepage.
      (7)   Features. In the subdividing of any land, due regard must be shown
for all natural features, such as tree growth, water courses, historic sites or
similar conditions, which if preserved will add attractiveness and stability to
the proposed development.
      (8)   Lot remnants. All remnants of lots below minimum size left over
after subdividing of a larger tract must be added to adjacent lots; rather than
allowed to remain as unusable parcels.
      (9)   Political boundary line. No lot may extend over a political
boundary or school district line.
(Prior Code, § 151.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.06 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND FEES.
   (A)   Certifications. No final plat may be approved by the City Council
without first receiving a report by the Public Works Director and the City
Attorney certifying that the proposed improvements together with the agreements
and documents required under this chapter meet city requirements, and a
certification from the City Manager or designee that all fees have been paid,
including all fees of the Public Works Director and City Attorney relating to
the subdivision.
   (B)   Monuments. Monuments must be placed at all block corners, angle
points, points of curves in streets, and at intermediate points as shown on the
final plat before the plat is signed on behalf of the city.
   (C)   Water and sewer facilities. Water and sewer improvements must conform
to specifications of the city, and will be subject to inspection and approval
by the city.
   (D)   Street grading. The full width of the right-of-way must be graded,
including the subgrade of the areas to be paved, in accordance with the
standard plans approved by the city.
   (E)   Street improvements. All streets must be improved with pavement or
wearing course surfaces to an overall width of 30 feet. All cul-de-sacs must
have turnarounds, the pavements of which must have a minimum diameter of 100
feet. Concrete curbs and gutters are to be installed, and each lot will be
provided with a driveway entrance. All street improvements must be constructed
in accordance with applicable standard specifications approved by the city.
   (F)   Utilities. Utility lines for telephone and electric service must be
placed in rearline easements when carried on overhead poles. Where telephone,
electric, and gas services lines are placed underground entirely throughout a
subdivided area, conduits, or cables shall be placed within easements, or
dedicated public ways, in a manner which will not conflict with other
underground service. Further transformer boxes must be located so as not to be
hazardous to the public. All drainage and underground utility installations
which traverse privately-owned property must be protected by easements.
   (G)   Topographic map. The subdivider must furnish the city a topographic
map at the subdivider’s expense to conform with elevations and revised for
subdivision purposes.
   (H)   Railroad crossing. No street dedications will be accepted which
require a crossing of a railroad unless sufficient land is dedicated to provide
for approachers view consistent with safety, in such an area as the City
Council may determine.
(Prior Code, § 151.06) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.07 AGREEMENT AND SECURITY.
   Before a final plat is approved, the owner and subdivider must execute an
agreement acceptable to the City Attorney to make and install all required
improvements in accordance with the timetable and plans and specifications,
prepared or approved by the city. The agreement shall be accompanied by a cash
escrow, letter of credit, or performance bond acceptable to the City Attorney
equal to the city’s estimated costs of improvements and all fees to be paid by
the subdivider.
(Prior Code, § 151.07)
§ 153.08 SUBDIVISION WITHOUT PLATTING.
   The City Council may waive compliance with the platting requirements of this
subchapter and approve subdivision by conveyance of land by adoption of a
resolution to that effect based upon findings by the City Council that
compliance with the platting requirements would create an unnecessary hardship
or expense because of the nature of the subdivision, and failure to require the
filing of a plat does not interfere with the purposes of this subchapter. The
City Council may consider the number of parcels resulting from the subdivision,
the complexity of the legal descriptions, the necessity for dedication of
streets or drainage and utility casements, and the probability of future
subdivision of the parcels.
(Prior Code, § 151.08)
§ 153.09 BUILDING PERMIT.
   No building permit will be issued for the construction of any building,
structure, or improvement on any land required to be subdivided by this chapter
until all requirements of this chapter have been fully complied with.
(Prior Code, § 151.09)
§ 153.10 CONVEYANCE BY METES AND BOUNDS FORBIDDEN.
   No conveyance by metes and bounds may be made or recorded if the parcel
described in the conveyance is less than two and one-half acres in area or 150
feet in width, unless the parcel was a separate parcel of record on August 22,
1973.
(Prior Code, § 151.10)
§ 153.11 VARIANCES.
   The City Council may authorize a variance from these regulations when, in
its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict compliance. Any application
for a variance will be dealt with in the same manner as is provided in Chapter
154 relating to zoning variances.
(Prior Code, § 151.11)
§ 153.12 PUBLIC LAND DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Land dedication. The owners of a parcel of land of one acre or more in
size and being subdivided shall dedicate to the city a reasonable portion of
the land for use as public parks, playgrounds, trails or open space, or, in the
alternative, the city may require a cash contribution as provided in division
(B) below. As a general rule, it is deemed reasonable for the City Council to
require as a condition of subdivision, approval dedication of 10% of the total
square foot area of the land being subdivided, or the cash contribution
provided for in division (B). The city may determine the location and
configuration of any land dedicated, taking into consideration the suitability
of the land for its intended purpose and future needs of the community for
park, playground, trail, or open space property. This section shall apply to
all new residential developments, and lot combination/redivisions meant to
facilitate residential development and to all new industrial and commercial
developments. It shall not apply to lot combination/redivisions which do not
increase the number of residential dwellings, conversion of apartments to
condominiums, or internal leasehold improvements.
   (B)   Contribution in lieu of land. At the city’s option, the subdivider
shall contribute an amount in cash, in lieu of all or a portion of the land
required under division (A) above as set forth in Chapter 33 based on the
number and type of dwelling units the subdivision will accommodate in the case
of any residential development and the total square foot area of the land being
subdivided in the case of any commercial or industrial development.
   (C)   Land title. Prior to the dedication of the required property, the
subdivider shall provide the city with an acceptable title opinion or title
insurance policy addressed to the city, which insures the title and the city’s
proposed interest in the property. In any land dedication, the subdivider must
transfer good and marketable title to the city, free and clear of any
mortgages, liens, encumbrances, or assessments, except easements or minor
imperfections of title acceptable to the city. If land is not formally
dedicated to the city in the final plat, the subdivider shall record all deeds
for conveyance of the property to the city at the same time as the final plat
or other appropriate division documents.
   (D)   Land not credited. At the city’s option, the following types of land
shall not be credited for the requirements of this subchapter:
      (1)   Land dedicated or obtained as easements for storm water retention,
drainage, roadway, or utility purposes;
      (2)   Land which is unusable or of limited use; and
      (3)   Land that is protected wetlands/floodplain.
   (E)   Cash contributions. Cash contributions, for single-family residential
development, will be due and payable at the time of final plat approval by the
city. Cash contributions for multi-family residential development will be due
and payable at the time of building permit issuance. The applicant will execute
a document in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney which acknowledges the
obligation to pay amounts due under division (B) above at the time building
permits are secured. The documents will be in recordable form and any fee
charged in connection with the filing thereof shall be paid by the applicant.
   (F)   Park fund. Any cash contribution received pursuant to division (B)
above shall be placed in a separate city fund and used only for park,
playground, trail, or open space purposes.
   (G)   Dedication or contribution not required. In the case of subdivision of
property with existing residential dwelling units already in place where no new
units will be added, no land dedication or cash contribution shall be required.
(Prior Code, § 151.12)
CHAPTER 154: ZONING CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
154.001   Title
   
154.002   Intent and purpose
   
154.003   Scope
   
154.004   Interpretation
   
154.005   Permits required
   
154.006   Uses not specified
   
154.007   Definitions
Districts
   
154.020   Division of city into districts
   
154.021   Zoning map
   
154.022   District boundaries
R-1 Single-Family District
   
154.035   Purpose
   
154.036   Permitted uses
   
154.037   Permitted conditional uses
   
154.038   Accessory uses
   
154.039   Dimensional regulations
R-1A Single-Family Lakeshore District
   
154.050   Purpose
   
154.051   Permitted uses
   
154.052   Permitted conditional uses
   
154.053   Permitted accessory uses
   
154.054   Dimensional regulations
R-2 Two-Family District
   
154.065   Purpose
   
154.066   Permitted uses
   
154.067   Permitted conditional uses
   
154.068   Accessory uses
   
154.069   Dimensional regulations
   
154.070   Division of lot into separate ownership
R-3 Townhouse District
   
154.085   Purpose
   
154.086   Permitted uses
   
154.087   Permitted conditional uses
   
154.088   Accessory uses
   
154.089   Dimensional regulations
R-4 Multiple-Family District
   
154.100   Purpose
   
154.101   Permitted uses
   
154.102   Conditional uses
   
154.103   Accessory uses
   
154.104   Dimensional regulations
   
154.105   General regulations
C General Commercial District
   
154.120   Purpose
   
154.121   Permitted uses
   
154.122   Conditional uses
   
154.123   Accessory uses
   
154.124   Dimensional regulations
   
154.125   General regulations
LI Light Industrial District
   
154.140   Purpose
   
154.141   Permitted uses
   
154.142   Permitted conditional uses
   
154.143   Accessory uses
   
154.144   Dimensional regulations
R/O Recreational/Open Space District
   
154.155   Purpose
   
154.156   Permitted uses
   
154.157   Impact statement for any rezoning
   
154.158   Accessory uses
   
154.159   Dimensional regulations
   
154.160   Building design requirements
General Requirements
   
154.175   Lot requirements
   
154.176   Accessory buildings
   
154.177   Encroachment in yards
   
154.178   Height limit exceptions
   
154.179   Parking
   
154.180   Curb cuts
   
154.181   Off-street loading docks
   
154.182   Landscaping
   
154.183   Screening
   
154.184   Boulevards on corner lots
   
154.185   Relocating buildings
   
154.186   Soil removal and filling
   
154.187   Solar energy systems
   
154.188   Cannabis businesses and zoning
   
154.189   Temporary family healthcare dwellings
   
154.190   Temporary structures and uses
Planned Unit Development
   
154.205   Purpose
   
154.206   Definitions
   
154.207   Authorization
   
154.208   Allowed uses
   
154.209   Required standards
   
154.210   Coordination with subdivision regulations
   
154.211   Revisions and/or changes
   
154.212   Phasing and guarantee of performance
   
154.213   Control of PUD following completion
   
154.214   Procedure for processing a PUD
Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots
   
154.225   Intent for nonconforming uses and structures
   
154.226   Limited continuation
   
154.227   Intent for nonconforming lots of record
Administration
   
154.240   Zoning Officer
   
154.241   Plan review
   
154.242   Rezoning and amendments
   
154.243   Conditional uses permits
   
154.244   Board of Adjustments and Appeals
   
154.245   Variances
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 TITLE.
   This chapter will be known as the city’s “Zoning Code.”
(Prior Code, § 152.001)
§ 154.002 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The intent of the Zoning Code is to protect the health, safety, and
general welfare of the city and its people through the establishment of minimum
regulations governing land development and use. The zoning code divides the
city into use districts and establishes regulations for the location, erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, and use of land and structures.
   (B)   The Zoning Code is established to:
      (1)   Protect the use districts;
      (2)   Promote orderly development and redevelopment;
      (3)   Provide adequate light, air, and access to property;
      (4)   Prevent congestion in the public streets;
      (5)   Prevent overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures
by regulating land, buildings, yards, and densities;
      (6)   Provide for compatibility of different land uses;
      (7)   Provide for administration and amendment of the Zoning Code;
      (8)   Prescribe penalties for violations; and
      (9)   Define the powers and duties of the city staff, the Board of
Adjustments and Appeals, the Planning Commission, and the City Council in
relation to the Zoning Code.
(Prior Code, § 152.002)
§ 154.003 SCOPE.
   The use of all property in the city must comply with the Zoning Code. Any
building, structure, or use lawfully existing on August 2, 1976, and continuing
to lawfully exist to the date of adoption of this Zoning Code, but not in
conformity with this Zoning Code, will be regarded as nonconforming. The
nonconforming uses and structures may be continued subject to the provisions of
§§
154.225 and
154.226.
(Prior Code, § 152.003)
§ 154.004 INTERPRETATION.
   The intent and purposes set forth in §
154.002 will be considered in interpreting and applying the Zoning Code. If
provisions of the Zoning Code impose greater restrictions than those of any
statute, other ordinance, or regulation, the provisions of the Zoning Code will
control. If provisions of any statute, other ordinance, or regulation impose
greater restrictions than the Zoning Code, the provisions of the statute, other
ordinance, or regulation will control. In this Zoning Code, the singular
includes the plural and the plural the singular, the present tense includes the
past and future tenses, the word “building” includes the word “structure,” and
the word “lot” includes the word “parcel.”
(Prior Code, § 152.004)
§ 154.005 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   Except as provided in the Zoning Code, no building, structure, or premises
may be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, altered, used, or occupied
unless it is in compliance with the Zoning Code, and an appropriate building
permit has been issued.
(Prior Code, § 152.005)
§ 154.006 USES NOT SPECIFIED.
   If a use is not specifically permitted, permitted by conditional use permit,
or prohibited, the use will be considered prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 152.006)
§ 154.007 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A separate building or a portion of a principal building
used for accessory uses.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING - GARAGE. An accessory building (attached or detached)
which is used, to store passenger automobiles and light trucks owned by
occupants of the principal building, and which has a door opening which is six
feet or greater in width.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING - MAJOR. A detached accessory building sheltering an
allowed accessory use, except for storage of motor vehicles. Accessory
buildings may include garden sheds, recreational buildings such as gazebos, or
other similar uses.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING - MINOR. A detached accessory building 200 square feet or
less in floor area.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use subordinate to the main use on a lot and which is
customarily incidental to the main use.
   ADDITION. Part of a building added to increase the usable space of the
building.
   ADULT USES. The following uses will be deemed adult uses and will have the
following definitions.
      (1)   ADULT BODY PAINTING STUDIO. An establishment or business which
provides the service of applying paint or other substance, whether transparent
or nontransparent, to or on the body of a patron when the body is wholly or
partially nude in terms of specified anatomical areas.
      (2)   ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment or business which barters, rents,
or sells items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audio
tape, videotape, or motion picture film and either alone or when combined with
adult motion picture rental or sales and adult novelty sales within the same
business premises has either 10% or more of its stock in trade or 10% or more
of its floor area containing items which are distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      (3)   ADULT CABARET. An establishment or business which provides dancing
or other live entertainment, if the dancing or other live entertainment is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the presentation, display,
depiction, or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
      (4)   ADULT COMPANIONSHIP ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment or business
which provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk,
or discussion between an employee of the establishment and a customer, if the
service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (5)   ADULT CONVERSATION/RAP PARLOR. An establishment or business which
provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or
discussion, if the service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (6)   ADULT HEALTH/SPORT CLUB. An establishment or business which
excludes minors by reason of age and is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (7)   ADULT HOTEL OR MOTEL. A hotel or motel from which minors are
specifically excluded from patronage and wherein material is presented which is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing,
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (8)   ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A building or portion of a
building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
      (9)   ADULT MODELING STUDIO. An establishment or business which provides
to customers figure models who engage in specified sexual activities or display
specified anatomical areas while being observed, painted, painted upon,
sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted by the
customers.
      (10)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE. Any place to which the public is
permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically, or mechanically controlled or operated still or motion picture
machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show
images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the
images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
      (11)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE RENTAL OR SALES. An establishment or business
which barters, rents, or sells videotapes or motion picture film and either
alone or when combined with adult bookstore or adult novelty sales within the
same business premises has either 10% or more of its stock in trade or 10% or
more of its floor area containing items which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (12)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A building or portion of a building
with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
      (13)   ADULT NOVELTY SALES. An establishment or business which sells
devices which stimulate human genitals or devices which are designed for sexual
stimulation and either alone or when combined with adult bookstore and adult
motion picture rental or sales has either 10% or more of its stock in trade or
10% or more of its floor area containing the items and other items which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (14)   ADULT SAUNA/BATHHOUSE/STEAM ROOM. An establishment or business
which excludes minors by reason of age and which provides a steam bath or heat
bathing room if the service provided by the sauna is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
   ALLEY. A public right-of-way upon which the rear of premises generally
abuts, or upon which service entrances of buildings abut, and which is not used
for general traffic circulation.
   ANTENNA. Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower,
building, or other structure and used in communications that radiate or capture
electromagnetic waves, digital signs, analog signals, radio frequencies
(excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunication signals, or other
communication signals.
   APARTMENT. A room or suite of rooms located in a multiple dwelling, which
includes a bath (or shower) and kitchen, intended or designed for use as an
independent residence.
   APARTMENT BUILDING. A multiple dwelling structure designed to accommodate
three or more apartments.
   ASSEMBLY. A company of persons gathered for deliberation and legislation,
worship, or entertainment. An ASSEMBLY may be either religious or secular, but
specifically includes a religious institution/place of worship.
   AUTO REPAIR. Rebuilding, reconditioning, reconstructing, repairing, or
replacing worn or damaged motor vehicle parts.
   AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATION. Premises used to conduct auto repair, dispense,
sell, or install automobile fuel, oil, tires, batteries, or accessories, or to
wash automobiles, with or without a convenience store.
   BALCONY. A platform projecting from a wall of a building, enclosed by a
railing, and elevated at least seven feet above ground.
   BASEMENT. A portion of a building located partly or completely underground,
but having at least half its floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of
the adjoining ground. A garden level apartment, in which the bottom of the
windows are not more than four feet above the floor, is not considered a
BASEMENT.
   BOULEVARD. The part of the public right-of-way located between the curb line
and the property line.
   BUFFER. The use of land, topography, space, fences, or landscape plantings
to screen or partially screen a lot from another lot.
   BUILDABLE AREA. The space on a lot on which a building may be constructed.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the elevation of the
lot grade at the building setback line, to the top of the cornice of a flat
roof, to the top of a mansard roof, to a point on the roof directly above the
highest wall of a shed roof, to the uppermost point on a round or other arch
type roof, to the average distance of the highest gable on a pitched or hip
roof.
   BUILDING-INTEGRATED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A solar energy system that is an
integral part of a principal or accessory building, rather than a separate
mechanical device, replacing or substituting for an architectural or structural
component of the building. BUILDING-INTEGRATED SYSTEMS include, but are not
limited to, active photovoltaic or hot water systems that are contained within
roofing materials, windows, walls, skylights, and awnings, or passive systems
that are designed to capture direct solar heat.
   BUILDING-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A solar energy system affixed to a
principal or accessory building.
   BUILDING SETBACK. The distance between a building and a given lot line.
   CANNABIS FACILITY (A.K.A. MARIJUANA DISPENSARY). An establishment or
business which cultivates, acquires, manufactures, possesses, prepares,
transfers, transports, supplies, or dispenses medical cannabis or any related
supplies in accordance with M.S. § 152.22, as it may be amended from time to
time.
   CLUB or LODGE. An establishment in which a limited group of people are
organized to pursue common social or fraternal goals, interests or activities,
and usually characterized by certain membership restrictions, payment of fees
or dues, regular meetings and a constitution or bylaws. The use of any premises
and /or buildings is restricted to members and their guests. “Health clubs,”
listed as a permitted conditional use within the C District under §
154.122, and defined in §
114.020, are excluded from this definition.
   COMMON AREAS. Privately-owned land in a residential development which is
used for recreational purposes or is of an aesthetic nature, or provides access
and is generally intended for the use and/or enjoyment of the residents of the
development.
   CONDITIONAL USE. A use which is not classified as a permitted use but which
may be permitted subject to conditions imposed by the City Council.
   CONDOMINIUM. Property to be owned and conveyed in accordance with the State
Condominium Act, M.S. Chapter 515, as it may be amended from time to time.
   CONVENIENCE STORE. A retail business that provides the public with a
convenient location to quickly purchase a wide variety of consumable products
and services, generally food and automotive fuels and lubricants.
   DAYCARE FACILITY. A facility regulated by state law where adult supervision
and care is provided for three or more children.
   DECK. A platform projecting from the wall of a building or constructed on
top of a building designed to be used by people as space which is part of the
structure.
   DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY. A facility from which a product or service is
dispensed, sold, rendered, or from which business is transacted, between a
business establishment and persons in vehicles.
   DWELLING and DWELLING UNIT. A building or a unit in a building intended to
be occupied by a person or persons as a place of residence, but excluding rooms
in motels, hotels, nursing homes, and boarding homes, and excluding trailers
and tents.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE. A building with three or more dwelling units, access to
which is provided from a common internal hallway.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A dwelling designed to accommodate one family.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A dwelling designed to accommodate two families in
separate dwelling units, each unit with its own means of access.
   EXPANSION, ENLARGEMENT, or INTENSIFICATION. Any increase in a dimension,
size, area, volume, or height, any increase in the area of use, any placement
of a structure or part thereof where none existed before, any addition of a
site feature such as a deck, patio fence, driveway, parking area, or swimming
pool, any improvement that would allow the land to be more intensely developed,
any move of operations to a new location on the property, or any increase in
intensity of use based on a review of the original nature, function or purpose
of the use, the hours of operation, traffic, parking, noise, exterior storage,
signs, exterior lighting, types of operations, types of goods or services
offered, odors, area of operation, number of employees, and other factors
deemed relevant by the city.
   FAMILY. One person, or two or more persons each related to the others by
blood, marriage, adoption, or foster care, or a group of not more than the
owner of a residence plus three persons not so related, occupying the residence
and maintaining a common household and using common cooking and kitchen
facilities.
   FAST FOOD RESTAURANT. A restaurant in which the primary method of dispensing
and selling food is over the counter directly to the customer for consumption
on the premises or elsewhere, excluding restaurants in which more than 20% of
the gross sales are through table service.
   FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross areas of all floors in a structure except
the basement floor, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls.
   FLOOR AREA RATIO. The ratio of the maximum permitted floor area of the
principal building or buildings to the area of the lot on which they are
located or to be located. The maximum allowable floor area on a lot is
determined by multiplying the lot area by the floor area ratio. The garage is
not included in determining the FLOOR AREA RATIO as it is considered an
accessory building in residential areas.
   FLUSHMOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A solar energy system that is installed on
the roof of a building in which the solar panels are parallel with the finished
roof materials.
   FREE-STANDING SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A solar energy system with a supporting
framework that is placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that is independent
of any building or other structure. Garages, carports, or similar structures
that incorporate building-integrated or building mounted solar energy systems
shall not be classified as FREE-STANDING SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS and shall instead
be subject to regulations governing accessory structures.
   GARAGE. An accessory building or portion of a principal building which is
principally used for the storage of motor vehicles owned by occupants of the
principal building. GARAGES cannot be larger than the principal structure or be
more than 1,000 square feet in size in R-1, R-1A, and R-2 zoned property.
   GARAGE SALE. Any display of items for sale in a dwelling, garage, or yard on
a property used primarily as a residence.
   GARDEN LEVEL APARTMENT. An apartment on the lowest level of a building and
in which the height of the base of windows is not more than four feet above the
floor.
   GRADE. The elevation of the garage floor in a structure with an attached or
tuck under garage, or the elevation of the average finished surface of the
ground at the building setback line in a structure with a detached garage.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. A constructed hard surface that prevents or retards
entry of water into the soil and causes water to run off the surface in greater
quantities and at an increased rate of flow than prior to development,
including rooftops; decks; sidewalks; patios; swimming pools; parking lots;
concrete, asphalt, gravel driveways, or pavers, including “permeable” pavers;
and other similar surfaces.
   JUNK YARD. Property where waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought,
sold, stored, exchanged, cleaned, packed, disassembled, or handled.
   KENNEL. Property other than animal hospitals, pet shops, and veterinary
clinics, which is deemed to be a KENNEL under §
91.15.
   LAND RECLAMATION. Land upon which 25 cubic yards or more of fill material
(rock, concrete, bituminous concrete, or sand) is deposited.
   LAND REMOVAL. Land upon which 100 cubic yards or more of soil or subsoil
material is removed, not including material excavated for the purpose of
constructing basements, footings, or foundations.
   LANDSCAPING. The aesthetic improvement of land by the arrangement of
plantings and/or decorative features such as fences and walls.
   LOT. An area of land intended for occupancy or use as permitted in the
Zoning Code, and otherwise meeting the requirements of the Zoning Code.
   LOT AREA. The area of a lot in a horizontal plane exclusive of contours,
bounded by the lot lines, but excluding any area which constitutes public
waters or public street or alley right-of-way.
   LOT, CORNER. The area of a lot in a horizontal plane exclusive of contours,
bounded by the lot lines, but excluding any area which constitutes public
waters or public street or alley right-of-way.
      (1)   LOT COVERAGE. The area of a lot covered by impervious surface. An
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE is any material that substantially reduces or prevents the
infiltration of storm water into the ground. IMPERVIOUS SURFACES shall include
all buildings, driveways (paved or gravel), sidewalks and parking areas. A
surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it
is highly resistant to infiltration by water will be considered impervious. An
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE shall not include decks as long as the deck is pervious and
the surface beneath the deck is pervious.
      (2)   BUILDING TO LAND RATIO. The area of the lot covered by buildings
only and expressed as a percentage of the total area of the lot.
   LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the
rear lot line of a lot.
   LOT, INTERIOR. Any lot other than a corner lot.
   LOT LINE. The boundary line of a lot, except that where any portion of a lot
extends into the public right-of-way, the right-of-way line will be treated as
the lot line.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. The boundary of a lot which abuts a public or private
street, and in the case of a corner lot, it is the boundary to the front of the
building’s principal entrance.
   LOT LINE, REAR. The boundary of a lot which is opposite the front lot line.
If the rear lot line is less than ten feet in length, or if the lot forms a
point at the rear, the REAR LOT LINE will be deemed to be a line ten feet in
length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front
lot line, for the purpose of determining setbacks.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a
rear lot line.
   LOT, THROUGH. A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting two
substantially parallel public rights-of-way. For a THROUGH LOT, both right-of-
way lines will be treated as front lot lines.
   LOT WIDTH. The averaged distance between side lot lines measured at the
front and rear lot lines.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A manufactured home as defined in M.S. § 327.31, Subd. 6,
as it may be amended from time to time.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. A manufactured home park as defined in M.S. §
327.14, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time.
   MOTEL (INCLUDES HOTEL). Premises furnishing sleeping or overnight stopping
accommodations for travelers and other transient guests for stays of fewer than
30 consecutive days.
   NONCONFORMITY. Any land use, structure, physical form of land development,
lot of record or sign that is not in full compliance with the regulations of
this chapter and either was legally established before the effective date of
the ordinance provision with which it does not comply, or became nonconforming
because of other governmental action, such as a court order or taking by a
governmental body under eminent domain or negotiated sale. A NONCONFORMITY does
not include a land use, structure, physical form of land development, lot of
record, or sign that was allowed to deviate from this ordinance by an approved
variance. A NONCONFORMITY is one of two types of physical land development: a
nonconforming use or a nonconforming development.
   NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT. A nonconformity other than a nonconforming use
that does not currently conform to an ordinance standard such as height,
setback, or size.
   NONCONFORMING LOT OR RECORD. A lot which was legally created and was
recorded with the County Recorder’s Office on or before the effective date of
this chapter which does not comply with the lot size requirements for any
permitted use in the district in which it is located. Such lot is considered
buildable without a variance.
   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. A nonconforming structure as defined in §
154.003.
   NONCONFORMING USE. A nonconforming use as defined in §
154.003.
   NURSING HOME. A nursing home as defined in M.S. § 144A.01, Subd. 5, as it
may be amended from time to time.
   OPEN SALES LOT. Land devoted to the display of goods for sale, rent, lease,
advertising, or trade where the goods are not enclosed within a building.
   PARCEL. A contiguous tract of land, which may consist of unplatted land or
one or more platted lots. For purposes of the Zoning Code, adjoining lots which
were in common ownership on LI-1991 according to the real estate records of
Hennepin County, or Ramsey County, Minnesota, will be deemed a single parcel if
one or more of the lots was smaller than the minimum lot size then required
under the Zoning Code.
   PARKING LOT. A facility comprised of parking spaces, drive aisles,
circulation, and access that provides for the temporary off-street parking of
passenger vehicles and small commercial vehicles, accessory to multiple-family
residential, commercial, industrial, and institutional principal uses.
   PARKING, OFF-STREET. The act of keeping a passenger vehicle as defined
herein and/or small commercial vehicles, recreational vehicles, and emergency
vehicles as defined herein, on an approved parking space, properly surfaced per
code, for a period of less than 24 hours. In residential districts, vehicles,
as defined and as regulated, may be parked on driveways in the front yard for
more than 24 hours. PARKING, OFF-STREET may include a parking space, parking
lot, or parking pad as used in the code.
   PARKING PAD. A location on a parcel approved for the parking of a vehicle
which is not a driveway. A PARKING PAD must meet the relevant performance and
location requirements of the applicable code.
   PARKING SPACE. An area of not less than 180 square feet, exclusive of
driveways and aisles, designed for the parking of one passenger or small
commercial vehicle.
   PATIO. A courtyard or other finished exterior ground surface open to the sky
constructed of rock, brick, concrete, stone, or similar materials and commonly
used for relaxation, socializing, or dining.
   PAVED. A parking area which is paved as required in this section with
asphalt, concrete, durable pavers, or which is surfaced with materials to match
an existing compliant driveway section with pavement. Pavers are an acceptable
surfacing material to meet this requirement, but regardless of design or
construction, are considered impervious for the purposes of impervious surface
requirements.
   PERMITTED USE. A use expressly authorized by the Zoning Code for a
particular district or districts.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. Property developed as a unit under §§
154.205 through
154.214 rather than as several separate developments under other provisions of
the Zoning Code.
   PORCH. A structure projecting from and structurally attached to an exterior
wall of a building, covered by a roof and having a floor elevation not more
than three feet above grade.
   PRINCIPAL BUILDING. The main structure on a parcel or lot which houses the
principal use of the property.
   PRINCIPAL USE. The primary use of a parcel or lot as opposed to a
subordinate “accessory” use.
   RECREATIONAL/OPEN SPACE. Land which has significant natural and/or
recreational amenities which warrant protection and/or an assessment of any
proposed change in the usage of the land.
   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION/PLACE OF WORSHIP. A building or portion thereof
together with its accessory buildings (supporting homes, convents, or
rectories) and uses commonly associated with religious institutions, where
persons regularly assemble for religious workshop and which building or portion
thereof, together with its accessory buildings and common religious uses, is
maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain religious
ceremonies and purposed. The term shall not carry secular connotation.
   REMODELING. Alterations of a building primarily of an aesthetic nature which
may include incidental repairs to supporting members but not structural
alterations.
   RESIDENCE OR RESIDENTIAL USE. A dwelling unit that is intended for occupancy
as a domicile for an individual, family, or groups of individuals as specified
in this chapter, for no less than 30 consecutive days, whether owned or rented.
   RETAINING WALL. That which is erected as a permanent barrier, affixed along
its entire length to the ground or some immovable structure to impede the
movement or erosion of soil. Retaining walls shall be subject to the applicable
requirements of other fences.
   SETBACKS. Areas of a lot adjoining the lots lines in which structures are
prohibited.
   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES. Adult bookstores, adult motion picture
theaters, adult motion picture rental, adult mini-motion picture theaters,
adult steam room/bathhouse/sauna facilities, adult companionship
establishments, adult rap/conversation parlors, adult health/sport clubs, adult
cabarets, adult novelty businesses, adult motion picture arcades, adult
modeling studios, adult hotels/motels, and adult body painting studios as
defined in this section. In addition, all other premises, enterprises,
establishments, businesses, or places at or in which there is an emphasis on
the presentation, display, depiction, or description of specified sexual
activity or specified anatomical areas which are capable of being seen by
members of the public. The term SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES shall not be
construed to include schools or professional offices of licensed physicians,
chiropractors, psychologists, physical therapists, teachers, or similar
licensed professionals performing functions authorized under the licenses held,
establishments or businesses operated by or employing licensed cosmetologists
or barbers performing functions authorized under licenses held, or the sale of
clothing.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL UNIT. A form of transient occupancy, similar to motels or
other such uses, in a residential zoning district for which occupancy of a
residential building, room, or suite of rooms is offered, rented, or used, for
periods of fewer than 30 consecutive days.
   SIDEWALK. A paved path typically located in a public right-of-way, on
publicly owned property, or a public easement that is open to members of the
public traveling as pedestrians, and if designated, open to non-motorized
wheeled traffic (such as bicycles or similar vehicles). The term SIDEWALK may
include public trails or pathways, or similar public improvements. Pedestrians
shall include those persons afoot, or using any manual or motorized wheelchair,
scooter, tricycle, or similar device designed for persons with disabilities as
a substitute for walking.
   SIT-DOWN RESTAURANT. A restaurant in which more than 20% of the gross sales
are through table service.
   SITE PLAN. An outline in detail of the proposed layout of all proposed
structures, driveways, parking, landscaping, and other improvements, drawn to
an appropriate scale.
   SOLAR COLLECTOR SURFACE. Any part of a solar energy system that absorbs
solar energy for use in the system’s transformation process. The COLLECTOR
SURFACE does not include frames, supports, and mounting hardware.
   SOLAR ENERGY. Radiant energy received from the sun that can be collected in
the form of heat or light by a solar collector.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A device, set of devices, or structural design feature
intended to provide for collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy
for purposes including heating or cooling buildings or other energy-using
processes, electricity generating by means of any combination of collecting,
transferring, solar-generated energy, or water heating.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast(s) below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; or, human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
      (1)   Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal
intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of
unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual
relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual
relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct:
analingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio,
necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, or zooerasty;
      (2)   Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation,
arousal, or tumescence;
      (3)   Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation,
coitus, or masturbation;
      (4)   Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttock,
or female breast(s);
      (5)   Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude,
clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, and who are engaged in
activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding, or other
physical restraint of any such persons;
      (6)   Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other sexually-oriented
contact with an animal by a human being; or
      (7)   Human excretion, urination, menstruation, or vaginal or anal
irrigation.
   STORAGE, OUTDOOR. The keeping, in an un-roofed area, of any goods, material,
merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours. This shall
not include the display of vehicles for sale in a new or used car sales lot.
   STORY. The portion of a building other than a basement which is between the
surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it; or if there is
no floor above, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above.
   STREET. A public right-of-way which affords a primary means of access to
abutting property.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change made to existing support members, columns,
beams, girders, or foundations except those which are solely of an ornamental,
decorative, or incidental nature.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed, moved, or erected, the use of which
requires location on the ground or attached to something having a location on
the ground, but excluding fences, sidewalks, retaining walls, and items of an
ornamental or decorative nature.
   TOWNHOUSE. Attached dwelling units of three or more, each with separate
means of access which are not a condominium.
   UNSURFACED. A space which is covered by vegetation, such as grass or other
landscaped cover, and which is mowed or trimmed to meet the city’s weed control
regulations. UNSURFACED space may not include bare ground which may be subject
to erosion, tracking of mud onto the roadway, or drainage of silt into a public
drainage easement or waterway.
   USE. The purpose or activity for which land or a building is designed or
intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
   VARIANCE. A modification of the dimensional requirements of the Zoning Code
pursuant to §
154.245.
   VEHICLE. A car, van, truck, motorcycle, snowmobile, motor home, camper,
trailer, boat, or similar item licensed by the state for use on roadways or
waterways, but excluding bicycles and mopeds.
   VEHICLE, LARGE COMMERCIAL. A vehicle used for commercial purposes which is a
semi-tractor and/or semi-trailer, dump truck, or any other commercial vehicle
that does not qualify under the definition of a “small commercial vehicle.”
   VEHICLE, PASSENGER. A vehicle capable of moving under its own power which is
licensed and operable for use on public roadways, and shall include the
following vehicles: passenger automobiles, pick-up trucks, and sport-utility
vehicles of less than 9,000 pounds gross vehicle weight, pick-up trucks, and
sport-utility vehicles of between 9,000 pounds and 13,000 pounds, commuter vans
of a capacity up to 16 persons, and motorcycles.
   VEHICLE, RECREATIONAL.
      (1)   A vehicle that is used and licensed primarily for recreational or
vacation purposes, and which is licensed and operable for use on public
roadways, whether self-propelled, carried on, or towed behind, a self-propelled
vehicle.
      (2)   Operable recreational equipment that is not licensed for use on the
public roadway, but used off-road, such as all-terrain vehicles, boats, off-
road motorcycles, race vehicles, snowmobiles, or similar equipment. Such
equipment shall be properly licensed if the state provides for such licensing.
      (3)   Licensed, operable trailers which may be used to tow recreational
equipment, whether such trailers are loaded or unloaded, including utility
trailers. Where a trailer is loaded with recreational equipment, such trailer
and equipment shall be considered to be one piece of equipment for the purposes
of this section.
   VEHICLE, SMALL COMMERCIAL. A vehicle used primarily for commercial purposes,
including pick-up trucks and sport-utility vehicles larger than 9,000 pounds
gross vehicle weight, but less than 13,000 pounds gross vehicle weight which
display a commercial business message, and all other commercial vans or trucks,
regardless of commercial message which are no greater than any of the following
dimensions: 22 feet in length, eight feet in height, and eight and one-half
feet in width.
   WALKWAY. A hard-surfaced path (consisting of pavement, rock, stone, brick,
or pavers) located on private property for the purpose of providing internal
access to occupants or visitors to the uses on or adjacent to the property. A
WALKWAY shall be no greater than three feet in width. Any surfaced area greater
than three feet in width shall be considered a PATIO.
   YARD. The portion of a lot between a lot line and a building on the lot.
   YARD, EXTERIOR SIDE. A side yard which abuts a street or public right-of-way
along the side lot line.
   YARD, FRONT. The area extending along the full width of the lot between side
lot lines from the street right-of-way line to the principal building on the
lot.
   YARD, INTERIOR SIDE. A side yard which abuts an adjacent side yard or
backyard along the side lot line.
   YARD, REAR. The area extending along the full width of the lot between the
side lot lines from the rear lot line to the principal building on the lot.
   YARD, SIDE. The area extending along the full depth of the lot between the
front and rear lot lines from the side lot line to the principal building on
the lot.
   ZONING DISTRICT. One of the areas defined in §
154.020.
   ZONING MAP. The map referred to in §
154.021 designating the zoning districts.
(Prior Code, § 152.008) (Ord. 2012-11, passed 11-12-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed
- -; Ord. 2015-04, passed - -; Ord. 2016-01, passed - -; Ord. 2019-11, passed
11-15-2019; Ord. 2023-01, passed 7-11-2023; Ord. 2025-02, passed 4-22-2025;
Ord. 2025-05, passed 10-28-2025)
DISTRICTS
§ 154.020 DIVISION OF CITY INTO DISTRICTS.
   The city is divided into the following zoning districts:
   (A)   Residential:
      (1)   R-1 Single-Family;
      (2)   R-1A Single-Family Lakeshore;
      (3)   R-2 Two-Family;
      (4)   R-3 Townhouse; and
      (5)   R-4 Multiple-Family.
   (B)   C General Commercial;
   (C)   LI Light Industrial;
   (D)   R/O Recreational/Open Space; and
   (E)   PUD Planned Unit Development.
      (1)   Silver Lake Village PUD District.
         (a)   Purpose. The purpose of the Silver Lake Village PUD District is
to provide for the development of certain real estate subject to the District
for mixed land uses.
         (b)   Permitted uses. Permitted principal uses in the Silver Lake
Village PUD District shall be those uses as found in the C, General Commercial
Zoning District and the R-4, Multiple Family Residential District of the City
Zoning Ordinance, subject to the approved PUD development agreements on file
with the city, as well as the final stage development plans dated November 1,
2019, and planned unit development agreement dated December 10, 2019, as may be
amended. The introduction of any other use from any district shall be reviewed
under the requirements of §§
154.205 through
154.214.
         (c)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses shall be those commonly accessory
and incidental to the allowed uses, and as specifically identified by the
approved final stage PUD plans.
         (d)   District performance standards. Performance standards for the
development of any lot in the Silver Lake Village PUD District shall adhere to
the approved final stage PUD plans and development agreement for each lot. In
such case where any proposed improvement is not addressed by the final stage
PUD, then the regulations of the C, General Commercial or R-4, Multiple Family
Residential District shall apply, as applicable to the use on the subject
parcel.
         (e)   Amendments. Where changes to the PUD are proposed in the manner
of use, density, site plan, development layout, building size, mass, or
coverage, or any other change, the proposer shall apply for an amendment to the
PUD under the terms of the §§
154.205 through
154.214. The city may require that substantial changes in overall use of the
PUD property be processed as a new project, including a zoning district
amendment.
      (2)   Stinson Apartments PUD Sub-District.
         (a)   Purpose. The purpose of the Stinson Apartments PUD Sub-District,
a portion of the Silver Lake Village PUD District, is to provide for the
development of certain real estate subject to the Sub-District for high-density
residential land uses.
         (b)   Permitted uses. Permitted principal uses in the Stinson
Apartments PUD Sub-District shall be those uses as found in the R-4, Multiple
Family Residential District of the City Zoning Ordinance, subject to any
approved PUD development agreement on file with the city, as well as the final
stage development plans submitted on November 17, 2020, as may be amended. The
introduction of any other use from any district shall be reviewed under the
requirements of §§
154.205 through
154.214.
         (c)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses shall be those commonly accessory
and incidental to the allowed uses, and as specifically identified by the
approved final stage PUD plans.
         (d)   District performance standards. Performance standards for the
development of any lot in the Stinson Apartments PUD Sub-District shall adhere
to the approved final stage PUD plans and development agreement for each lot.
In such case where any proposed improvement is not addressed by the final stage
PUD, then the regulations of the R-4, Multiple Family Residential District
shall apply, as applicable to the use on the subject parcel.
         (e)   Amendments. Where changes to the PUD are proposed in the manner
of use, density, site plan, development layout, building size, mass, or
coverage, or any other change, the proposer shall apply for an amendment to the
PUD under the terms of §§
154.205 through
154.214. The city may require that substantial changes in overall use of the
PUD property be processed as a new project, including a zoning district
amendment.
      (3)   Development 65 PUD District.
         (a)   Purpose. The purpose of the Development 65 PUD District is to
provide for the development of certain real estate subject to the Sub-District
for high-density senior residential land uses.
         (b)   Permitted uses. Permitted principal uses in the Development 65
PUD District shall be those uses as found in the R-4, Multiple Family
Residential District of the City Zoning Ordinance, subject to any approved PUD
development agreement on file with the city, as well as the final stage
development plans submitted on March 25, 2021 and the supplement dated March
29, 2021, as may be amended. The introduction of any other use from any
district shall be reviewed under the requirements of §§
154.205 through
154.214.
         (c)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses shall be those commonly accessory
and incidental to the allowed uses, and as specifically identified by the
approved final stage PUD plans.
         (d)   District performance standards. Performance standards for the
development of any lot in the Development 65 PUD District shall adhere to the
approved final stage PUD plans and development agreement for each lot. In such
case where any proposed improvement is not addressed by the final stage PUD,
then the regulations of the R-4, Multiple Family Residential District shall
apply, as applicable to the use on the subject parcel.
         (e)   Amendments. Where changes to the PUD are proposed in the manner
of use, density, site plan, development layout, building size, mass, or
coverage, or any other change, the proposer shall apply for an amendment to the
PUD under the terms of §§
154.205 through
154.214. The city may require that substantial changes in overall use of the
PUD property be processed as a new project, including a zoning district
amendment.
      (4)   Kenzie Terrace PUD Overlay District.
         (a)   Purpose. The purpose of the Kenzie Terrace PUD Overlay District
is to provide for the development of certain real estate subject to the Overlay
District for commercial and high-density residential land uses.
         (b)   Permitted uses. Permitted principal uses in the Development 65
PUD District shall be those uses as found in the R-4, Multiple Family
Residential District of the City Zoning Ordinance on Parcel PID 07-029-23-23-
0002; and those uses found in the C Commercial District on Parcels PID 07-029-
23-24-0020 and 07-029-23-24-0021, subject to any approved PUD development
agreement on file with the city, as well as the final stage development plans
submitted on October 5, 2021, as may be amended. The introduction of any other
use from any district shall be reviewed under the requirements of §§
154.205 through
154.214.
         (c)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses shall be those commonly accessory
and incidental to the allowed uses, and as specifically identified by the
approved final stage PUD plans.
         (d)   District performance standards. Performance standards for the
development of any lot in the Kenzie Terrace PUD Overlay District shall adhere
to the approved final stage PUD plans and development agreement for each lot.
In such case where any proposed improvement is not addressed by the final stage
PUD, then the regulations of the R-4, Multiple Family Residential District or C
Commercial District shall apply, as applicable to the approved Principal Use on
the subject parcel.
         (e)   Amendments. Where changes to the PUD are proposed in the manner
of use, density, site plan, development layout, building size, mass, or
coverage, or any other change, the proposer shall apply for an amendment to the
PUD under the terms of §§
154.205 through
154.214. The City may require that substantial changes in overall use of the
PUD property be processed as a new project, including a zoning district
amendment.
(Prior Code, § 152.020) (Ord. 2020-04, passed 12-8-2020; Ord. 2021-01, passed
4-13-2021; Ord. 2021-04, passed 10-26-2021)
§ 154.021 ZONING MAP.
   The location and boundaries of the zoning districts are designated in the
zoning map dated January 1, 1993, which is hereby made a part of the Zoning
Code. The zoning map and all notations, references, and data shown on the
zoning map are hereby incorporated by reference into the Zoning Code and made a
part of the Zoning Code. The Zoning Officer will maintain the zoning map on
file in the City Hall.
(Prior Code, § 152.021)
§ 154.022 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   The boundaries between districts are, unless otherwise indicated, either the
centerlines of streets, alleys, or railroad rights-of-way or property lines, or
the lines extended.
(Prior Code, § 152.022)
R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICT
§ 154.035 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the R-1 District is to create and maintain areas which due to
the natural amenities of the land, low traffic volumes, and historical
development patterns are best suited for single-family detached residences.
(Prior Code, § 152.035)
§ 154.036 PERMITTED USES.
   Within an R-1 District, only the following uses are permitted:
   (A)   Single-family detached dwellings, but not including short-term
rentals;
      (1)   Short-term rental of single-family dwellings may be allowed as a
permitted principal use only as provided under the following conditions:
         (a)   The subject property shall have been fully licensed as a rental
property, and used as a short-term rental unit, as of September 9, 2025, and at
all times shall remain in compliance with all licensing requirements of
Chapter 152.
         (b)   The short-term rental unit shall be included in the maximum cap
on rental single-family dwelling units as limited by §
152.08.
         (c)   The license for a short-term rental unit shall be issued only
for a parcel that directly abuts the homestead property of the owner of the
short-term rental unit.
         (d)   The rental license allowing short-term rental use shall expire
upon any one or more of the following events:
            1.   Conversion of the short-term rental unit to long-term rental;
            2.   Sale of the short-term rental property to a new ownership
party;
            3.   Relocation of the owner of the homestead property to a
property that is no longer abutting the short-term rental parcel;
            4.   Failure of the short-term rental parcel to be in full
compliance with the requirements of
Chapter 152.
   (B)   Public schools or parochial schools which have a curriculum equivalent
to a public school;
   (C)   Publicly owned recreational facilities including parks, play grounds,
swimming pools, and athletic fields; and
   (D)   State licensed facilities permitted under M.S. § 462.357, Subd. 7, as
it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 152.036) (Ord. 2025-05, passed 10-28-2025)
§ 154.037 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES.
   Within an R-1 District, the following uses are permitted only if a
conditional use permit has been issued for that use by the City Council:
   (A)   Religious institution/place of worship;
   (B)   Essential service structures, including, but not limited to, buildings
such as telephone exchange substations, booster or pressure regular stations,
wells and pumping stations, elevated tanks, and electrical power substations;
and
   (C)   City buildings including fire and police stations and other municipal
service buildings not considered industrial.
(Prior Code, § 152.037) (Ord. 2012-11, passed - -)
§ 154.038 ACCESSORY USES.
   Subject to the provisions of §§
154.175 through
154.186, the following accessory uses are permitted in the R-1 District:
   (A)   Accessory buildings and private garages and parking for passenger cars
and for recreational vehicles and trucks subject to the limitations of Chapter
72, but excluding carports;
   (B)   Swimming pools, subject to the provisions of §§
150.065 through
150.073;
   (C)   Tennis courts;
   (D)   Signs, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 157;
   (E)   Accommodations for not more than two boarders or roomers;
   (F)   Landscaping;
   (G)   Private nonprofit conservatories for plants and flowers;
   (H)   Lawn, garden, and utility buildings; and
   (I)   Solar energy systems, subject to the provisions of §
154.187.
(Prior Code, § 152.038) (Ord. 2015-04, passed - -)
§ 154.039 DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Height. No dwelling may exceed 25 feet in height or contain more than
two stories.
   (B)   Area and width. No dwelling may be constructed or placed on an
interior lot of less than 9,000 square feet, or less than 75 feet in width at
the building setback line, or a corner of less than 11,000 square feet or less
than 90 feet in width at the building setback line, except as allowed in §
154.227.
   (C)   Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio within the R-1 District may not
exceed three-tenths.
   (D)   Minimum floor area.
      (1) Each dwelling must contain the following minimum floor areas on the
first floor:
 
One-story dwellings              1,000 square feet
One and one-half story dwellings 900 square feet
Two-story dwellings              750 square feet
 
      (2)   In split level dwellings which have finished rooms on the lowest
level in compliance with the State Building Code, the area of those rooms will
be included in the first floor area minimums.
   (E)   Front yard. The front yard must have a depth equal to the greater of
30 feet or a distance equal to the average of the front yard depths of the two
adjacent lots.
   (F)   Side yards. Dwellings must have two side yards the combined width of
which is at least 15 feet, and each side yard must be at least five feet wide.
A side yard adjacent to a street must be at least 30 feet wide.
   (G)   Rear yard. The rear yard must have a depth equal to the greater of 20%
of the depth of the entire lot or 25 feet.
   (H)   Lot coverage. The lot coverage for residential structures on lots with
an area 9,000 square feet and above may not exceed 35%. The lot coverage for
residential structures on lots with an area less than 9,000 square feet, may
not exceed 40%.
   (I)   Braiding to land ratio. The building to land ratio for the following
permitted and permitted conditional uses may not exceed 35%:
      (1)   Public schools, and private schools or parochial schools which have
an approved curriculum equivalent to a public school;
      (2)   Publicly owned recreational facilities, including parks, play
grounds, swimming pools, and athletic fields;
      (3)   Religious institution/place of worship;
      (4)   Essential service structures, including, but not limited to,
buildings such as telephone exchange substations, booster or pressure regular
stations, wells and pumping stations, elevated tanks, and electrical power
substations; and
      (5)   City buildings, including fire and police stations and other
municipal service buildings not considered industrial.
   (J)   General regulations. Property in the R-1 District is also subject to
the provisions of §§
154.175 through
154.186.
(Prior Code, § 152.039) (Ord. 2012-11, passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
R-1A SINGLE-FAMILY LAKESHORE DISTRICT
§ 154.050 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the R-1A District is to create and maintain lakeshore areas
for single-family detached residences which, due to the natural amenity of the
lake, and the topographic characteristics, call for zoning regulations which
are somewhat different from other single-family districts and which are
designed for the preservation of natural areas.
(Prior Code, § 152.050)
§ 154.051 PERMITTED USES.
   Within an R-1A District, only the following uses are permitted:
   (A)   Single-family detached dwellings, but not including short-term
rentals;
      (1)   Short-term rental of single-family dwellings may be allowed as a
permitted principal use only as provided under the following conditions:
         (a)   The subject property shall have been fully licensed as a rental
property, and used as a short-term rental unit, as of September 9, 2025, and at
all times shall remain in compliance with all licensing requirements of
Chapter 152.
         (b)   The short-term rental unit shall be included in the maximum cap
on rental single-family dwelling units as limited by §
152.08.
         (c)   The license for a short-term rental unit shall be issued only
for a parcel that directly abuts the homestead property of the owner of the
short-term rental unit.
         (d)   The rental license allowing short-term rental use shall expire
upon any one or more of the following events:
            1.   Conversion of the short-term rental unit to a long-term
rental;
            2.   Sale of the short-term rental property to a new ownership
party;
            3.   Relocation of the owner of the homestead property to a
property that is no longer abutting the short-term rental parcel;
            4.   Failure of the short-term rental parcel to be in full
compliance with the requirements of
Chapter 152.
   (B)   Public schools or parochial schools which have a curriculum equivalent
to a public school;
   (C)   Public owned recreational facilities including parks, play grounds,
swimming pools, and athletic fields; and
   (D)   State licensed facilities permitted under M.S. § 462.357, Subd. 7, as
it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 152.051) (Ord. 2025-05, passed 10-28-2025)
§ 154.052 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES.
   Within an R-1A District, the following uses are permitted only by issuance
of a conditional use permit by the City Council:
   (A)   Essential service structures, including, but not limited to, buildings
such as telephone exchange substations, booster or pressure regulating
stations, wells and pumping stations, elevated tanks, and electrical power
substations; and
   (B)   Public municipal buildings including fire and police stations and
other municipal service buildings not considered industrial.
(Prior Code, § 152.052)
§ 154.053 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   Subject to the provisions of §§
154.175 through
154.186, the following accessory uses are permitted in the R-1A District:
   (A)   Accessory buildings and private garages, carports and parking for
passenger cars and for recreational vehicles and trucks subject to the
limitations of Chapter 72;
   (B)   Swimming pools which comply with the provisions of §§
150.065 through
150.073, and which also comply with the following.
      (1)   No part of a swimming pool may be located within ten feet from the
side yard lot line or within 75 feet from the natural high water elevation of
the lake.
      (2)   No swimming pool may be located in a front yard.
      (3)   The filter unit, pump, heating unit, and any other mechanical
equipment must be at least 25 feet from any neighboring residential structure,
at least ten feet from any side yard lot line and at least 75 feet from the
natural high water elevation of the lake.
   (C)   Tennis courts;
   (D)   Decorative landscaping features, including, but not limited to, pools,
arbors, and terraces;
   (E)   Lawn, garden, boat house, and utility buildings;
   (F)   Patios, covered and uncovered porches, gazebos, and picnic shelters;
and
   (G)   Solar energy systems, subject to the provisions of §
154.187.
(Prior Code, § 152.053) (Ord. 2015-04, passed - -)
§ 154.054 DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Height. No dwelling may exceed 25 feet in height or contain more than
two stories.
   (B)   Area and width. No dwelling may be constructed or placed on an
interior lot of less than 9,000 square feet or less than 75 feet in width at
the building setback line, or a corner lot of less than 11,000 square feet or
less than 90 feet in width at the building setback line, except as allowed in §
154.227.
   (C)   Floor area ratio. The area ratio within the R-1A District may not
exceed three-tenths.
   (D)   Minimum floor area. Each dwelling must contain no less than the
following minimum floor areas on the first floor:
 
One-story dwellings              1,100 square feet
One and one-half story dwellings 900 square feet
Two-story dwellings              750 square feet
 
   (E)   Front yard. The front yard must have a depth of at least 30 feet.
   (F)   Side yards. Each dwelling must have two side yards, each having a
width of at least five feet and having a combined width of at least 15 feet.
Any side yard adjacent to a street must be at least 30 feet in width.
   (G)   Rear yard. The rear yard of any lot abutting the lake must be at least
75 feet from the natural high water elevation of the lake. The rear yard of any
lot not abutting the lake must be at least 20% of the depth of the entire lot
but in no case less than 25 feet.
   (H)   Lot coverage. The lot coverage may not exceed 35%.
   (I)   General regulations. Property in the R-1A District is also subject to
the provisions of §§
154.175 through
154.186.
(Prior Code, § 152.054) Penalty, see §
10.99
R-2 TWO-FAMILY DISTRICT
§ 154.065 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the R-2 District is to provide areas which are best suited
for a higher density than single-family dwellings, and which may serve as a
transitional use between R-1 or R-1A Districts and other districts.
(Prior Code, § 152.065)
§ 154.066 PERMITTED USES.
   Within an R-2 District, only the following uses are permitted:
   (A)   Uses permitted in the R-1 or R-1A District; and
   (B)   Two-family detached dwellings.
(Prior Code, § 152.066)
§ 154.067 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES.
   Within an R-2 District, a use permitted under §
154.037 is permitted only if a conditional use permit has been issued for that
use by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 152.067)
§ 154.068 ACCESSORY USES.
   Subject to the provisions of §§
154.175 through
154.186, the accessory uses permitted in the R-1 and R-1A District are
permitted in the R-2 District.
(Prior Code, § 152.068)
§ 154.069 DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Height. No dwelling may exceed 25 feet in height or contain more than
two stories.
   (B)   Area and width. No dwelling may be constructed or placed or built on
an interior lot of less than 12,000 square feet or less than 85 feet in width
at the building setback line, or a corner lot of less than 14,000 square feet
or less than 100 feet in width at the building setback line, except as allowed
in §
154.227.
   (C)   Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio within the R-2 District may not
exceed three-tenths.
   (D)   Minimum floor areas. Each dwelling must contain the following minimum
floor areas on the first floor:
 
One-story dwellings              850 square feet
One and one-half story dwellings 800 square feet
Two-story dwellings              700 square feet
 
   (E)   Front yard. The front yard must have a depth equal to the greater of
30 feet or a distance equal to the average of the front yard depths of the two
adjacent lots.
   (F)   Side yards. Dwellings must have two side yards the combined width of
which is at least 15 feet, and each side yard must be at least five feet wide.
A side yard adjacent to a street must be at least 30 feet wide.
   (G)   Rear yard. The rear yard must have a depth equal to the greater of 20%
of the depth of the entire lot or 25 feet.
   (H)   Lot coverage. The lot coverage may not exceed 35%.
   (I)   General regulations. Property in the R-2 District is also subject to
the provisions of §§
154.175 through
154.186.
(Prior Code, § 152.069) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.070 DIVISION OF LOT INTO SEPARATE OWNERSHIP.
   A lot in the R-2 District may be divided into two separate lots with the
party wall between the two dwelling units acting as the dividing lot line,
subject to the procedures and other requirements of
Chapters 151,
152, and
153, and subject to the following conditions.
   (A)   The areas of the two lots must be as nearly equal as is reasonably
possible, and each lot must contain no less than one-half the minimum land area
requirement for a two-family dwelling.
   (B)   Except for having no setback along the common property line, all other
setback and yard requirements must be met.
   (C)   No fence or shrubbery divider may be installed or maintained within
the required front yard of either lot.
   (D)   Separate services must be provided to each residential unit for
sanitary sewer, water, electricity, natural gas, telephone, and other
utilities.
   (E)   The common party wall must have the fire rating and sound transmission
control rating required under the Uniform Building Code.
   (F)   The owner must execute and record at the owner’s expense a declaration
of covenants, conditions, and restrictions in a form approved by the city
covering party walls, arbitration of disputes, maintenance of the structure,
exterior finishes, land surrounding the building, architectural control, roofs
of different types and colors, and the right (but not the obligation) of the
city to enforce the provisions of the declaration.
(Prior Code, § 152.070) Penalty, see §
10.99
R-3 TOWNHOUSE DISTRICT
§ 154.085 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the R-3 District is to provide areas where the natural
amenities such as trees, hills, and bodies of water are preserved by
encouraging development of medium density housing surrounded by common open
space, which may serve as a transitional use between less dense residential
districts and other districts, and which provide for alternatives to one-family
and two-family detached dwellings.
(Prior Code, § 152.085)
§ 154.086 PERMITTED USES.
   Within an R-3 District, only the following uses are permitted:
   (A)   Uses permitted in the R-1, R-1A, and R-2 Districts; and
   (B)   Townhouse buildings containing not less than three units nor more than
eight units, but not including short-term rentals.
(Prior Code, § 152.086) (Ord. 2025-05, passed 10-28-2025)
§ 154.087 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES.
   Within an R-3 District, the following uses are permitted only if a
conditional use permit has been issued by the City Council:
   (A)   Uses permitted as conditional uses in the R-1, R-1A, and R-
2 Districts;
   (B)   Nursing homes; and
   (C)   Multiple dwellings with not more than four apartments.
(Prior Code, § 152.087)
§ 154.088 ACCESSORY USES.
   Subject to the provisions of §§
154.175 through
154.186, the following accessory uses are permitted in the R-3 District:
   (A)   Accessory uses permitted in the R-1, R-1A, and R-2 Districts; and
   (B)   Common area facilities including swimming pools and tennis courts,
intended solely for the use and enjoyment of the residents and their guests.
   (C)   Multiple residential dwellings with not more than four residential
dwelling units, but not including short-term rentals.
(Prior Code, § 152.088) (Ord. 2025-05, passed 10-28-2025)
§ 154.089 DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Height. No dwelling may exceed 30 feet in height or contain more than
two stories.
   (B)   Area and width. The land must contain at least 4,000 square feet per
dwelling unit, with a total lot area of at least 15,000 square feet, and a lot
width of at least 90 feet at the building setback line, except as allowed in §
154.227.
   (C)   Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio within the R-3 District may not
exceed six-tenths.
   (D)   Minimum floor area.
      (1)   Efficiency units must contain at least 500 square feet on one
floor.
      (2)   One bedroom units must contain at least 650 square feet on one or
two floors, not including any basement.
      (3)   Two bedroom units must contain at least 800 square feet on one or
two floors, not including any basement.
      (4)   Units with more than two bedrooms must contain at least 800 square
feet plus 125 square feet for each additional bedroom, not including any
basement.
   (E)   Front yard. The front yard must have a depth equal to the greater of
30 feet or a distance equal to the average of the front yard depths of the two
adjacent lots.
   (G)   Side yards. Dwellings must have two side yards the combined width of
which is at least 25 feet, and each side yard must be at least ten feet wide.
Side yards adjacent to a street must be at least 30 feet wide.
   (H)   Rear yards. The rear yard must have a depth equal to the greater of
25% of the depth of the entire lot or 30 feet.
   (I)   Unit width. The width of each dwelling unit must be at least 20 feet.
   (J)   Lot coverage. The lot coverage may not exceed 50%.
   (K)   General regulations. Property in the R-3 District is also subject to
the provisions of §§
154.175 through
154.186.
(Prior Code, § 152.089) Penalty, see §
10.99
R-4 MULTIPLE-FAMILY DISTRICT
§ 154.100 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the R-4 District is to provide areas for multiple-family
housing consistent with the City’s Comprehensive Plan goals and objectives,
including sustainability, quality, and a broad range of market reach, including
affordability, luxury, family, senior, and other resident categories.
(Prior Code, § 152.100) (Ord. 2021-03, passed 8-13-2021)
§ 154.101 PERMITTED USES.
   Within an R-4 District, the only permitted uses are rental apartment units
and condominium apartment units. Permitted multi-family buildings shall meet
the standards and requirements of this subchapter. Short-term rentals shall not
be allowed in the R-4 District.
(Prior Code, § 152.101) (Ord. 2021-03, passed 8-13-2021) (Ord. 2025-05, passed
10-28-2025)
§ 154.102 CONDITIONAL USES.
   Within an R-4 District, the following uses are allowed only if a conditional
use permit has been issued for that use by the City Council:
   (A)   Uses permitted as conditional uses in the R-1, R-1A, R-2, and R-
3 Districts;
   (B)    Townhouses, but not including short-term rentals;
   (C)   Service or convenience type businesses, including grocery stores,
pharmacies, barber shops and beauty shops catering to the residents of an
apartment or condominium building or complex, not to exceed 1,000 square feet
in size, and provided there is no advertising or signing on the exterior of the
building or in any yard;
   (D)   A state licensed residential facility serving from seven through 16
persons, provided conditions are necessary to protect public health, safety,
and welfare, and similar to the conditions required and applied to other
conditional uses in the district;
   (E)   A state licensed daycare facility serving from 13 through 16 persons
provided conditions are necessary to protect public health, safety, and
welfare, and similar to the conditions required and applied to other
conditional uses in the district;
   (F)   Nursing home;
   (G)   Multi-family housing which exceeds the height and density standards of
this section, provided that:
      (1)   Maximum height shall be limited to 50 feet and no more than four
stories (parking garages that are constructed which are at least 50% below
natural grade shall not count as a “story” for the purposes of this section);
      (2)   Density shall be limited to between 20 and 40 units per acre;
      (3)   Multi-family housing constructed under this provision shall be
required to meet setbacks which are double those of this section;
      (4)   Such housing shall be located on a parcel that is within 400 feet
of a public transit stop. Such housing shall provide off-street parking of no
less than one and one-tenth spaces per bedroom, or one and one-half spaces per
unit, whichever is greater, no less than 50% of which shall be underground or
under the principal building;
      (5)   Such housing located on a parcel more than 400 feet from a public
transit stop may be allowed, but shall provide off-street parking of at least
two spaces per unit, no less than 50% of which shall be underground or under
the principal building; and
      (6)   Additional conditions deemed necessary by the City Council to
support the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan and the conditions
found in the immediate neighborhood of the proposed development.
   (H)   Multi-family housing restricted to units each of which are occupied by
at least one senior citizen 55 years of age and older, provided that:
      (1)   The development provides at least 75% of its required parking
underground or under the building;
      (2)   The required parking for the facility totals no less than one and
one-tenth parking spaces per unit;
      (3)   The facility is located on a collector or arterial status street as
identified in the Comprehensive Plan, or the facility has provided specific
plans for alternative transit services to be available to senior residents of
the facility, whether provided publicly or privately;
      (4)   Unit sizes may fall below the thresholds in this section, but shall
include a demonstration by plan as to how such units may be converted to meet
the requirements of this section if the building is redesigned to accommodate
occupants that are not senior citizens;
      (5)   Density of the project shall be limited to between 20 and 40 units
per acre; and
      (6)   Additional conditions deemed necessary by the City Council to
support the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan and the conditions
found in the immediate neighborhood of the proposed development.
(Prior Code, § 152.102) (Ord. 2021-03, passed 8-13-2021; Ord. 2025-05, passed
10-28-2025) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.103 ACCESSORY USES.
   Subject to the provisions of §§
154.175 through
154.186, the accessory uses permitted in the R-1, R-1A, R-2, and R-3 Districts
are permitted in the R-4 District.
(Prior Code, § 152.03) (Ord. 2021-03, passed 8-13-2021)
§ 154.104 DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Height. No building or structure may exceed 35 feet in height or
contain more than three stories, except by conditional use permit.
   (B)   Area. Except by conditional use permit, no dwelling may be constructed
or placed on a lot which is less in area than the following, except as allowed
in §
154.227:
 
Building Size      Minimum Lot Size
Two to eight units 12,000 square feet plus 2,500 square feet per each unit over
                   two
Nine to 16 units   27,000 square feet plus 2,000 square feet per each unit over
                   eight
17 or more units   43,000 square feet plus 1,750 square feet per each unit over
                   16
 
   (C)   Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio within the R-4 District may not
exceed one except by conditional use permit.
   (D)   Front yard. There must be a front yard with a setback of at least 20
feet.
   (E)   Side yard.
      (1)   There must be one side yard with a minimum width of at least 20
feet each, or at least 50% of the height of the building, whichever is greater.
      (2)   Side yards adjacent to a public right-of-way must be at least 20
feet in width.
      (3)   There must be a distance equal to the height of the highest
building on a lot between any buildings on the same lot, to a maximum required
distance of 30 feet.
   (F)   Rear yard. The rear yard must have a depth equal to 40 feet or 50% of
the height of the building, whichever is greater.
   (G)   Minimum floor area.
      (1)   Efficiency units must contain at least 500 square feet.
      (2)   One-bedroom units must contain at least 650 square feet.
      (3)   Units with more than one bedroom must contain at least 650 square
feet plus 125 square feet for each bedroom in excess of one.
      (4)   Units in buildings designated for senior occupants may utilize
smaller units under the CUP allowed by this section, with the provisions for
future conversion as noted.
   (H)   Lot coverage. The lot coverage (including all impervious surfaces) may
not exceed 50% except by conditional use permit, upon a showing that storm
water management is addressed on-site without creating impacts on flooding
potential and pursuant to the requirements of a storm water pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP).
(Prior Code, § 152.04) (Ord. 2021-03, passed 8-13-2021) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.105 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   Property in the R-4 District is also subject to the provisions of §§
154.175 through
154.186, and the following.
   (A)   Building materials and architecture. The applicant for any mult-family
structure in the R-4 District shall provide a proposed materials palette,
including a plan that shows brick, stone, glass, and architectural metal on no
less than 50% of all building walls. Architecture shall include significant
articulation in both wall facades and building roofline.
   (B)   Landscaping and site improvements. Any application for a multiple
family development shall include a landscaping plan which includes an
intensively landscaped site, including usable outdoor spaces such as patios or
similar features, structural elements such as gazebos or usable shade, and a
variety of trees, shrubs, forms, and grasses that provide an attractive outdoor
environment for the project residents, and a visually attractive environment
for passersby. Provisions shall be made for pedestrian and bicycle use and
connections to surrounding sidewalk, trail, and pathways. Extensions of
existing public pedestrian/bicycle routes may be required as a part of any
multi-family project. All landscaped areas shall be irrigated. Natural or
native landscapes may be incorporated into the planting plan, consistent with
city policy and or other applicable regulations.
   (C)   Sustainability. The city will review multi-family residential projects
with a consideration for sustainability measures included in the project
development. Elements that may be included are charging stations for electric
vehicles, storm water treatment and re-use for landscape irrigation,
accommodations for sustainable energy provisions, such as roof-top solar or
wind, and other measures. The city encourages a creative and affirmative
approach to sustainability consistent with its Comprehensive Plan and related
policies.
(Prior Code, § 152.05) (Ord. 2021-03, passed 8-13-2021)
C GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
§ 154.120 PURPOSE.
   The C District is intended to provide areas for retail sales and services
located and regulated so as to minimize adverse effects on neighboring
residential districts and congestion of public streets. The uses and standards
in the “C,” Commercial District shall serve as the basis for commercial
standards in “PUD”, Planned Unit Development District areas where commercial
uses are designated by the District or the Comprehensive Plan.
(Prior Code, § 152.120) (Ord. 2022-01, passed 4-26-2022)
§ 154.121 PERMITTED USES.
   Within a C District, only the following uses are permitted:
   (A)   Retail stores in which at least 51% of the floor area is devoted to
stocking and displaying goods for sale to the general public end users, and
where customers may see, purchase, and receive items for such sales. Retail
stores may incorporate electronic ordering or other means of providing goods to
the end users. Storage of goods or other accessory uses are limited to 49% or
less of the facility;
   (B)   Retail service facilities in which customers receive personal services
on-site, such as salons, spas, personal fitness, and exercise, or similar
facilities;
   (C)   Trade services and retail sales, rental, or repair facilities, such as
plumbers, electricians, auto parts, home improvement, hardware, and similar
facilities, in which no more than 10% of the floor area is devoted to repair,
fabrication, or other accessory activity;
   (D)   Professional offices and services, in which customers receive
professional advice and/or documents and conduct professional transactions,
whether on-site or via other correspondence media, such as legal, tax,
financial institutions, real estate, insurance, and similar services, and which
facility may be dominated by office space;
   (E)   Commercial offices providing space for primarily administrative
business functions and related activities;
   (F)   Hospitality uses, including eating and drinking establishments,
hotels/motels, entertainment venues, indoor commercial recreation, and similar
uses. Such uses that are on parcels where any portion is less than 250 feet
from property zoned R-1 or R-2, and/or which include any drive-through ordering
and pick-up lane, shall require a conditional use permit in accordance with the
requirements in this subchapter. Permitted restaurant uses may include drive-up
pick-up parking space locations for pre-ordered goods;
   (G)   Medical, dental, veterinary, and related clinics, in which customers
receive such services in person, and which consist of offices, exam rooms,
laboratory and similar services, and related activities; and
   (H)   Government administrative services, including postal facilities,
municipal services, community centers, and similar uses dominated by offices,
direct citizen activities or services, and retail transactions.
(Prior Code, § 152.121) (Ord. 2022-01, passed 4-26-2022) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.122 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses are allowed in the C District only by conditional use
permit issued by the City Council.
   (A)   Sexually-oriented businesses which comply with the requirements of
Chapter 110;
   (B)   A use permitted under §
154.121 except for the fact that it has a drive-through facility;
   (C)   Assembly, club, or lodge in which such facilities provide space for
specific purposes, and which is characterized by groups of common interest
attending scheduled common activities.
   (D)   Auto or other motor vehicle sales and repair which includes no storage
of auto vehicles for parts, subject to and including, but not limited to, the
following additional conditions.
      (1)   Outdoor storage of vehicles awaiting repair or customer pick-up
shall constitute no more than 30% of the property in question.
      (2)   Outdoor storage of vehicles is located no closer to the street than
the rear line of the principal building.
      (3)   Outdoor storage of vehicles awaiting repair is fully screened by a
completely opaque fence of eight feet in height, with landscaping outside the
screening fence.
      (4)   No outside storage of other parts, tires, or materials.
      (5)   Refuse and recycling containers shall be stored indoors, or within
the screened enclosure with the vehicles being serviced.
      (6)   No such use shall be allowed on property abutting and parcel(s)
zoned R, Residential, or PUD when used for residential uses.
   (E)   Motor vehicle sales, separate (or as a component of) repair and parts
sales, provided that:
      (1)   The facility has a separate indoor space devoted to sales office.
      (2)   The vehicles for sale are fully operational, and not in need of
repair for such operation, and licensed, or capable of being immediately
licensed, for their intended use.
      (3)   Vehicles for sale may be displayed in the front yard of the
property in a location meeting all other requirements of the city’s commercial
parking lot dimensions, pavement and curb materials, and setback requirements.
      (4)   Vehicles for sale may not occupy parking spaces required for
compliance with the parking standards for employees or customers of the
business(es) on the property.
   (F)   Bus stations of the Metropolitan Transit Operations;
   (G)   Car washes; subject to and including, but not limited to, the
following conditions.
      (1)   Any such facility is designed to adhere to all noise-related
requirements of the city and state.
      (2)   Headlight glare is fully screened from view of adjoining
residential property.
      (3)   The facility is designed to be fully closed whenever any mechanical
activity is in operation, including both entry and exit doors.
      (4)   Vacuum mechanical equipment is housed within the primary structure,
or if in individual equipment outside, is designed so as to avoid noise
detection at the boundary of any adjoining residential property.
   (H)   Motor fuel station as a principal use of property; electric vehicle
(EV) charging stations and/or other alternative fuel dispensary may be a
component of a principal use Motor Fuel station under this section. Accessory
EV charging stations (but not other alternative fuels) consisting of no more
than two such EV stations shall be exempt from the requirement for CUP, and
shall be allowed as a permitted accessory uses;
   (I)   Pool or billiard halls;
   (J)   Hospitality uses, including eating and drinking establishments,
hotels/motels, entertainment venues, indoor commercial recreation, and similar
uses, where any portion of the subject property is located less than 250 feet
from property zoned R-1 or R-2.
   (K)   Establishments having more than three amusement devices as defined in
§
114.001;
   (L)   Hardware and building material supply store with outdoor lumber yard,
where the lumber yard is screened in a manner approved by the City Council, and
the hardware and building material supply store building contains at least
30,000 square feet of space;
   (M)   Laboratories for medical research and testing (except research and
testing which uses animals) that provide services to healthcare providers;
   (N)   Pawnbroker businesses which comply with the requirements of §§
113.35 through
113.99;
   (O)   Secondhand dealers that comply with the requirements of §§
113.01 through
113.23;
   (P)   Adult daycare centers, licensed under M.S. Chapter 245A, as it may be
amended from time to time, and Minn. Rules parts 9555.9600 through 9555.9730;
or commercial child daycare centers, licensed under M.S. Chapter 245A, as it
may be amended from time to time, and Minn. Rules Chapter 9502 et seq.
   (Q)   Brewery/taprooms and micro-distillery/cocktail rooms, subject to the
requirements applicable to other hospitality uses in this section; and subject
to findings that show the use will avoid conflicts between the industrial
production and distribution activities and other commercial uses in the
district through appropriate access, hours of operation, and other relevant
factors. Any such use shall at all times be subject to maintenance of the
appropriate liquor licensing and size limitations under state and local
requirements; and
   (R)   Trade services and retail sales, rental, or repair facilities, such as
plumbers, electricians, auto parts, home improvement, hardware, crafts, arts,
and similar facilities, in which more than 10% (up to a maximum of 70%) of the
floor area is devoted to repair, fabrication, storage, or other accessory
activity.
(Prior Code, § 152.122) (Ord. 2022-01, passed 4-26-2022; Ord. 2024-01, passed
4-9-2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.123 ACCESSORY USES.
   Subject to the provisions of §§
154.175 through
154.186, the following accessory uses are permitted in the C District:
   (A)   Incidental repair, limited processing, or storage necessary to conduct
a permitted principal use if conducted within the principal structure, where
such uses constitute no more than a total of 49% of the floor area of the
structure, and for repair and/or processing, no more than 10% of the floor area
of the structure;
   (B)   Private garages, off-street loading and unloading docks and
facilities, parking lots, and related facilities for service and customer use
directly related to the principal use;
   (C)   Temporary mobile structures for construction purposes only; and
   (D)   Accessory buildings not exceeding one story in height, and which are
constructed to be consistent with the architecture and exterior building
materials of the principal building.
(Prior Code, § 152.123) (Ord. 2022-01, passed 4-26-2022)
§ 154.124 DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Height. No structure may exceed 35 feet in height or contain more than
three stories.
   (B)   Lot area and width. The minimum lot area is 15,000 square feet, and
the minimum lot width is 100 feet, except as allowed in §
154.227.
   (C)   Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio within the C District may not
exceed one.
   (D)   Front yards. The front yard must have a depth equal to the greater of
35 feet or a distance equal to the average of the front yard depths on the two
adjacent lots.
   (E)   Side yards. Interior side yards must be at least ten feet in width,
except where a common wall meeting fire code requirements is provided between
two buildings. Side yards adjoining a street must be at least 35 feet.
   (F)   Rear yards. The rear yard must have a depth of at least 20 feet, or at
least 25 feet if there is an alley.
   (G)   Setbacks from residential districts. There must be a setback area of
not less than 20 feet from any property in a residential district within which
setback area parking, storage, and/or loading facilities are excluded.
   (H)   Shopping centers. The minimum yards set forth in this section will not
apply to any lot line of a lot in a shopping center if the lot line adjoins
either another lot within the shopping center or a driveway or parking area
within the shopping center, and the City Council has approved a site plan for a
building to be constructed on the lot with a different setback from the lot
line. In those cases, the setback approved by the City Council shall apply so
long as the building exists on the lot. For purposes of this division (H), a
SHOPPING CENTER means any group of four or more retail or service
establishments totaling a minimum floor area of 75,000 square feet, on one or
more contiguous tracts of land in single ownership, or in multiple ownership
but subject to a reciprocal easement agreement governing common access and
parking
(Prior Code, § 152.124) (Ord. 2022-01, passed 4-26-2022) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.125 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   Property in the C District is also subject to the provisions of §§
154.175 through
154.186.
(Prior Code, § 152.125) (Ord. 2022-01, passed 4-26-2022)
LI LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
§ 154.140 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of the LI District is to designate areas for, and regulate
the development of, light industry. Areas are designated as light industrial
due to the proximity of high capacity roadways or rail facilities, as well as
both private and public utilities and existing development, and regulated to
enhance the compatibility of light industrial uses and uses within the
commercial and residential districts.
   (B)   The objective of the Light Industrial District is to provide
appropriate locations for facilities that provide jobs and services to the
community, and to the region, and help provide a stable property tax base to
the city.
(Prior Code, § 152.140) (Ord. 2022-02, passed 4-26-2022)
§ 154.141 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses are permitted within an LI District:
   (A)   Light industrial uses which include: manufacturing, research, testing,
processing, assembly, fabrication, and treatment of materials, the products of
which are distributed to other facilities for further storage, processing, or
eventual distribution to the end users. Light industrial uses do not include
uses dominated by storage or warehousing, freight transfer, or delivery of
goods to the end user on-site;
   (B)   Motor vehicle service and repair provided no junked, unlicensed, or
inoperable vehicles are kept on the property;
   (C)   Cleaning, laundering, and dry cleaning processing facilities, without
direct retail transactions with the end users;
   (D)   Construction contractors’ offices, if equipment or materials are
screened according to§
154.183. Any outdoor storage of equipment or materials for construction
contractors shall constitute no more than 25% of the ground floor size of the
principal building, and shall be no more than eight feet in height; and
   (E)   Commercial offices for administrative purposes as a principal use or
as a function of an industrial enterprise.
   (F)   Medical, dental, veterinary, and related clinics, in which customers
receive such services in person, and which consist of offices, exam rooms,
laboratory and similar services, and related activities.
(Prior Code, § 152.141) (Ord. 2022-02, passed 4-26-2022; Ord. 2024-06, passed
11-12-2024)
§ 154.142 PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses are allowed in an LI District only by a conditional use
permit issued by the City Council:
   (A)   Drug, cosmetic, pharmaceutical, and toiletries manufacture;
   (B)   Canning or bottling other than malt products;
   (C)   Finish coat applications utilizing chemical or mechanical processes
which have the potential for emissions or sanitary wastewater treatment
impacts;
   (D)   Meat packing which does not include the slaughtering of any kind of
animal;
   (E)   Steel or metal goods manufacturing processes, not involving blast
furnace processes;
   (F)   Catering operations; and
   (G)   Adult daycare centers, licensed under M.S. Chapter 245A, as it may be
amended from time to time, and Minn. Rules parts 9555.9600 through 9555.9730;
or commercial child daycare centers, licensed under M.S. Chapter 245A, as it
may be amended from time to time, and Minn. Rules Chapter 9502 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 152.142) (Ord. 2022-02, passed 4-26-2022; Ord. 2024-01, passed
4-9-2024)
§ 154.143 ACCESSORY USES.
   Subject to the provisions of §§
154.175 through
154.186, the following uses are permitted accessory uses in the LI District:
   (A)   Accessory buildings which do not exceed one story in height and are
constructed of materials consistent with those of the principal building;
   (B)   Buildings temporarily located on the premises for purposes of
construction for a period not to exceed completion of construction;
   (C)   Parking, loading, semi-trailers, and other company truck/trailer
vehicles are permitted in designated loading areas, provided they are actively
loading or unloading; and
   (D)   Semi-trailer and truck parking, provided such parking occupies no more
than 20% of the subject property. Semi-trailers shall not be utilized for the
storage of goods or materials.
(Prior Code, § 152.143) (Ord. 2022-02, passed 4-26-2022)
§ 154.144 DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Height. No structure may exceed 50 feet in height or contain more than
three stories.
   (B)   Lot area and width. The minimum lot area is 15,000 square feet, and
the minimum lot width is 100 feet.
   (C)   Front yard. The front yard must have a depth equal to 20 feet.
   (D)   Side yards. Side yards on interior lots must be at least 15 feet each.
Side yards adjoining a street must be at least 40 feet.
   (E)   Rear yards. The rear yard must be at least 15 feet in depth.
   (F)   Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio in the LI District may not
exceed one and one-half.
   (G)   Setbacks from residential districts. There must be a setback of at
least 20 feet from any property in a residential district, within which setback
area parking, storage, and/or loading facilities are excluded.
(Prior Code, § 152.144) (Ord. 2022-02, passed 4-26-2022) Penalty, see §
10.99
R/O RECREATIONAL/OPEN SPACE DISTRICT
§ 154.155 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the R/O District is to regulate development in those areas
which have significant natural amenities such as trees, terrain, and water
resources, and to regulate development for recreational purposes in areas which
have significant public or private recreational potential.
(Prior Code, § 152.155)
§ 154.156 PERMITTED USES.
   Only the following uses are permitted in the R/O District:
   (A)   Outdoor or indoor recreational facilities and their supporting
structures operated by a governmental agency, a private, nonprofit service
organization or conservation group, including, but not limited to, lodges,
kitchens, dining halls, and supporting restaurants, dormitories, and golf
courses;
   (B)   Trails and pathways for pedestrians and non-motorized means of
transit;
   (C)   Cemeteries; and
   (D)   Schools and government buildings.
(Prior Code, § 152.156)
§ 154.157 IMPACT STATEMENT FOR ANY REZONING.
   Before an application is considered for rezoning any R/O District, a
statement indicating the expected impact of the proposed development on the
environment and public facilities including streets, schools, and utilities,
and an economic feasibility study of the development, are required. The
statement must include:
   (A)   Expected impact. An assessment of the expected impact of the project
on the watershed, including ponds, streams, and wetlands;
   (B)   Topography. A survey of the existing topography, soil, vegetation, and
habitat and how the development will affect these;
   (C)   Noise control. How the developer proposes to control noise, vibration,
smoke, dust, and particulate matter during and after construction;
   (D)   Congestion. An assessment of the impact the project will have on
congestion in streets and roadways in the vicinity, and the effect the
development will have on schools and public utilities; and
   (E)   Economic feasibility. A marketing study of the economic feasibility of
the proposed development, the market to be reached, and substantiation of the
financial capability of the developer to complete the proposed development.
(Prior Code, § 152.157)
§ 154.158 ACCESSORY USES.
   Subject to the provisions of §§
154.175 through
154.186, the following accessory uses are permitted in an R/O District:
   (A)   Athletic fields;
   (B)   Craft or art buildings;
   (C)   Maintenance buildings for the storage of equipment used to maintain
grounds, buildings, trees, and equipment, to be located in such a way as to
minimize the potential damage to the environment by the seepage or spillage of
oil, gasoline, solvents, or lubricants;
   (D)   Nature interpretive centers;
   (E)   Swimming pools, bathhouses, gymnasiums, locker rooms, and other
athletic structures;
   (F)   Mausoleums and crypts; and
   (G)   Solar energy systems, subject to the provisions of §
154.187.
(Prior Code, § 152.158) (Ord. 2013-02, passed - -)
§ 154.159 DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Height. No structure may exceed 35 feet in height or contain more than
three stories.
   (B)   Setbacks. No structure may be constructed or placed within 25 feet of
a property line.
   (C)   Lake setback. No structure may be constructed or placed within 200
feet of a lake or within 75 feet of a watercourse or ponding area.
(Prior Code, § 152.159) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.160 BUILDING DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   All structures must be constructed of a material and of a design which is
compatible with the natural environment as determined by the Planning
Commission and City Council, and must conform with all applicable laws.
(Prior Code, § 152.160) Penalty, see §
10.99
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 154.175 LOT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Lot size. Adjoining lots which were in common ownership on or after
August 18, 1976, according to the real estate records of Hennepin or Ramsey
County, Minnesota, will be deemed a single parcel if one or more of the lots is
smaller than the minimum lot size required under the Zoning Code.
   (B)   Principal structure. There may be no more than one principal structure
on a lot in any R-1, R-1A, or R-2 District.
   (C)   Street lines. On a through lot, both street lines will be front lot
lines for applying the yard and parking requirements of the Zoning Code.
(Prior Code, § 152.175) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.176 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Permitted. The following accessory buildings shall be allowed as
permitted uses, subject to the requirements of division (I) below:
      (1)   R-1 and R-1A, Single-Family Zones.
         (a)   One attached garage;
         (b)   One detached garage or one accessory building-major greater than
200 square feet in floor area. No more than two garages, (only one of which may
be a detached garage), shall be allowed on any single-family parcel;
         (c)   One accessory building-minor no greater than 200 square feet in
floor area meeting the requirements of this subchapter;
         (d)   Accessory uses which are not accessory buildings, including
swimming pools, hot tubs, play structures, animal shelters, and rubbish
container screens of no more than 36 square feet in area, and landscape
elements that do not provide any shelter for human occupancy, provided all
other conditions and performance standards are met;
         (e)   Unless attached to and made a part of the principal building, no
eave or other portion of an accessory building may be closer than five feet
measured horizontally from any eave or other portion of a principal or
accessory building; and
         (f)   All accessory buildings constructed after the construction of
the principal building must be designed and constructed in a manner consistent
with the design and general appearance of the principal building. Accessory
buildings constructed of canvas, plastic, fabric, or other similar non-
permanent materials shall be prohibited, with the exception of temporary
structures regulated by §
154.190.
         (g)   Accessory recreational uses may be allowed pursuant to the
requirements of §
92.06(B)(1)(b).
      (2)   Attached and multi-family buildings. Attached and multi-family
buildings in the R-2, R-3 and R-4 Districts are allowed one accessory building-
major of up to 500 square feet in area, and one accessory building-minor of 200
square feet or less per complex, plus detached garage structures as needed to
meet the requirements of the Zoning Code for off-street parking.
      (3)   Commercial or Industrial Districts. No accessory building in a
commercial or industrial district shall exceed the height of the principal
building except by conditional use permit.
      (4)   Building standards. All accessory buildings in excess of 200 square
feet shall be constructed to the standards of the State Building Code. The
architectural appearance of accessory buildings should be visually compatible
with the principal building relative to color, materials, and form. Carports
shall only be permitted as attached structures, and shall also comply with the
architectural requirements of this section.
   (B)   Accessory buildings without a principal building. No accessory
building or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the time of
construction of the principal building to which it is an accessory unless
authorized through an agreement as prepared by the City Attorney and approved
by the City Council.
   (C)   Accessory dwelling units. Detached accessory buildings shall be
prohibited from containing complete independent living facilities (accessory
dwelling units), which would include permanent provisions for living, sleeping,
eating, and sanitation.
   (D)   Driveways. Driveways shall be required for doorway openings meeting or
exceeding eight feet wide by seven feet tall. All driveways must meet the
standards as outlined in §
154.179.
   (E)   Drainage and utility easements. No part of an accessory building shall
extend into a drainage and utility easement or any required setback.
   (F)   Landscape elements. Landscape elements, such as vegetation, gardens,
statuary, and the like shall be allowed in all yards, provided other applicable
regulations are met. Retaining walls shall be considered fences for the
purposes of this subchapter.
   (G)   Enclosures for rubbish, recyclables, and other waste. Enclosures,
where allowed, shall be required to be constructed of materials that match the
materials used on the principal building exterior, and shall be located in
accordance with §
151.06.
   (H)   Detached garage accessory building materials. Detached garages
accessory buildings accessory to attached and multiple family residential
dwellings, or any commercial or industrial use, shall be constructed of
materials that match those used on the principal building.
   (I)   District performance standards - accessory buildings and uses. Unless
otherwise specified in this chapter, all accessory buildings and/or uses shall
conform to the following requirements (except where noted as applying to
specific districts):
 
 Accessory Building-                 Accessory Building- Other Accessory Uses
 Major or Detached   Attached Garage Minor               or Structures
 Garage
                Accessory                                       Other Accessory
                Building- Major Attached Garage Accessory       Uses or
                or Detached                     Building-Minor  Structures
                Garage
                No closer than
Front yard      principal                       Not allowed in  Not allowed in
setback         building, or 30 30 feet         front yard      front yard
                feet, whichever
                is greater
                                Five feet, with
Side yard                       an aggregate    Not allowed in
setback         Five feet       total of 15     side yard       Five feet
                                feet on two
                                sides
                20 feet, or     20 feet, or
Side yard       equal to        equal to
setback         principal       principal
adjacent to     building        building        20 feet         20 feet
public street   setback,        setback,
                whichever is    whichever is
                greater         greater
Rear yard
setback from    Five feet       30 feet         Five feet       Five feet
private
property
Rear yard
setback from    Five feet       30 feet         Five feet       Five feet
alley
Rear yard
setback from    30 feet         30 feet         30 feet         30 feet
public street
                1,000 square
                feet, or up to  No greater than
Maximum square  the ground      ground floor    200 square      NA, subject to
feet: R-1 and   floor area of   area of         feet, one per   impervious
R-1A            principal       principal       parcel          surface and
                building,       building, one                   other standards
                whichever is    per parcel
                less
                                No greater than                 NA, subject to
Maximum square  500 square      ground floor    200 square      impervious
feet: R-2, R-3, feet, one per   area of         feet, one per   surface and
and R-4         complex         principal       complex         other standards
                                building
                80% of ground   No greater than                 NA, subject to
Maximum square  floor area of   ground floor    200 square      impervious
feet: C, I      principal       area of         feet, one per   surface and
Districts       building        principal       parcel          other standards
                                building
                15 feet to      No greater than
Maximum height: average roof    roof height of  15 feet to peak
R-1, R-1A, R-2  height, and no  principal       roof height     NA
                more than 20    structure
                feet overall
Maximum height: 30 feet         30 feet         15 feet to peak NA
R-3, R-4                                        roof height
                No accessory    No accessory
                building in a   building in a
                Commercial or   Commercial or
                Industrial      Industrial
Maximum height: District shall  District shall  15 feet to peak
C, I Districts  exceed the      exceed the      roof height     NA
                height of the   height of the
                principal       principal
                building except building except
                by conditional  by conditional
                use permit      use permit
Special                                         Other Accessory
Provisions for  Detached Garage Attached Garage Building        Other Accessory
Accessory       Setback from    Setback from    Setback from    Use Setback
Buildings and   OHW             OHW             OHW of 200      from OHW
Uses in the R-                                  Square Feet or
1A District                                     Less
                75 feet, or no                  37.5 feet. No
                closer than the                 such structure
Setback from    nearest                         shall occupy
ordinary high   building line                   land within the
water (OHW)     of the          75 feet         Shore Impact    37.5 feet*
elevation       principal                       Zone, defined
                structure,                      as one-half the
                whichever is                    setback from
                greater                         OHW
Note to table:
* Exception: Access to the shoreline may be provided within this setback area
via stairs, pathways, and landings no greater than four feet in width. One
surfaced patio/landing/deck area of no more than 96 square feet in area may be
located within the Shore Impact Zone, provided such patio maintains a setback
from the OHW of at least 15 feet, and provided such structure extends no more
than 30 inches above the natural grade at any location.
 
(Prior Code, § 152.176) (Ord. 2021-02, passed 4-27-2021; Ord. 2022-03, passed
5-24-2022; Ord. 2023-01, passed 7-11-2023; Ord. 2024-01, passed 4-9-2024)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.177 ENCROACHMENTS IN YARDS.
   The following are permitted encroachments in required yards:
   (A)   Chimneys, flues, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, and
bays which do not extend more than three feet into the yard or closer than
three feet from the property line;
   (B)   Yard light and nameplate signs which are at least five feet from any
side property line;
   (C)   Balconies which project no more than five feet into required front or
side yards and are not closer than five feet from any property line, or
balconies which project no more than 20 feet into required rear yards and are
not closer than 25 feet from the rear property line;
   (D)   Steps, stoops, and porches which extend into a front yard not more
than five feet;
   (E)   Terraces, steps, stoops, uncovered porches, and patios which extend
into a side yard not more than five feet and are not closer than five feet from
any property line;
   (F)   Breezeways, covered or uncovered porches, patios, steps, stoops, and
picnic shelters in a rear yard which are not closer than five feet from any
property line;
   (G)   Non-window mounted air conditioning units which extend no more than
six feet into any required yard other than the front yard, and which are at
least 15 feet from any property line;
   (H)   Eaves, gutters, and downspouts which project no more than five feet
into any required yard, which are at least 30 inches from any property line,
and which do not drain onto neighboring property;
   (I)   Any life safety improvements to a residential structure such as egress
window wells and/or other similar above grade exiting requirements so long as
access to the rear yard is preserved; and
   (J)   The Building Official and/or the Fire Marshal shall have the authority
to require a fence or any other means of structure to be installed in such a
manner as to protect the public from accidentally falling, tripping, or
sustaining an injury of any sort as the result of the installation and
existence of an egress window well.
   (K)   Walkways, as defined in this subchapter, which do not encroach closer
than one foot to any internal side lot line, provided that the property owner
controls drainage impacting adjoining property in a manner that will be
consistent with applicable law.
(Prior Code, § 152.177) (Ord. 2019-11, passed 11-15-2019) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.178 HEIGHT LIMIT EXCEPTIONS.
   In determining height limitations, the following items will be excluded if
they do not adversely affect adjoining properties and their inclusion would not
cause a structure to exceed 75 feet in height: belfries, chimneys, church
spires, cupolas, and domes which do not contain usable space, elevator
penthouses, fire and hose towers, flag poles, monuments, antennas, and
transmission and receiving towers for which a conditional use permit has been
issued.
(Prior Code, § 152.178)
§ 154.179 PARKING.
   (A)   On-site parking. All property in the city must comply with the
following on-site parking requirements.
      (1)   Each parking space must be at least nine feet by 20 feet and those
in the R-4, B, C, and LI Districts must be clearly marked and outlined.
      (2)   The total area of a parking lot, including all parking spaces,
drive aisles, islands, and landscaping must be no less than the required number
of parking spaces multiplied by 300 square feet.
      (3)   All vehicles, as defined in §
154.007, parked on any parcel in an R-1, R-1A, R-2, or R-3 District must be
parked on a surface paved with asphalt or bituminous material, concrete,
cement, brick, or other paved surface, or, if between the front of the
principal structure and the public street, on a driveway surfaced in accordance
with this section.
      (4)   Any vehicle without a current state registration must be kept in a
garage or other building.
         (a)   It shall be unlawful to keep, park, store, or abandon any motor
vehicle which is not in operating condition, partially dismantled, used for
repair of parts or as a source of repair or replacement parts for other
vehicles, kept for scrapping, dismantling, or salvage of any kind, or which is
not properly licensed for operation with the state, pursuant to M.S. §
168B.011, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time.
         (b)   Any motor vehicles described in this section constitute a hazard
to the health and welfare of the residents of the community in that the
vehicles can harbor noxious diseases, furnish a shelter and breeding place for
vermin and present physical danger to the safety and well-being of children and
citizens; and vehicles containing fluids which, if released into the
environment, can and do cause significant health risks to the community.
      (5)   Minimum number of spaces: this section applies to any new
development, or redevelopment that alters an existing parking lot’s dimensions
or square footage of the buildings served by the subject parking facility:
         (a)   Single-family detached units must have at least one fully
enclosed parking space;
         (b)   Two-family dwellings and townhouses must have at least two
parking spaces per unit, at least one of which is enclosed. There must be a
fire wall meeting Fire Code requirements separating parking stalls from living
space. Multiple-family residential must provide at least 1.2 spaces per
bedroom. Housing legally required to be occupied by seniors only may provide a
lesser amount based on the services and resident needs of the building as
determined by the City Council;
         (c)   Churches, clubs, and restaurants must have a number of parking
spaces which is no less than the total designed seating capacity of the
structure divided by two and one-half, plus one parking space for each employee
on the largest shift;
         (d)   Convalescent or nursing homes must have at least one space for
every five beds, plus one space for every employee on the largest shift;
         (e)   Retirement homes must have at least one parking space for every
three living units;
         (f)   Uses in the C District must have at least one parking space for
every 300 square feet of gross floor area;
         (g)   Light industrial, manufacturing, testing, and research uses must
have one space for every 500 square feet of building floor area;
         (h)   Warehousing, transfer, and storage uses must have at least one
space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area;
         (i)   Animal hospitals must have at least four parking spaces for
every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area;
         (j)   Medical and dental offices must have no fewer than four parking
spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area;
         (k)   The parking requirements in the R/O District will be set by the
City Council according to the expected demand for a particular facility; and
         (l)   Fast food, take out, and convenience restaurants must have at
least one parking space for every 50 square feet of gross floor area, plus
eight stacking spaces for every menu board. Coffee shops with drive-through
lanes shall provide no less than 12 stacking spaces.
      (6)   The number of existing on-site parking spaces on a property may not
be reduced below the number required under division (A)(5) above, except for
nonresidential uses permitted under §§
154.036 or
154.037, for which the City Council may establish a lower number of on-site
parking spaces if the owner has demonstrated that a specific structure and use
will not have an adverse effect on off-site parking in the vicinity of the
property.
      (7)   Where parking is lighted, the light sources may not exceed 30 feet
in height, nor may the light intensity exceed one footcandle measured at the
property line.
      (8)   Any parking area or access drive constructed in any zoning district
after May 1, 1987 must be paved with either asphalt or concrete, or with pavers
of stone, asphalt, concrete, brick, or similar materials. Regardless of the
design or manufacturers specifications, all such materials are considered
impervious for the purposes of the applicable lot coverage requirements.
      (9)   All parking must meet the city’s grade requirements for proper
drainage, and there must be approved curbing around the perimeter of all
parking areas except in the R-1, R-lA, and R-2 Districts.
      (10)   Travel trailers, campers, and other recreational vehicles may not
be parked in any zoning district for use as a dwelling or for sleeping or
housekeeping purposes.
      (11)   As used in this division (A), COMMERCIAL PARKING LOT means any
surface used for parking more than three vehicles in any zoning district except
R-1 and R-2, including access drives. The construction or reconstruction of any
commercial parking lot requires a zoning permit. The owner of any commercial
parking lot must maintain it in a safe condition, and the maintenance will
include sweeping to control dust, dirt, and debris; removal of snow; and the
filling of holes caused by freezing and thawing as soon as practicable. Snow
may be stored on the parking lot only if it does not obstruct the visibility
of, or interfere with, vehicular or pedestrian traffic in the parking lot or
access to the parking lot. Snow storage shall not reduce the number of
available parking spaces below the number required in division (A)(5). No snow
may be stored on the city right-of-way. All commercial parking lots must be
supplied with appropriate trash and rubbish containers which are emptied as
necessary. If an owner fails to comply with this division (A)(11), the city may
give notice to the owner that the city will bring the property into compliance
at the owner’s expense if the owner has not done so within 30 days after the
date of the notice. If the owner does not comply within the 30-day period, the
city may cause the work to be done, and bill the owner for the reasonable value
of the services. If the owner fails to pay for these improvements within 60
days, the city may proceed to levy a special assessment against the improved
property pursuant to M.S. Chapter 429, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (12)   Electric vehicle (EV) charging.
         (a)   All parking lots serving new residential developments, and any
existing parking lots being reconstructed that are not exempt under division
(A)(12)(c) of this section, shall include one or more locations to allow for
electric vehicle charging. The thresholds for adding EV charging spaces to new
developments are as follows:
 
EV Charging Space Thresholds
Number of New Parking Spaces            Required Number of EV Spaces and Level
                                        of Charger
Residential developments with at least  10% of spaces at Level 2 or greater
10 spaces and up to 29 spaces
Residential developments with 30 spaces 10% of spaces at Level 2 or greater
up to and 49 spcaes
Residential developments with 50 spaces 10% of spaces at Level 2 or greater
or more
 
         (b)   Level 2 chargers shall be those that operate at 240 volts in
residential settings, or 208 volts in commercial settings, and which typically
deliver power ranging from three kilowatts to 19.2 kilowatts.
         (c)   These requirements shall not apply to maintenance of existing
parking areas when that maintenance consists only of re-striping, seal-coating,
patching of less than 25% of the total area of the parking lot, or "mill and
overlay" projects.
         (d)   Spaces designated as EV charging spaces shall be included in
meeting the property's required parking quantities per this code.
         (e)   EV charging spaces shall be placed in locations easily
accessible to tenants of, or visitors to, the property, and shall be designed
so at least one of the provided EV charging spaces is accessible to vehicles
requiring handicapped access.
         (f)   If EV charging equipment, including charging stations,
transformers, and other above-ground mechanical equipment, is proposed to be
located in the front yard, such equipment shall be screened from view of the
public right-of-way with fencing or landscaping consistent with applicable
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
         (g)   When electric infrastructure is installed, such infrastructure
shall be designed and installed to accommodate convenient expansion of the
charging system on the property.
         (h)   The city may grant an applicant for parking lot construction a
waiver by development agreement of up to two years to install the required
charging facilities if the applicant develops infrastructure to install Level 3
chargers (direct current chargers with power outputs of 30 kilowatts or higher)
rather than Level 2, and installs charging facilities no later than two years
following completion of the parking area.
         (i)   Nothing in this division (A)(12) is intended to discourage or
prohibit the provision of other EV chargers of any level, in addition to those
required by this section.
   (B)   Prohibited on-site parking.
      (1)   In the C and LI Districts, it is unlawful to park a vehicle in any
of the following areas:
         (a)   Within five feet of a side lot line;
         (b)   Within ten feet of the front property line; and/or
         (c)   Within ten feet of the rear lot line.
      (2)   Where an R-4, B, C, or LI District abuts an R-l, R-2, or R-
3 District, it is unlawful to park a vehicle in any location that is not an
approved parking space, or provide a parking space on the R-4, B, C, or LI
property closer than 20 feet from the R-1, R-2, or R-3 property.
   (C)   Residential driveways. All residentially-zoned properties must comply
with the following regulations.
      (1)   Driveway width. Residential driveways installed or modified after
the date of adoption of the ordinance shall comply with the following
standards.
         (a)   Driveways with a single driveway approach shall not exceed 40%
of the width of the lot up to a maximum of 36 feet, whichever dimension is the
smaller provided the driveway between the curb and right-of-way line does not
exceed 28 feet in width.
         (b)   Circular driveways with driveway approach cuts serving the same
lot shall not exceed the maximum 36 feet when both driveway approaches are
combined.
      (2)   Driveway setback. Residential driveways enlarged or reconfigured
after the date of ordinance adoptions shall be setback a minimum of five feet
from the property lines.
      (3)   Required surface material. All driveways and parking areas shall be
of a hard surface. Hard surfaced areas shall consist of a durable material such
as concrete, bituminous, or pavers, but not including gravel or crushed rock.
Any parking space so required or provided shall be surfaced to the full length
and width of the vehicle parked on said parking space. Regardless of the design
or manufacturers specifications of the proposed surfacing material, all such
materials are considered impervious for the purposes of the applicable lot
coverage requirements.
      (4)   Parking area. One 400 square foot hard surface parking area
adjacent to a garage or driveway for parking purposes shall be permitted. Such
area shall not be located in front of the living area of the dwelling. The
parking area shall be setback at least ten feet from the corner side property
lines and five feet from the interior property line.
      (5)   Permit requirements. All new driveways, alterations, or additions
to existing driveways (not including pavement overlay or seal coating) shall
require the issuance of a zoning permit. A fee as determined from time to time
by the City Council shall be required to process the permit.
   (D)   Residential parking location. On any parcel zoned or used for single-
family residential, parking shall be allowed in those locations identified and
shown in Figures 154.179-1 and 154.179-2.
Figure 154.179-1 (See Figure 154.179-2 for graphic)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba6b8ae3c313f9f42c7bd4fe883cd69d42739f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1911.png]
 
Figure 154.179-2 (see Figure 154.179-1 for key)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba6b8ae3c313f9f42c7bd4fe883cd69d42739f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1913.png]
(Prior Code, § 152.179) (Ord. 2013-05, passed 11- 12- 2013; Ord. 2022-03,
passed 5-24-2022; Ord. 2023- 01, passed 7-11- 2023; Ord. 2025-03, passed 9-9-
2025)
§ 154.180 CURB CUTS.
   The City Council has the authority to limit the curb cuts serving a property
or properties where the City Council deems it appropriate for safety reasons
due to the traffic on abutting streets. No curb cut to a parking area may be
more than 28 feet in width or as otherwise regulated by the county or state
agency. Curb cuts on any one street must be at least 30 feet apart, unless curb
cuts are to be used for one-way traffic only and clearly designated as such,
and except that residential driveways may be closer as long as they meet the
requirements as designated in §
154.179(C). No C or LI use may have a curb cut within 30 feet of any
residential district boundary, unless it is located across a street from the
residential district boundary.
(Prior Code, § 152.180) (Ord. 2013-05, passed 11-12-2013) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.181 OFF-STREET LOADING DOCKS.
   All loading docks must be off-street and must be attached to the building to
be served. A loading dock may not be located closer than 25 feet to a street
intersection, or 50 feet to a residential district, unless the loading dock is
totally within a building. Loading docks may not be located within the required
front yard setback space. Loading docks must be located in a manner which will
least interfere with traffic. No portion of any truck trailers using a loading
dock may project into a public street. All loading docks and accessways must be
paved with concrete or bituminous surfacing.
(Prior Code, § 152.181) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.182 LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   Existing trees and vegetation. Existing healthy trees and native
vegetation on a site are to be preserved to the maximum extent feasible during
site development.
   (B)   Landscaping plan. Prior to issuance of a building permit for the
development of property in any district, the owner must submit to the city for
approval a landscaping plan showing:
      (1)   Placement and height of plantings and decorative features such as
fences, walls, berms, and other landscaping features;
      (2)   Species, quantity, and diameter of trees, grasses, and shrubs;
      (3)   Areas to be left in their natural state and areas to be seeded or
sodded;
      (4)   Dimension, descriptions, and other pertinent data identifying
proposed special landscaping effects such as ponds, rock gardens, fountains,
and other similar items; and
      (5)   When requested by the City Council, a grade and contour plan
showing elevations at two-foot intervals, or less where necessary, to identify
pertinent site data (floor and spot elevations, critical points, drainage, and
other items).
   (C)   Prohibited trees. It is unlawful to plant any of the following trees
in the city:
      (1)   All elms (Ulmas all species);
      (2)   Ginkgo/Maiden Fair female (Ginkgo biloba);
      (3)   All red or black oaks (Quercus red species);
      (4)   Boxelder (Acer Negundo);
      (5)   Eastern Cottonwood (Populus deltoides); and/or
      (6)   Lombardy Poplar (Populus nigra italica).
   (D)   Planting of trees in right-of-way. No trees may be planted in public
rights-of-way, except by permission of the Public Works Director.
   (E)   Dead or diseased trees. If a building permit is issued for a building,
all dead or diseased trees and stumps on the lot on which the building is to be
constructed must be removed before completion of construction.
   (F)   Berms. The City Council may require earthen berms or other visual or
acoustic barriers where there exists excess noise or potential visual blight.
   (G)   Required tree plantings. No less than the following number of trees
having a diameter of at least one and three-quarters inches measured one foot
above the ground will be planted in the development of any site within the
city:
      (1)   Single-Family and Two-Family Districts - no requirement;
      (2)   R-3 and R-4 Districts require at least the following number of
trees per building:
         (a)   Up to six units: six trees;
         (b)   Six to 12 units: nine trees;
         (c)   Twelve to 25 units: 12 trees; and
         (d)   Over 25 units: 12 trees, plus one tree for every five units over
25.
      (3)   In the C and LI Districts, the required trees, shrubs, and ground
cover will be specified by the City Council based upon aesthetic
considerations, the size and type of structure, and the available open space.
(Prior Code, § 152.182) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.183 SCREENING.
   (A)   Screening may be accomplished with a wall, fence, berm, or other
landscape feature, or plantings which will provide an opacity of 80% within
three years of planting. Planting type and screen design are subject to
Planning Commission review and City Council approval and shall meet the
following criteria.
      (1)   Plant material centers shall not be located closer than three feet
from the fence line or property line and shall not be planted to conflict with
public plantings, sidewalks, trails, fences, parking areas, and driveways based
on the judgment of the City Manager or designee.
      (2)   Where materials are planted for screening purposes in two or more
rows, plantings shall be staggered in rows or designed to provide maximum
screening effect, unless otherwise approved by the City Manager or designee.
      (3)   Evergreen trees intended for screening shall be planted not more
than 15 feet apart.
      (4)   Where massing of shrubs for screening is required, large deciduous
shrubs shall be planted four feet on center or closer, and/or evergreen shrubs
shall be planted three feet on center or closer. The City Manager or designee
may approve a different spacing if warranted for plant health and impact, based
on species selected.
   (B)   Screening is required on C or LI District property which abuts any
property in a residential district. The City Council may require screening on
R-4 District property which abuts R-1, R- lA, R-2, or R-3 District property.
All exterior storage must be screened, except merchandise being displayed for
sale or materials and equipment being used for construction on the premises.
(Prior Code, § 152.183) (Ord. 2024-01, passed 4-9-2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.184 BOULEVARDS ON CORNER LOTS.
   No new structure, fencing, grade elevation, or planting, in excess of 18
inches above the curb line, is permitted within the boulevard on corner lots in
residential districts.
(Prior Code, § 152.184) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.185 RELOCATING BUILDINGS.
   Structures to be relocated within the city must comply with the following.
   (A)   Licensed mover. Buildings may be moved only by a licensed building
mover approved by the City Manager or designee.
   (B)   Public hearing. A public hearing to consider the application for the
permit will be held by the Planning Commission and notice of the hearing will
be given in accordance with §§
30.45 through
30.48. The Planning Commission will then make its recommendations to the City
Council regarding the permit.
   (C)   Permit. The mover must complete a permit application specifying the
origin and destination of the building, the proposed route, and the time of the
move.
   (D)   Relocated buildings. The relocated building must comply with the
Zoning Code and all other applicable codes.
   (E)   Moving permit. The owner of record will be charged a moving permit fee
based upon the assessed valuation of the building as provided in the Uniform
Building Code.
   (F)   Codes and section compliance. A building may not be occupied until it
has been inspected by the city’s Building Official and it has been determined
that it complies with all applicable laws and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 152.185) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.186 SOIL REMOVAL AND FILLING.
   (A)   Land reclamation and land removal and filling, grading, and excavation
of beaches will be permitted only by permit issued by the City Council.
   (B)   An application for a permit must include the following and be
accompanied by the fee set forth in
Chapter 33:
      (1)   The type of fill to be used;
      (2)   A finished grade plan;
      (3)   A program for rodent, fire, dust, and noxious weed control;
      (4)   Controls for streets;
      (5)   Controls for materials dispersed by wind or spillage;
      (6)   Plans for maintenance of the site;
      (7)   Plans for erosion control, including the proposed type of ground
cover; and
      (8)   An assessment of the environmental impact upon wetlands,
watercourses, and water ponding areas.
(Prior Code, § 152.186) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.187 SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Purpose. Regulations governing solar energy systems are established to
provide for appropriate locations for solar energy systems, to ensure
compatibility with surrounding uses, and to promote safe and effective use of
solar energy to increase opportunities for generation of renewable energy. The
city finds that it is in the public interest to encourage the use and
development of renewable energy systems that enhance energy conservation
efforts, but result in limited adverse impacts on nearby properties. As such,
the city supports the use of solar energy systems.
   (B)   Permitted uses and specific standards.
      (1)   In general. Solar energy systems shall be permitted in those zoning
districts where permitted as an accessory use, subject to the standards of this
subchapter. Solar collector surfaces and all mounting devices shall comply with
the minimum yard requirements of the district in which they are located, unless
otherwise specified herein. Screening of solar collector surfaces shall not be
required, except as required in division (C)(1) below.
      (2)   Building-mounted solar energy systems.
         (a)   Zoning district standards.
            1.   Residential District standards.
               a.   Notwithstanding the height limitations of the zoning
district, building mounted solar energy systems shall be constructed and
maintained at or below the ridge level of a roof on a structure with a gable,
hip, or gambrel roof as long and not visible from the nearest edge of the
street frontage right-of-way other than an alley.
               b.   Building mounted solar energy systems that are visible from
the nearest edge of the street frontage right-of-way shall be flushmounted and
not have a highest finished pitch steeper than the roof pitch on which the
system is mounted, and shall be no higher than 12 inches above the roof
surface. Solar energy systems on all accessory structures shall be
flushmounted, regardless of the location on the structure.
               c.   Building-integrated solar energy systems shall be allowed
regardless of whether the system is visible from the public right-of-way,
provided the building component in which the system is integrated meets all
required setbacks, land use, or performance standards for the district in which
the building is located.
            2.   Commercial, Industrial, and Recreational Open Space (ROS)
Zoning Districts. Notwithstanding the height limitations of the zoning
district, building mounted solar energy systems shall be constructed and
maintained at or below the ridge level of a roof on a structure with a gable,
hip, or gambrel roof and shall not extend higher than ten feet above the
surface of the roof when installed on flat or shed roof.
         (b)   The solar collector surface and mounting devices for building-
mounted solar energy systems shall be setback not less than one foot from the
exterior perimeter of a roof for every one foot that the system extends above
the roof surface on which the system is mounted to ensure ready roof access in
the event of a fire or other safety related occurrence whereby roof access is
needed. Solar energy systems that extend less than one foot above the roof
surface shall be exempt from this provision, however shall be setback from the
roof edge by a minimum of one foot.
         (c)   The collector surface and mounting devices for building-mounted
solar energy systems shall not extend beyond the exterior perimeter of the
building on which the system is mounted or built.
         (d)   Solar energy systems shall be designed to blend into the
architecture of the building to the maximum extent practical. The color of the
solar collector is not required to be consistent with the roofing materials.
         (e)   Building-mounted systems, excluding building-integrated systems,
shall not cover more than 80% of the roof upon which the panels are mounted to
ensure ready roof access in the event of a fire or other safety occurrence
whereby roof access is needed.
         (f)   A conditional use permit is required for any solar installations
in the commercial district, subject to the conditions and criteria for review
in accordance with §
154.243.
      (3)   Free-standing solar energy systems.
         (a)   Free-standing solar energy systems, measured to the highest
point of the system, shall not exceed ten feet in height and shall meet double
the minimum setback requirements of an accessory structure as outlined in §
154.176, as measured from the outermost perimeter of the solar panel to the
property line. Free-standing solar energy systems are only permitted in rear
yards.
         (b)   In all residential districts, the area of the solar collector
surface of freestanding solar energy systems shall not exceed 3% of the lot
area. In all other districts, the area of the solar collector surface of free-
standing solar energy systems shall not exceed 5% of the lot area.
Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, the maximum area of solar
energy systems shall be calculated independently of the floor area of all other
accessory structures on the zoning lot.
         (c)   The supporting framework for freestanding solar energy systems
shall not include unfinished lumber.
      (4)   Lightpole-mounted solar energy systems. Any solar installation on a
light pole shall require the issuance of a conditional use permit, and shall
take into account the surrounding land uses, the proposed visual impact, and
the structural integrity relative to size and height of the proposed solar
installation. No lightpole-mounted solar installation shall exceed three square
feet in size.
   (C)   Design and performance standards. In addition to the standards
required above, the folio-wing standards shall apply to all solar energy
systems.
      (1)   Compatibility with nearby properties. The visual impact of rooftop
equipment on nearby properties shall be minimized through such means as
location on the roof, flushmounting to the roof, screening, or other
integration into the roof design. Screening shall be of durable permanent
materials that are compatible with the primary building materials. Screening
shall be done to the extent possible without reducing the system’s efficiency.
      (2)   Feeder lines. Any lines accompanying a solar energy systems, other
than those attached to on-site structures by leads, shall be buried within the
interior of the subject parcel, unless there are existing lines in the area
which the lines accompanying a solar energy system can be attached. The City
Manager or designee may grant exemptions to this requirement in instances where
shallow bedrock, water courses, or other elements of the natural landscape
interfere with the ability to bury lines.
      (3)   Maintenance. Solar energy systems shall be kept in good repair and
free from damaged supports, mounts, framework, or other components.
      (4)   Abandonment. A solar energy system that is allowed to remain in a
nonfunctional or inoperative state for a period of 12 consecutive months, and
which is not brought in operation within the time specified by the city shall
be presumed abandoned and may be declared a public nuisance subject to removal
at the expense of the operator.
      (5)   Compliance. All solar energy systems shall be designed,
constructed, and operated in compliance with any applicable federal, state, and
local laws, codes, standards, and ordinances, as well as adhere to the
requirements of local utilities if connected to utility lines, including, but
not limited to the State Building Code, State Electric Code, and State Plumbing
Code.
      (6)   Interference. Solar energy systems shall be designed to not cause
electrical, radio frequency, television, and other communication signal
interference.
      (7)   Installation. Solar energy systems shall require the issuance of a
building permit.
      (8)   Structural integrity. The structure upon which the solar energy
system is mounted shall have the structural integrity to carry the weight of
the solar energy system. Proof of structural integrity shall be submitted to
the satisfaction of the City Building Official.
   (D)   Administrative review process.
      (1)   In general. Applications that meet the design requirements of this
policy shall be granted administrative approval by the City Manager or designee
or other Authorized Agent. Plan approval does not indicate compliance with
Building Code or Electric Code. All systems shall comply with the State
Building and Electric Code.
      (2)   Submittal requirements. An application for a solar energy system
shall be filed on a form provided by the city. In addition, the applicant shall
submit the following:
         (a)   Plan application for solar energy systems shall be accompanied
by scaled horizontal and vertical (elevation) drawings. The drawings must show
the location of the system on the building, or on the property for a ground-
mounted system, including the property lines.
            1.   For all building-mounted systems other than a flat roof the
elevation drawings shall show the highest finished slope of the solar collector
and the slope of the finished roof surface on which it is mounted.
            2.   For flat-building-building systems, a drawing shall be
submitted showing the distance to the roof edge and any parapets on the
building and shall identify the height of the building on the street frontage
side, the shortest distance of the system from the street frontage edge of the
building, and the highest finished height of the solar collector above the
finished surface of the roof.
         (b)   Written evidence that the electric utility service provider that
serves the proposed site has been informed of the applicant’s intent to install
a solar energy system, unless the applicant does not plan, and so states so in
the application, to connect the system to the electricity grid.
         (c)   Written evidence that the electric solar energy system
components have a UL listing.
   (E)   Solar access. Solar access easements may be filed consistent with M.S.
§ 500.30, as may be amended from time to time. Any property owner may purchase
an easement across nearby properties to protect access to sunlight. The
easement is purchased or granted by owners of nearby properties and can apply
to buildings, trees, or other structures that would diminish solar access.
   (F)   Legal nonconformities. Solar energy systems in existence prior to
adoption of this section shall be permitted to exist and be repaired in their
current form. However, any changes, expansions, or upgrades in the solar energy
system that would require a building permit shall necessitate conformance with
this section.
(Prior Code, § 152.187) (Ord. 2015-04, passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.188 CANNABIS BUSINESSES AND ZONING.
   (A)   Findings and purpose. The city makes the following legislative
findings.
      (1)   The purpose of this section is to implement the provisions of M.S.
Chapter 342 that authorize the city to protect the public health, safety,
welfare of city residents by regulating cannabis businesses within the legal
boundaries of city.
      (2)   The city finds and concludes that the proposed provisions are
appropriate and lawful land use regulations for the city, that the proposed
amendments will promote the community’s interest in reasonable stability in
zoning for now and in the future, and that the proposed provisions are in the
public interest and for the public good.
   (B)   Authority and jurisdiction. 
      (1)   The city has the authority to adopt this section pursuant to:
         (a)   M.S. § 342.13(c), regarding the authority of a local unit of
government to adopt reasonable restrictions of the time, place, and manner of
the operation of a cannabis business, provided that such restrictions do not
prohibit the establishment or operation of cannabis businesses;
         (b)   M.S. § 342.22, regarding the local registration and enforcement
requirements of state-licensed cannabis retail businesses and lower-potency
hemp edible retail businesses;
         (c)   M.S. § 152.0263, Subd. 5, regarding the use of cannabis in
public places;
         (d)   M.S. § 462.357, regarding the authority of a local authority to
adopt zoning ordinances.
      (2)   This section shall be applicable to the legal boundaries of the
City of St. Anthony, in both Hennepin and Ramsey Counties, and shall count
total licensed facilities as if the city were in one county.
   (C)   Enforcement. The City Manager or designee is responsible for the
administration and enforcement of this section. Any violation of the provisions
of this section or failure to comply with any of its requirements constitutes a
misdemeanor and is punishable as defined by law. Violations of this section can
occur regardless of whether or not a permit is required for a regulated
activity listed in this section.
   (D)   Definitions. Unless otherwise noted in this section, words and phrases
contained in M.S. § 342.01, and the rules promulgated pursuant to any of these
acts, shall have the same meanings in this section.
      CANNABIS CULTIVATION. A cannabis business licensed by the state to grow
cannabis plants within the approved amount of space, from seed or immature
plant to mature plant; harvest cannabis flower from mature plant, package and
label immature plants and seedlings and cannabis flower for sale to other
cannabis businesses; transport cannabis flower to a cannabis manufacturer
located on the same premises; and perform other actions approved by the office.
      CANNABIS RETAIL BUSINESSES. A retail location and the retail location(s)
of a mezzobusiness with a retail operations endorsement, a microbusiness with a
retail operations endorsement, medical combination businesses operating a
retail location, and lower-potency hemp edible retailers.
      CANNABIS RETAILER. Any person, partnership, firm, corporation, or
association, foreign or domestic, selling cannabis product to a consumer, and
not for the purpose of resale in any form.
      DAYCARE. A location licensed with the Minnesota Department of Human
Services to provide the care of a child in a residence outside the child’s own
home for gain or otherwise, on a regular basis, for any part of a 24-hour day.
      LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLE. As defined under M.S. § 342.01, Subd. 50.
      OFFICE OF CANNABIS MANAGEMENT or OCM. The Minnesota Office of Cannabis
Management.
      PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION. A business, accommodation, refreshment,
entertainment, recreation, or transportation facility of any kind, whether
licensed or not, whose goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages or
accommodations are extended, offered, sold, or otherwise made available to the
public.
      PRELIMINARY LICENSE APPROVAL. OCM pre-approval for a cannabis business
license for applicants who qualify under M.S. § 342.17.
      PUBLIC PLACE. A public park or trail, public street or sidewalk; any
enclosed, indoor area used by the general public, including, but not limited
to, restaurants, bars; any other food or liquor establishment, hospitals,
nursing homes, auditoriums, arenas, gyms, meeting rooms, common areas of rental
apartment buildings, and other places of public accommodation.
      RESIDENTIAL TREATMENT FACILITY. As defined under M.S. § 245.462, Subd.
23.
      RETAIL REGISTRATION. An approved registration issued by the city to a
state-licensed cannabis retail business.
      SCHOOL. A public school as defined under M.S. § 120A.05 or a nonpublic
school that must meet the reporting requirements under M.S. § 120A.24.
      STATE LICENSE. An approved license issued by the Minnesota Office of
Cannabis Management to a cannabis retail business.
   (E)   Registration of cannabis businesses.
      (1)   Consent to registering of cannabis businesses. No individual or
entity may operate a state-licensed cannabis retail business within the city
without first registering with the city. Any state-licensed cannabis retail
business that sells to a customer or patient without valid retail registration
shall incur a civil penalty of up to $2,000 for each violation.
      (2)   Compliance checks prior to retail registration. Prior to issuance
of a cannabis retail business registration, the city shall conduct a
preliminary compliance check to ensure compliance with local ordinances.
Pursuant to M.S. Chapter 342, within 30 days of receiving a copy of a state
license application from OCM, the city shall certify, on a form provided by
OCM, whether a proposed cannabis retail business complies with local zoning
ordinances and, if applicable, whether the proposed business complies with the
State Fire Code and the State Building Code.
      (3)   Registration and application procedure.
         (a)   Fees. The city shall not charge an application fee. A
registration fee, as established in the city’s fee schedule, shall be charged
to applicants, depending on the type of retail business registration applied
for. An initial retail registration fee shall not exceed $500 or half the
amount of an initial state license fee under M.S. § 342.11, whichever is less.
The initial registration fee shall include the initial retail registration fee
and the first annual renewal fee. Any renewal retail registration fee imposed
by the city shall be charged at the time of the second renewal, and each
subsequent renewal thereafter. A renewal retail registration fee shall not
exceed $1,000 or half the amount of a renewal state license fee under M.S. §
342.11, whichever is less. A medical combination business operating an adult-
use retail location may only be charged a single registration fee, not to
exceed the lesser of a single retail registration fee, defined under this
section, of the adult-use retail business.
         (b)   Application submittal. The city shall issue a retail
registration to a state-licensed cannabis retail business that adheres to the
requirements of M.S. § 342.22.
         (c)   Application form. An applicant for a retail registration shall
fill out an application form, as provided by the city. The form shall include,
but is not limited to:
            1.   The full name of the property owner and applicant;
            2.   The address, email address, and telephone number of the
applicant;
            3.   The address and parcel ID of the property for which the retail
registration is sought;
            4.   Certification that the applicant complies with the
requirements of local ordinances established pursuant to M.S. § 342.13.
         (d)   The applicant shall include with the form:
            1.   The application fee as required in the city’s fee schedule;
            2.   A copy of a valid state license or written notice of OCM
license preapproval;
            3.   Other information requested by the City Manager determined to
be necessary for city registration.
         (e)   Once an application is considered complete, the City Manager
shall inform the applicant as such, process the application fees, and forward
the application to the City Council for approval or denial.
         (f)   The application fee shall be non-refundable once processed.
      (4)   Application approval.
         (a)   A state-licensed cannabis retail business application shall not
be approved if the cannabis retail business would exceed the maximum number of
registered cannabis retail businesses permitted under division (J) of this
section.
         (b)   A state-licensed cannabis retail business application shall not
be approved or renewed if the applicant is unable to meet the requirements of
this section.
         (c)   A state-licensed cannabis retail business application that meets
the requirements of this section shall be approved.
   (F)   Annual compliance checks.
      (1)   The city shall complete at minimum one compliance check per
calendar year of every cannabis business to assess if the business meets age
verification requirements, as required under M.S. § 342.22, Subd. 4(b) and M.S.
§ 342.24 and this section.
      (2)   The city shall conduct at minimum one unannounced, age-verification
compliance check at least once per calendar year. Age-verification compliance
checks shall involve persons at least 17 years of age but under the age of 21
who, with the prior written consent of a parent or guardian if the person is
under the age of 18, attempt to purchase adult-use cannabis flower, adult-use
cannabis products, lower-potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer
products under the direct supervision of a law enforcement officer or an
employee of the local unit of government.
      (3)   Any failures under this section must be reported to the Office of
Cannabis Management.
   (G)   Location change. If a state-licensed cannabis retail business seeks to
move to a new location still within the legal boundaries of the city, it shall
notify city of the proposed location change, and submit necessary information
to meet all the criteria in this division without the need for a new
registration or fee.
   (H)   Renewal of registration. The city shall renew an annual registration
of a state-licensed cannabis retail business at the same time OCM renews the
cannabis retail business license. A state-licensed cannabis retail business
shall apply to renew registration on a form established by city. A cannabis
retail registration issued under this section shall not be transferred.
      (1)   Renewal fees. The city may charge a renewal fee for the
registration, starting at the second renewal, as established in city's fee
schedule.
      (2)   Renewal application. The application for renewal of a retail
registration shall include, but is not limited to, items required under
division (E) of this section.
   (I)   Suspension of registration.
      (1)   When suspension is warranted. The city may suspend a cannabis
retail business’s registration if it violates a city ordinance or poses an
immediate threat to the health or safety of the public. The city shall
immediately notify the cannabis retail business in writing of the grounds for
the suspension.
      (2)   Notification to OCM. The city shall immediately notify the OCM in
writing of the grounds for the suspension. OCM will provide the city and the
cannabis business retailer a response to the complaint within seven calendar
days, and perform any necessary inspections within 30 calendar days.
      (3)   Length of suspension. The suspension of a cannabis retail business
registration may be for up to 30 calendar days, unless OCM suspends the license
for a longer period. The business may not make sales to customers if its
registration is suspended. The city may reinstate a registration if it
determines that the violations have been resolved. The city shall reinstate a
registration if OCM determines that the violation(s) have been resolved.
      (4)   Civil penalties. Subject to M.S. § 342.22, Subd. 5(e), the city may
impose a civil penalty, not to exceed $2,000, as specified in the city’s fee
schedule, for registration violations.
   (J)   Limiting of registrations. The city shall limit the number of cannabis
retail businesses to no fewer than one registration for every 12,500 residents
within the city’s boundaries. The city shall limit the number of cannabis
retail businesses to one.
   (K)   Requirements for cannabis businesses.
      (1)   Minimum buffer requirements. 
         (a)   Buffer distances shall be interpreted to be:
            1.   The shortest route on public streets;
            2.   The shortest route along a public sidewalk; or
            3.   The shortest route along a private sidewalk open to the
public; whichever of these is shorter, measured between the primary public
entrance of the cannabis business and the primary entrance of the use
identified herein.
         (b)   The city shall prohibit the operation of a retail cannabis
business within the following buffer distances:
            1.   One thousand feet from a school;
            2.   Three hundred feet from a day care;
            3.   Three hundred feet from a residential treatment facility;
            4.   Five hundred feet from an attraction within a public park that
is regularly used by minors, including a playground or athletic field.
      (2)   Pursuant to M.S. § 462.367, Subd. 14, nothing in this section shall
prohibit an active cannabis business or a cannabis business seeking
registration from continuing operation at the same site if any school, daycare,
residential treatment facility, or attraction within a public park that is
regularly used by minors moves within the minimum buffer zone.
   (L)   Zoning and land use.
      (1)   Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for cultivation, hemp
manufacture, hemp or cannabis wholesale, cannabis transportation, cannabis
delivery, cannabis mezzobusiness, or cannabis microbusiness, are permitted in
the Light Industrial District, and subject to all other regulations of the city
code and as required by §§
154.140 through
154.144. Such uses shall not be permitted any retail activity or endorsements
to qualify as permitted uses in the L-I, Light Industrial District.
      (2)   Cannabis businesses licensed for cannabis retail are a permitted
use in the C Commercial District, and subject to all other regulations of the
city code and as required by §§
154.120 through
154.125.
   (M)   Hours of operation. The sale of cannabis at any retail business shall
be prohibited between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday, and
between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Sunday.
   (N)   Advertising. Cannabis businesses are permitted to erect signage as
allowed by the city’s sign regulations in
Chapter 157 of the city code.
   (O)   Temporary cannabis events. Any individual or business seeking to
obtain a cannabis event license must provide OCM information about the time,
location, layout, number of business participants, and hours of operation. No
cannabis event shall last for more than four days. A cannabis event organizer
must receive city approval, including obtaining any necessary permits or
licenses issued by a local unit of government, before holding a cannabis event.
      (1)   License or permit required for temporary cannabis events.
         (a)   License required. A cannabis event organizer license entitles
the license holder to organize a temporary cannabis event lasting no more than
four days. In addition to the requirements of this section, the applicant shall
follow and be subject to the applicable requirements of §
154.190, Temporary Structures and Uses.
         (b)   Registration and application procedure. A registration fee, as
established in city’s fee schedule, shall be charged to applicants for
temporary cannabis events.
         (c)   Application submittal and review. The city shall require an
application for temporary cannabis events.
         (d)   An applicant for a temporary cannabis event registration shall
fill out an application form, as provided by the city. The form shall include,
but is not limited to:
            1.   The full name of the property owner and applicant;
            2.   The address, email address, and telephone number of the
applicant;
            3.   Written authorization of the owner(s) of the premise(s) on
which the temporary cannabis event is to be held;
            4.   Whether the exhibitors or attendees at the event will sell
cannabis products at the event;
            5.   Evidence of compliance with the requirements of the city’s
buffer distances in divisions (K) and (L) of this section, if retail sales of
cannabis products will be permitted.
            6.   A sketch plan of the premises on which the temporary event
will be held, including facilities such as shelters, canopies, restroom
facilities, parking, and other related support facilities.
         (e)   The applicant shall include with the form:
            1.   The application fee as required in division (O)(1)(b) of this
section;
            2.   A copy of the OCM cannabis event license application,
submitted pursuant to M.S. § 342.39, Subd. 2. The application shall be
submitted to the city or other designee for review. If the designee determines
that a submitted application is incomplete, they shall return the application
to the applicant with the notice of deficiencies.
         (f)   Once an application is considered complete, the designee shall
inform the applicant as such, process the application fees, and forward the
application to the City Council for approval or denial.
         (g)   Once the application has been processed, the application fee
shall be non-refundable.
      (2)   No temporary cannabis event shall permit smoking of any cannabis
product on the premises of the event.
      (3)   A request for a temporary cannabis event that meets the
requirements of this section shall be approved in accordance with the process
for special event permits in §
154.190.
      (4)   A request for a temporary cannabis event that does not meet the
requirements of this section shall be denied. The city shall notify the
applicant of the standards not met and the basis for the denial. The City
Council may require an applicant whose request is denied to submit a new
application, or the Council may permit the applicant to modify the application,
at the discretion of the City Council.
   (P)   Lower-potency hemp edibles.
      (1)   Sale of low-potency hemp edibles or low-potency hemp beverages for
off-site consumption. The sale of low-potency edibles or beverages for off-site
consumption is permitted, subject to the conditions within this section.
         (a)   Low-potency edibles or beverages are permitted as a retail sales
use for off-site consumption (off-sale) in any premise that holds a valid
tobacco sales license in the city.
         (b)   Low-potency edibles or beverages shall be stored behind a
counter in a locked case, not directly available to the customer.
      (2)   Sale of low-potency hemp edibles or low-potency hemp beverages for
onsite consumption.
         (a)   The sale of low-potency edibles or beverages for on-site
consumption is permitted, subject to the conditions within this section.
         (b)   Low-potency edibles or beverages are permitted as a retail sales
use for on-site consumption (on-sale) only in establishments licensed to serve
alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption (on-sale).
(Prior Code, § 152.188) (Ord. 2016-01, passed 3-8-2016; Ord. 2024-03, passed 7-
9-2024; Ord. 2024-05, passed 10-22-2024) Penalty, see §  
10.99
§ 154.189 TEMPORARY FAMILY HEALTHCARE DWELLINGS.
   The city opts-out of M.S. § 462.3593, as it may be amended from time to
time. Pursuant to authority granted by M.S. § 462.3593, Subd. 9, as it may be
amended from time to time, the city opts-out of the requirements of M.S. §
462.3593, as it may be amended from time to time, which defines and regulates
temporary family healthcare dwellings.
(Prior Code, § 152.189) (Ord. 2016-04, passed 7-16-2016)
§ 154.190 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES.
   The following temporary uses and structures shall be allowed in all zoning
districts unless specified otherwise, provided such use or structure complies
with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located and all
other applicable provisions of this title. Where the general standards of the
zoning ordinance vary from the standards in this section, the standards of this
section shall apply.
   (A)   Garage, rummage, yard, estate, and/or boutique sales in residential
districts are permitted to utilize temporary structures, but shall be limited
to three sales each calendar year per dwelling unit, and shall not exceed three
consecutive days per sale or nine total days in duration per year. The maximum
daily hours of operation shall be 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Temporary structures
shall not exceed a total of 400 square feet. Temporary structures erected in
conjunction with a garage or boutique sale shall be limited to temporary tent
or tarp shelters, and must be placed no closer than three feet to a property
line.
   (B)   Special or celebratory events in all zoning districts are permitted to
utilize temporary structures, limited to tent or tarp shelters; shall be
limited to three events each calendar year per principal building; and shall
not exceed a single day per event or three total days in duration per year.
Temporary structures in residential districts shall not exceed a total of 400
square feet. Temporary structures erected in conjunction with a special or
celebratory event must be placed no less than three feet from a property line.
Temporary structures shall be allowed in the Recreation and Open Space District
or on public property regardless of zoning district, and shall be exempt from
the limitations of this section.
   (C)   Temporary greenhouses on residential properties shall be permitted for
a period of no more than 180 days per calendar year. One temporary greenhouse
shall be allowed in addition to, and exempt from, the requirements of §
154.176, accessory structures. Such greenhouses shall be located no closer to
any public street than the rear building line of a residential lot, and shall
be placed no closer than five feet from any side or rear lot line or any alley.
Greenhouses exceeding a duration of 180 days per year shall require a building
permit, shall meet all other standards of the city code, and shall meet all
required accessory building regulations per §
154.176.
   (D)   Construction sites: storage of building materials and equipment or
temporary buildings for construction purposes on sites which have active
building permits shall be located on the same lot as the project under
construction, not in any public right-of-way, and shall be removed within 30
days following completion of construction and/or termination of the applicable
building permit, whichever is sooner.
   (E)   Portable restroom facilities shall be allowed in all districts per the
following requirements.
      (1)   In all residential districts, one portable restroom facility shall
be allowed in conjunction with a permitted construction activity. The activity
must be permitted by the city; the duration of the portable restroom facility
cannot begin prior to the issuance of the permit and must end prior to either
the expiration date of the permit or the final approval of permitted work by
the City Building Inspector, whichever is shorter. Portable restroom facilities
within these districts must be located no closer to any public street than the
front building line of the house, and at least five feet from a property line.
Where portable restroom facilities are allowed, but cannot be placed to meet
these requirements due to physical condition of the property, they may be
placed in the driveway in front of the principal residence, and encroach in
front of the building line no more than eight feet. In such cases, portable
restroom facilities shall be placed in such a way as to maximize, insofar as
practicable, screening of view from the public right-of-way and/or
residentially-zoned property, while acknowledging the need for service and
maintenance access.
      (2)   In all Commercial, Industrial, and PUD Districts, portable restroom
facilities shall be allowed in conjunction with a permitted construction
activity. The activity must be permitted by the city; the duration of the
portable restroom facility cannot begin prior to the issuance of the permit and
must end prior to either the expiration date of the permit or the approval of
permitted work by the City Building Inspector, whichever is shorter. Portable
restroom facilities within these districts must be completely shielded from
public view by a fence or other opaque screening method equal in height to no
less than that of the structure when viewed from the street.
      (3)   In any R/OS, Recreation and Open Space District, portable restroom
facilities shall be allowed for purposes of serving the public use of property
as needed.
      (4)   In all districts, portable restroom facilities shall be placed in
such a way as to maximize, insofar as practicable, screening of view from the
public right-of-way and/or residentially-zoned property, while acknowledging
the need for service and maintenance access.
   (F)   Accessory seasonal outdoor sales, within a Commercial or PUD District,
is allowed per the following requirements:
      (1)   The seasonal outdoor sales is an accessory aspect of the principal
business on the property;
      (2)   Issuance of a conditional use permit (CUP). For recurring seasonal
sales, the CUP shall be valid for each year the sales area is reestablished
under an administrative permit issued by the Zoning Administrator. A lapse of
more than one year, or a change to the configuration or size of the proposed
sales area, shall require an amendment to the conditional use permit;
      (3)   Shall be allowed for no longer than 180 consecutive days each
calendar year;
      (4)   The outdoor sales area shall be located within the parking lot in a
location so as not to disrupt the safety and flow of customer traffic;
      (5)   The outdoor sales area shall not eliminate parking spaces to an
amount that is detrimental to primary use or function of the site;
      (6)   The outdoor sales area shall not obstruct existing pedestrian
access on the site, whether from parking areas to the building entrance or from
the public street to the building entrance; and
      (7)   Accessory structures in conjunction with the seasonal sales shall
meet all applicable Fire Codes and parking lot setback requirements. Enclosed
structures 200 square feet or more in size and/or open-sided canopies 400
square feet or more require a review and inspection by the Fire Marshal.
(Ord. 2023-01, passed 7-11-2023)
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
§ 154.205 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for planned unit developments
within the city.
(Prior Code, § 152.200)
§ 154.206 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEVELOPER. The owner of the property, or a person or entity authorized in
writing by the owner of the property to file the applications for the PUD and
who will become the owner of the property prior to any development of the
property.
   DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE. A committee as appointed by the City Manager
or designee from time to time to conduct a review of all development plans for
any PUD.
   FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN. A final development plan based upon the preliminary
development plan and presented by a PUD applicant as provided in §
154.214(D), and including the requirements set forth in §
154.214(E).
   PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN. A formal development plan in preliminary form
presented by a PUD applicant as provided in §
154.214(C), and including the requirements set forth in §
154.214(E).
   PROPERTY. All land included within the PUD.
   PUD. A zoning district and development plan which may include single or
mixed uses, and one or more lots or parcels, and which is intended to create a
more flexible, creative, and efficient approach to the use of land. Any PUD
shall be subject to the procedures, standards, and regulations contained in
this subchapter. A PUD SITE must be at least three acres in size, and
applications for PUD approval will not be considered for sites of less than
three acres.
   PUD AGREEMENT. The agreement to be entered into between the developer and
the city to incorporate all term, requirements, and conditions of the PUD
approval.
   SKETCH PLAN. An informal development plan presented by a PUD applicant as
provided in §
154.214(B).
(Prior Code, § 152.201)
§ 154.207 AUTHORIZATION.
   A PUD approval may allow the following:
   (A)   Variety. Within a comprehensive site design concept, a mixture of land
uses, housing types, and densities;
   (B)   Sensitivity. Through the departure from the strict application of
required setbacks, yard areas, lot sizes, minimum house sizes, minimum
requirements, and other performance standards associated with traditional
zoning, a PUD can maximize the development potential of land while remaining
sensitive to its unique and valuable natural characteristics;
   (C)   Efficiency. The consolidation of areas for recreation and reductions
in street lengths and other utility-related expenses;
   (D)   Density transfer. The project density may be clustered, basing density
on a number of units per acre in place of specific lot dimensions; and
   (E)   District integration. The combination of uses which are allowed in
separate zoning districts such as:
      (1)   Mixed residential uses to allow both densities and unit types to be
varied within the project;
      (2)   Mixed residential uses with increased density based upon the
greater sensitivity of PUD projects to regulation; and
      (3)   Mixed land uses with the integration of compatible land uses within
the project.
(Prior Code, § 152.202)
§ 154.208 ALLOWED USES.
   Uses within a PUD may include only those uses generally considered
associated with the general land use category shown for the area on the
official Comprehensive Land Use Plan. However, in some unique situations, the
PUD may allow the approval of use or uses that are not listed as either
permitted or conditional uses in any underlying zoning district. The specific
allowed uses and performance standards for each PUD shall be delineated in an
ordinance and development plan. The PUD development plan shall identify all the
proposed land uses, which shall become permitted uses if the final development
plan is approved. Any change in the uses presented in the final development
plan will be considered an amendment to the PUD and must follow the procedures
specified in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 152.203)
§ 154.209 REQUIRED STANDARDS.
   The city shall consider a proposed PUD from the point of view of all
standards and purposes of the Comprehensive Land Use Plan to achieve a maximum
coordination between the proposed development and the surrounding uses, the
conservation of woodlands and wetlands, and the protection of health, safety,
and welfare of the community and residents of the PUD. To these ends, the City
Council shall consider the location of the buildings, compatibility, parking
areas, and other features with respect to the topography of the area and
existing natural features such as streams and large trees; the efficiency,
adequacy, and safety of the proposed layout of internal streets and driveways;
the adequacy and location of green areas; the adequacy, location, and screening
of parking areas; and any other matters as the City Council may find to have a
material bearing upon the stated standards and objectives of the Comprehensive
Land Use Plan.
(Prior Code, § 152.204)
§ 154.210 COORDINATION WITH SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS.
   If a PUD involves the subdivision of land, then the subdivision review shall
be carried out under Chapter 153 simultaneously with the review of the PUD. The
plans required under this subchapter shall be submitted in a form which will
satisfy the requirements of
Chapter 153 for the preliminary plat and final plat.
(Prior Code, § 152.205)
§ 154.211 REVISIONS AND/OR CHANGES.
   (A)   Minor changes in location, placement, and height. Minor changes in the
location, placement, and height of structures may be authorized by the
Development Review Committee if required by engineering or other circumstances
not foreseen at the time the final plan was approved and filed with the City
Manager or designee.
   (B)   Significant changes in use, location, size, and height. Changes in
uses, significant changes in location, size, or height of structures, any
rearrangement of lots, blocks, and building tracts, changes in provision of
common open spaces, and all other changes to the approved final development
plan may be made only after a public hearing conducted by the Planning
Commission. Upon determination by the Development Review Committee that a major
change has been proposed, the developer shall apply for an amended PUD. The
application to amend the PUD shall be treated as a new zoning application. Upon
acceptance of a complete application, the Planning Commission shall hold a
hearing as set forth in §§
30.45 through
30.48. Any changes shall be recorded as amendments to the recorded copy of the
final development plan.
   (C)   Provisions of original district apply. All of the provisions of the
zoning district within which the PUD is established shall apply to the amended
PUD except as otherwise provided in approval of the final development plan. The
effective date of the PUD shall be after:
      (1)   Approval of the PUD amendment and text and final development plan;
and
      (2)   Publication of the ordinance.
   (D)   Review. If substantial development has not occurred within a
reasonable time after approval of the PUD, the City Council may instruct the
Planning Commission to initiate rezoning to the original zoning district. It
shall not be necessary for the City Council to find that the rezoning was in
error.
   (E)   Formal review periods. Within the PUD agreement, the city may schedule
formal City Council review periods on an annual or less frequent basis to
ascertain that actual development on the site meets the conditions of the
approved PUD.
(Prior Code, § 152.206)
§ 154.212 PHASING AND GUARANTEE OF PERFORMANCE.
   (A)   Comparison with approved development schedule. The Planning Commission
shall compare the actual development accomplished in the various portions of
the PUD with the approved development schedule.
   (B)   Extension of limits of development schedule. Upon recommendation of
the Planning Commission and for good cause shown by the developer, the City
Council may extend the limits of the development schedule.
   (C)   Construction rates of dwelling and open space. The construction and
provision of all of the common open space and public and recreational
facilities which are shown on the final development plan must proceed at the
same rate as the construction of dwelling units, if any. The Development Review
Committee shall review all of the building permits issued for the PUD and
examine the construction which has taken place on the site. If they find that
the rate of construction of dwelling units is greater than the rate at which
common open spaces and public and recreational facilities have been constructed
and provided, they shall forward this information to the City Council for
action.
   (D)   Security. A letter of credit in form acceptable to the city shall be
required to guarantee performance by the developer. The amount of the letter of
credit and the specific elements of the development program that it is intended
to guarantee will be stipulated in the PUD agreement.
(Prior Code, § 152.207)
§ 154.213 CONTROL OF PUD FOLLOWING COMPLETION.
   (A)   Final development plan governs. After a certificate of occupancy has
been issued for all or any portion of a PUD, the use of the land covered by the
certificate of occupancy and the construction, modification, and alteration of
any buildings or structures within the PUD shall be governed by the final
development plan.
   (B)   Changes after issuance of certificate of occupancy. After a
certificate of occupancy has been issued for all or any portion of a PUD, no
changes shall be made in the approved final development plan except upon
application as provided below.
      (1)   Any minor extensions, alterations, or modifications of existing
buildings or structures may be authorized by the Development Review Committee
if they are consistent with the purposes and intent of the final development
plan. No change authorized by this section may increase the mass or volume of
any building or structure by more than 10%.
      (2)   Any building or structure that is totally or substantially
destroyed may be reconstructed only in compliance with the final development
plan unless an amendment to the final development plan is approved under this
subchapter.
      (3)   Changes in the use of the common open spaces may be authorized by
an amendment to the final development plan by the City Planning Commission
after a public hearing as provided in §§
30.45 through
30.48 and without all the documents necessary for the original application.
      (4)   Any other changes in the final development plan must be authorized
by an amendment of the final development plan under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 152.208)
§ 154.214 PROCEDURE FOR PROCESSING A PUD.
   (A)   Application conference. Upon filing of an application for a PUD, the
developer shall arrange for and attend a conference with the Development Review
Committee. The primary purpose of the conference shall be to provide the
developer with an opportunity to gather information and obtain guidance as to
the general suitability of developer’s proposal for the area for which it is
proposed and its conformity to the provisions of this subchapter before
incurring substantial expense in the preparation of plans, surveys, and other
data.
   (B)   Sketch plan. The sketch plan provides an opportunity for an applicant
to submit an informal plan to the city showing the applicant’s basic intent and
general nature of the development. The sketch plan is optional and is intended
to provide feedback from the Planning Commission before the applicant incurs
substantial cost in the preparation of formal plans. The sketch plan shall be
considered a partial, incomplete application prior to formal submittal of the
complete application and scheduling of hearings.
   (C)   Preliminary development plan. The purpose of a preliminary development
plan is to formally present a PUD application, and a preliminary plat
application if subdivision of land is a part of the PUD, in a public hearing
before the Planning Commission as set forth in §§
30.45 through
30.48. The plan shall include the following:
      (1)   Overall maximum PUD density range;
      (2)   General location of major streets and pedestrian ways;
      (3)   General location and extent of public and common and open space;
      (4)   General location of residential and nonresidential land uses with
approximate type of intensities of development;
      (5)   Staging and time schedule of development; and
      (6)   Other special criteria for development.
   (D)   Final development plan. Following approval of the preliminary
development plan, the applicant shall submit an application for the final
development plan, and a final plat if subdivision of land is a part of the PUD.
The application shall proceed and be acted upon in accordance with §
154.206 for zoning district changes. If appropriate, because of the limited
scale of the proposal, the Development Review Committee may permit the
preliminary development plan and final development plan to proceed through the
review and approval processes simultaneously.
   (E)   Procedures. The procedures to be followed by the applicant with
respect to a PUD, shall be as follows.
      (1)   Schedule.
         (a)   Developer shall meet with the Development Review Committee to
discuss the proposed developments.
         (b)   The developer shall file the preliminary development plan
application and preliminary plat, if any, together with all supporting data.
         (c)   Within 30 days after verification by the City Manager or
designee that the required plan and supporting data is adequate, the Planning
Commission shall hold a public hearing as provided for in §§
30.45 through
30.48.
         (d)   The Planning Commission shall conduct the hearing and report its
findings and make recommendations to the City Council. The procedure shall be
that set forth in §§
30.45 through
30.48.
         (e)   The city may request additional information from the developer
concerning operational factors or retain expert testimony at the expense of the
developer concerning operational factors.
         (f)   If the Planning Commission fails to take action on the matter on
or before a date 14 days after the initial hearing, then the City Council may
proceed as provided for in §§
30.45 through
30.48 without the Planning Commission’s recommendation. The City Council shall
assign an ordinance numerical reference to each final development plan and PUD
agreement text approved. The City Council may attach the additional conditions
as it deems reasonable. Approval shall require a four-fifths vote of the entire
City Council. After approval by the City Council, the PUD zoning ordinance map
amendment shall be published, with reference made to the PUD agreement text.
The developer shall be responsible for recording the ordinance and PUD
agreement in the office of the Hennepin or Ramsey County Recorder and/or
Registrar of Titles prior to issuance of any building permit or within 60 days,
whichever is less. The official PUD ordinance and PUD agreement shall also be
filed in the City Manager’s office.
      (2)   Application. Ten copies of the preliminary development plan,
including all of the following exhibits, analyses, and plans, shall be
submitted to the city:
         (a)   Preliminary plat for any land being subdivided and information
required by
Chapter 153;
         (b)   General information:
            1.   The landowner’s name and address and the landowner’s interest
in the property;
            2.   The developer’s name and address if different from the
landowner;
            3.   The names and addresses of all professional consultants who
have contributed to the development of the PUD plan being submitted, including
attorney, land planner, engineer, and surveyor;
            4.   Evidence that the developer has sufficient control over the
property to effectuate the proposed PUD, including a statement of all legal,
beneficial, tenancy, and contractual interests held in or affecting the
property and including an up-to-date certified abstract of title or registered
property report and any other evidence as the City Attorney may require to show
the status of title or control of the property; and
            5.   Evidence that the property is not less than three acres in
area.
         (c)   Present status:
            1.   The address and legal description of the property;
            2.   The existing zoning classification and present use of the
property and all lands within 1,000 feet of the property;
            3.   A map depicting the existing development of the property and
all land within 1,000 feet thereof and indicating the location of existing
streets, property lines, easements, water mains, and storm and sanitary sewers,
with invert elevations on and within 100 feet of the property;
            4.   A written statement generally describing the proposed PUD and
the market which it is intended to serve and its demand showing its
relationship to the city’s Comprehensive Plan and how the proposed PUD is to be
designed, arranged, and operated in order to permit the development and use of
neighboring property in accordance with the applicable regulations of the city;
            5.   Site conditions: graphic reproductions of the existing site
conditions at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet:
               a.   Contours; minimum two-foot intervals;
               b.   Area devoted to residential use by building type;
               c.   Area devoted to common open space;
               d.   Area devoted to public open space;
               e.   Approximate area devoted to streets;
               f.   Approximate area devoted to, and number of, off-street
parking and loading spaces and related access;
               g.   Approximate area and floor area devoted to commercial uses;
               h.   Approximate area and floor area devoted to industrial or
office use; and
               i.   Total area of the property.
            6.   When the PUD is to be constructed in stages during a period of
time extending beyond a single construction season, a schedule for the
development of the stages or units shall be submitted stating the approximate
beginning and completion date for each stage or unit and the proportion of the
total PUD public or common open space and dwelling units to be provided or
constructed during each stage and overall chronology of development to be
followed from stage to stage;
            7.   When the proposed PUD includes provisions for public or common
open space or service facilities, a statement describing the provision that is
to be made for the care and maintenance of the open space or service
facilities;
            8.   Any restrictive covenants that are to be recorded with respect
to property included in the proposed PUD;
            9.   Schematic utilities plans indicating placement of water,
sanitary, and storm sewers;
            10.   The city may excuse a developer from submitting any specific
item of information or document required in this stage which it finds to be
unnecessary to the consideration of the specific proposal; and
            11.   The city may require the submission of any additional
information or documentation which it may find necessary.
         (d)   The final development plan submission should depict and outline
the proposed implementations of the preliminary development plan for the PUD.
Information from the preliminary development plan may be included for
background and to provide a basis for the submitted plan. The final development
plan submissions shall include, but not be limited to:
            1.   A final plat for any land to be subdivided and information
required by
Chapter 153;
            2.   Ten sets of preliminary plans drawn to a scale of not less
than one inch equals 100 feet (or other scale requested by the City Manager or
designee) containing at least the following information:
               a.   Proposed name of the development, which shall not duplicate
nor be similar in pronunciation to the name of any plat previously recorded in
the county where the property is situated;
               b.   Property boundary lines and dimensions of the property and
any significant topographical or physical features of the property;
               c.   The location, size, use, and arrangement including height
in stories and feet and total square feet of ground area coverage and floor
area of proposed buildings, including mobile homes, and existing buildings
which will remain, if any;
               d.   Location, dimensions of all driveways, entrances, curb
cuts, parking stalls, loading spaces, and access aisles, and all other
circulation elements including bike and pedestrian; and the total site coverage
of all circulation elements;
               e.   Location, designation, and total area of all common open
space;
               f.   Location, designation, and total area proposed to be
conveyed or dedicated for public open space, including parks, playgrounds,
school sites, and recreational facilities;
               g.   Proposed lots and blocks, if any, and numbering system;
               h.   The location, use, and size of structures and other land
uses on adjacent properties;
               i.   Detailed sketches and provisions of proposed landscaping;
               j.   General grading and drainage plans for the developed PUD;
and
               k.   Any other information that may have been required by the
Planning Commission or County Board in conjunction with the approval of the
preliminary development plan.
            3.   An accurate legal description of the entire area within the
PUD for which final development plan approval is sought;
            4.   A tabulation indicating the number of residential dwelling
units and expected population;
            5.   A tabulation indicating the number of residential dwelling
units and expected;
            6.   Preliminary architectural “typical” plans indicating use,
floor, plan, elevations, and exterior wall finishes of proposed building,
including mobile homes;
            7.   A detailed site plan, suitable for recording, showing the
physical layout, design and purpose of all streets, easements, rights-of-way,
utility lines and facilities, lots, block, public and common open space,
general landscaping plan, structure, including mobile homes, and uses;
            8.   Preliminary grading and site alteration plan illustrating
changes to existing topography and natural site vegetation. The final
development plan should clearly reflect the site treatment and its conformance
with the approved preliminary development plan;
            9.   A final plat prepared in accordance with
Chapter 153 if land is being subdivided; and
            10.   A soil erosion control plan acceptable to watershed
districts, Department of Natural Resources, Soil Conservation Service, or any
other agency with review authority clearly illustrating erosion control
measures to be used during construction and as permanent measures.
(Prior Code, § 152.209)
NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES, AND LOTS
§ 154.225 INTENT FOR NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES.
   It is the intent of this subchapter to permit and recognize the existence of
nonconforming uses and structures which were lawful when established but which
no longer meet all ordinance requirements, as defined in §
154.003, to continue until they are removed, to encourage the elimination of
nonconformities or reduce their impact on adjacent properties, to discourage
the enlargement, expansion, intensification, or extension of nonconformities,
and to regulate the repair, replacement, restoration, and improvement of
nonconformities to prevent and abate nuisances, and to protect the public
health, safety, or welfare.
(Prior Code, § 152.220) (Ord. 2014-01, passed 4-8-2014)
§ 154.226 LIMITED CONTINUATION.
   Except as otherwise provided by law, any nonconformity, including a
nonconforming use or occupation of land or premises, may be continued,
including through repair, replacement, restoration, maintenance, or
improvement, but not including expansion, unless:
   (A)   Change to conforming use. The property used for a nonconforming use is
subsequently used for a conforming use;
   (B)   Discontinued use. The nonconformity or occupancy is discontinued for a
period of more than one year;
   (C)   Destruction of building. Any nonconforming use is destroyed by fire or
other peril to the extent of greater than 50% of the estimated market value, as
indicated by the records of the County Assessor at the time of damage, and no
building permit has been applied for within 180 days of when the property is
damaged; and
   (D)   Expansion. An expansion of any nonconformity use or structure may not
be done without first obtaining a variance pursuant to §
154.245.
(Prior Code, § 152.226) (Ord. 2011-05, passed 6-28-2011; Ord. 2014-01, passed
4-8-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.227 INTENT FOR NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.
   It is the intent of this subchapter to permit nonconforming lots of record,
as defined in §
154.007, to continue to be used for the legal use for which it is zoned in
accordance with the criteria for continuance as specified in this code.
Nonconforming lots of record within the shoreland area must conform to the
provisions as outlined in M.S. § 462.357, Subd. 1e, as it may be amended from
time to time. A lawful conforming lot of record shall be deemed buildable,
without a variance. If a group of two or more undeveloped, vacant, and
contiguous lots under common ownership, any individual lot does not meet the
minimum dimensional requirements must be combined with the one or more
contiguous lots. All additions or expansion to a structure on a nonconforming
lot of record shall meet the setback, height, density, and other requirements
of the code. Any deviation from the requirements of the code may not be done
without first obtaining a variance pursuant to §
154.245.
(Prior Code, § 152.227) (Ord. 2014-01, passed 4-8-2014)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 154.240 ZONING OFFICER.
   (A)   The City Manager or designee may act as, or may appoint, the City
Zoning Officer.
   (B)   The Zoning Officer will have the responsibility of enforcing and
administering the Zoning Code and performing the following duties:
      (1)   Review all applications pertaining to property use and approve
applications when they conform with the Zoning Code;
      (2)   Periodically inspect property to determine compliance with the
Zoning Code;
      (3)   Give written notice to persons violating the Zoning Code, stating
the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it;
and
      (4)   Maintain records relating to the Zoning Code, including all maps,
amendments, conditional use permits, variances, nonconforming uses, and files
pertaining to all permits and violations.
(Prior Code, § 152.240)
§ 154.241 PLAN REVIEW.
   (A)   All plans for structures and uses regulated by the Zoning Code must be
reviewed by the appropriate city official. If required by this code or state
law, the plans and uses will also be reviewed by the Planning Commission and
City Council before a building permit is issued. Plans for structures in the R-
3, R-4, R/O, C, and LI Districts will be reviewed by the Zoning Officer for
compliance with the Zoning Code.
   (B)   The city shall have the authority to charge applicants for the costs
that the city incurs in reviewing applications.
(Prior Code, § 152.241)
§ 154.242 REZONING AND AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Initiation of proceedings. Proceedings for amendment of the Zoning
Code may be initiated by a petition of the owners of property to be rezoned or
affected by amendment; a recommendation by the Planning Commission; or action
of the City Council.
   (B)   Submission requirements. All applications by a property owner for
changes in zoning must be accompanied by a drawing showing the property to be
affected and all property within 350 feet of the boundaries of the affected
property, a statement as to why the zoning change is requested, and the fee set
forth in Chapter 33. The application will be referred by the Zoning Officer to
the Planning Commission for a public hearing.
   (C)   Public hearing. The public hearing will be held by the Planning
Commission. Notice of the hearing will be given in accordance with §§
30.45 through
30.48. The Planning Commission will then make a recommendation to the City
Council on the proposed changes.
   (D)   City Council action. A majority affirmative vote of all members of the
City Council is required to approve any rezoning or any other change in the
Zoning Code, except that the adoption or amendment of any portion of the Zoning
Code that changes all or part of the existing classification of a zoning
district from residential to either commercial or industrial requires a four-
fifths’ majority vote of all members of the City Council.
   (E)   Planned unit development. In a proceeding for the rezoning of a
property under this section, if the property is three acres or more in area and
if the proceeding is pursuant to a petition by the owner of the property to be
rezoned, the City Council may require that the property be designated as a
planned unit development under §§
154.205 through
154.214, in which case the City Council may also require the property owner to
submit an application for a planned unit development approval in accordance
with §§
154.205 through
154.214.
(Prior Code, § 152.242)
§ 154.243 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.
   (A)   Procedure. An application for a conditional use permit is to be made
on forms available from the Zoning Officer and must be signed by the owner of
the property in question. The application must be accompanied by a fee in the
amount set forth in Chapter 33. The applicant may be required to provide
concept and final site plans, if requested by the Zoning Officer.
   (B)   Public hearing. The public hearing will be held by the Planning
Commission. Notice of the hearing will be given in accordance with §§
30.45 through
30.48. The Planning Commission will then make a recommendation to the City
Council on the proposed changes.
   (C)   City Council action. A conditional use permit may be granted only by a
majority vote of all members of the City Council after determining that:
      (1)   The use is one of the conditional uses specifically listed for the
district in which the property is located;
      (2)   The City Council has specified all conditions which the City
Council deems necessary to make the use compatible with other uses in the area;
      (3)   The use will not be detrimental to the health, safety, or general
welfare of persons residing or working in the vicinity or to the values of
property in the vicinity; and
      (4)   The use will provide a service or a facility which is in the
interest of public convenience and will contribute to the general welfare.
   (D)   Expiration. A conditional use permit authorizing the erection or
alteration of a building will expire if construction has not commenced within
12 months after the conditional use permit is approved by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 152.243)
§ 154.244 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS AND APPEALS.
   (A)   Composition. The Board of Adjustments and Appeals will be comprised of
all the members of the Planning Commission, with one member serving as Chair.
   (B)   Powers and duties. The Board will hear and make recommendations to the
City Council regarding variances and appeals where it is alleged that there is
an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the
Zoning Officer or a city staff member in the enforcement of the Zoning Code.
(Prior Code, § 152.244)
§ 154.245 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Application. An owner of property with an existing structure which
does not comply with the Zoning Code, or of property on which such a structure
is proposed to be constructed, may apply for a variance upon payment of the fee
specified in Chapter 33.
   (B)   City Council approved. Variances to the dimensional provisions of the
Zoning Code may be granted by the City Council upon recommendation of the Board
of Adjustments and Appeals, after a hearing is held by the Board of Adjustments
and Appeals. Variances will not be granted with respect to uses. A majority
affirmative vote of City Councilmembers present is required to approve a
variance.
   (C)   Evidence. No variance will be granted unless the evidence presented
discloses all of the following facts.
      (1)   The subject matter of the application is within the scope of this
section.
      (2)   Strict enforcement would cause practical difficulties because:
         (a)   The property owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable
manner not permitted by the Zoning Code;
         (b)   The plight of the property owner is due to circumstances unique
to the property not created by the property owner;
         (c)   The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character
of the locality; and
         (d)   Economic considerations alone are not the basis of the practical
difficulties.
      (3)   The variance, if granted, would be consistent with the city’s
Comprehensive Land Use Plan.
      (4)   The granting of the variance is in harmony with the general
purposes and intent of the Zoning Code.
   (D)   Planning Commission recommendation. The Planning Commission will
consider the application at a public hearing at any regular or special meeting.
Notice for the hearing will be given in accordance with §§
30.45 through
30.48. The Planning Commission, sitting as the Board of Adjustments and
Appeals, will make a recommendation to the City Council as follows:
      (1)   Recommend that the variance application be granted because the
evidence considered at the meeting supports each of the findings required under
division (C) above; and/or
      (2)   Recommend that the variance application be denied because the
applicant did not present sufficient evidence for the Planning Commission to
make all of the findings required under division (C) above.
   (E)   City Council consideration. After the minutes of the Planning
Commission meeting have been forwarded to the City Council, the City Council
will consider the application and recommendation of the Planning Commission.
Within 60 days after its first consideration, the City Council will by motion
grant or deny the application according to the provisions of division (C) above
and will make a record in the minutes stating its conclusions with respect to
each of the findings required under division (C) above.
   (F)   Expiration of variance. If a variance is granted but the building or
other structure permitted by the variance is not constructed within one year
from the date the variance is granted, the variance will expire and will be of
no further force or effect.
(Prior Code, § 152.245) (Ord. 2011-06, passed 6-28-2011)
CHAPTER 155: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section
   
155.01   Statutory authorization
   
155.02   Findings
   
155.03   Purpose
   
155.04   Definitions
   
155.05   Scope and effect
   
155.06   Plan approval procedures
   
155.07   Plan review procedures
   
155.08   Approval standards
   
155.09   Other controls
§ 155.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to M.S. §§ 462.351 through 462.365, as they
may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 153.01)
§ 155.02 FINDINGS.
   The city hereby finds that uncontrolled and inadequately planned use of
wetlands, woodlands, natural habitat areas, areas subject to soil erosion, and
areas containing restrictive soils, adversely affects the public health,
safety, and general welfare by impacting water quality and contributing to
other environmental problems, creating nuisances, impairing other beneficial
uses of environmental resources, and hindering the ability of the city to
provide adequate water, sewage, flood control, and other services.
(Prior Code, § 153.02)
§ 155.03 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to address the findings in §
155.02 and to promote, preserve, and enhance the natural resources within the
city.
(Prior Code, § 153.03)
§ 155.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. Any person who wishes to obtain a building permit, zoning permit,
or subdivision approval.
   CONTROL MEASURE. A practice or combination of practices to control erosion
and attendant pollution.
   DETENTION FACILITY. A permanent natural or human-made structure, including
wetlands, for the temporary storage of runoff which contains a permanent pool
of water.
   FLOOD FRINGE. The portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway.
   FLOODPLAIN. The areas adjoining a watercourse or water basin that have been
or may be covered by a regional flood.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of the watercourse, the bed of water basins, and those
portions of the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and
discharge flood water, and provide water storage during a regional flood.
   HYDRIC SOILS. Soils that are saturated, flooded, or ponded long enough
during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part.
   HYDROPHYTIC VEGETATION. Macrophytic plant life growing in water, soil, or on
a substrate that is at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of
excessive water content.
   LAND DISTURBING OR DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES. Any change of the land surface
including removing vegetative cover, excavating, filling, grading, and the
construction of any structure.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, franchisee, and
association.
   PLAN. A storm water management plan governed by this chapter.
   PUBLIC WATERS. Waters of the state as defined in M.S. § 103G.005, Subd. 15,
as it may be amended from time to time.
   REGIONAL FLOOD. A flood that is representative of large floods known to have
occurred generally in the state and reasonably characteristic of what can be
expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of a 100-year
recurrence interval.
   RETENTION FACILITY. A permanent natural or human-made structure that
provides for the storage of storm water runoff by means of a permanent pool of
water.
   RUBBISH. The miscellaneous waste materials resulting from housekeeping,
mercantile enterprises, trades, manufacturing, offices, including garbage,
refuse, and trash.
   SEDIMENT. Solid matter carried by water, sewage, or other liquids.
   STRUCTURE. Anything manufactured, constructed, or erected which is normally
attached to or positioned on land, including portable structures, earthen
structures, roads, parking lots, and paved storage areas.
   THIS CHAPTER. This
Chapter 155.
   WETLANDS. Lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where
the water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by
shallow water. For purposes of this definition, WETLANDS must have the
following three attributes:
      (1)   Have a predominance of hydric soils;
      (2)   Are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a
frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions; and
      (3)   Under normal circumstances, support a prevalence of the vegetation.
(Prior Code, § 153.04) (Ord. 2022-03, passed 5-24-2022)
§ 155.05 SCOPE AND EFFECT.
   (A)   Applicability. Every applicant for a building permit, subdivision
approval, or a permit in the Commercial, Industrial, R-3, and R-4 Zoning
Districts of the city must submit a storm water management plan to the Public
Works Director or designee. No building permit, subdivision approval, or permit
to allow land disturbing activities shall be issued until approval of the plan
or a waiver of the approval requirement has been obtained under this chapter.
   (B)   Exemptions. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to fences,
signs, or poles, or emergency work, or to the following items if approved
before the effective date of this chapter:
      (1)   Any part of a subdivision approved by the City Council before the
effective date of this chapter;
      (2)   Any land disturbing activity for which plans have been approved by
the watershed management organization;
      (3)   A lot for which a building permit has been approved; and
      (4)   Building permits issued in the R-1, R-1A, or R-2 Zoning District.
In these districts, the property owner must obtain prior approval from only the
Public Works Director or designee of a storm water plan appropriate in scale
and scope to the proposed activity when it is over one acre in size.
(Prior Code, § 153.05)
§ 155.06 PLAN APPROVAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Application. Any plan and an application for its approval shall be
filed with the Public Works Director or designee. It must state the grounds for
approval, that the proposed use is permitted by the zoning ordinances, and
adequate evidence that the proposed use will conform to this chapter. Prior to
applying, an applicant may have the plan reviewed by the appropriate
departments of the city. The applicant must submit two sets of clearly legible
blue or black lined drawings in appropriate scale (not less than one inch
equals 100 feet) and the required additional information with evidence of
payment of all fees required under §
155.07.
   (B)   Plan. At a minimum, the plan shall contain the following information.
      (1)   Existing site map. A map of existing site conditions showing the
site and immediately adjacent areas, including:
         (a)   The name and address of the applicant, the section, township and
range, north point, date, and scale of drawing, and number of sheets;
         (b)   Location of the tract by an insert map at a scale sufficient to
clearly identify the location of the property and giving the information as the
names and numbers of adjoining roads, railroads, utilities, subdivisions,
towns, and districts or other landmarks;
         (c)   Existing topography with a contour interval appropriate to the
topography of the land but in no case having a contour interval greater than
two feet;
         (d)   A delineation of all streams, rivers, public waters, and
wetlands located on and immediately adjacent to the site;
         (e)   Location and dimensions of existing storm water drainage systems
and natural drainage patterns on and immediately adjacent to the site
delineating in which direction and at what rate storm water is conveyed from
the site, identifying the receiving stream, river, public water, or wetland,
and setting forth those areas of the unaltered site where storm water collects;
         (f)   A description of the soils of the site, including a map
indicating soil types of areas to be disturbed as well as a soil report
containing information on the suitability of the soils for the type of
development proposed;
         (g)   Vegetative cover and clearly delineating any vegetation proposed
for removal; and
         (h)   One hundred year floodplains, flood fringes, and floodways.
      (2)   Site construction plan. A site construction plan, including:
         (a)   Locations and dimensions of all proposed land disturbing
activities and any phasing of those activities;
         (b)   Locations and dimensions of all temporary soil or dirt
stockpiles;
         (c)   Locations and dimensions of all construction site erosion
control measures necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter;
         (d)   Schedule of anticipated starting and completion date of each
land disturbing activity including the installation of construction site
erosion control measures needed to meet the requirements of this chapter; and
         (e)   Provisions for maintenance of the construction site erosion
control measures during construction.
      (3)   Drawing of final site conditions. A drawing of final site
conditions on the same scale as the existing site map showing the site changes,
including:
         (a)   Finished grading shown at contours at the same interval as
provided above or as required to clearly indicate the relationship of proposed
changes to existing topography and remaining features;
         (b)   A landscape plan, drawn to an appropriate scale, including
dimensions and distances and the location, type, size, and description of all
proposed landscape materials which will be added to the site as part of the
development;
         (c)   A drainage plan of the developed site delineating in which
direction and at what rate storm water will be conveyed from the site and
setting forth the areas of the site where storm water will be allowed to
collect;
         (d)   The proposed size, alignment, and intended use of any structures
to be erected on the site;
         (e)   A clear delineation and tabulation of all areas which shall be
paved or surfaced, including a description of the surfacing material to be
used; and
         (f)   Any other information pertinent to the particular project which
in the opinion of the applicant is necessary for the review of the project.
(Prior Code, § 153.06)
§ 155.07 PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Process. Plans meeting the requirements of §
155.06 shall be submitted by the Public Works Director or designee to the
Planning Commission for review under §
155.08. The Commission shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or
denial. Following Planning Commission action, the plan shall be submitted to
the City Council at its next available meeting. City Council action on the plan
must be accomplished within 120 days following the date the application is
filed with the Public Works Director or designee.
   (B)   Duration. Approval of a plan shall expire one year after the date of
approval unless construction has commenced in accordance with the plan, unless
the applicant makes a written request to the Public Works Director or designee
for an extension of setting forth the reasons for it. The Public Works Director
or designee shall make a decision on the extension within 30 days. The Public
Works Director or designee may grant one extension of not more than 12 months.
Any plan may be revised in the same manner as originally approved.
   (C)   Conditions. A plan may be approved subject to conditions related to
the requirements of this chapter. The conditions may, among other matters,
limit the size, kind, or character of the proposed development, require the
construction of structures, drainage facilities, storage basins and other
facilities, require replacement of vegetation, establish required monitoring
procedures, stage the work over time, require alteration of the site design to
insure buffering, and require the conveyance to the city or other public entity
of certain lands or interests therein.
   (D)   Security. Prior to approval, the applicant shall execute an agreement
in form acceptable to the City Council to construct any required improvements,
to dedicate property or easements, and to comply with any required conditions.
The agreement must be accompanied by cash or a letter of credit in form and
amount determined by the City Council sufficient to secure performance of the
applicant’s obligations.
   (E)   Fees. All applications for plan approval shall be accompanied by a
processing and approval fee of $150.
(Prior Code, § 153.07)
§ 155.08 APPROVAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   Requirements. The standards contained in this chapter must be met to
the degree required by the City Council.
   (B)   Site dewatering. Water pumped from the site shall be treated by
temporary sedimentation basins, grit chambers, sand filters, upflow chambers,
hydro-calcines, swirl concentrators, or other controls as appropriate. Water
may not be discharged in a manner that causes erosion or flooding of the site
or receiving channels, or a wetland.
   (C)   Waste and material disposal. All waste and unused building materials
(including garbage, rubbish, debris, cleaning wastes, waste water, toxic
materials, or hazardous materials) shall be properly disposed of off-site and
not allowed to be carried by runoff into a receiving channel or storm sewer
system.
   (D)   Tracking. Each site shall have graveled roads, access drives, and
parking areas of sufficient width and length to prevent sediment from being
tracked onto public or private roadways. Any sediment reaching a public or
private road shall be removed by street cleaning (not flushing) before the end
of each workday.
   (E)   Drain inlet protection. All storm drain inlets shall be protected
during construction until control measures are in place with a straw bale, silt
fence, or equivalent barrier meeting accepted design criteria, standards, and
specifications contained in the state’s Pollution Control Agency publication
Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas.
   (F)   Site erosion control. The requirements of this division (F) apply only
to construction activities that result in runoff leaving the site.
      (1)   Channelized runoff from adjacent areas passing through the site
shall be diverted around disturbed areas, if practical. Otherwise, the channel
shall be protected as described below. Sheetflow runoff from adjacent areas
greater than 10,000 square feet in area shall also be diverted around disturbed
areas, unless shown to have resultant runoff velocity of less than one-half
foot per second across the disturbed area for the one-year storm. Diverted
runoff shall be conveyed in a manner that will not erode the conveyance and
receiving channels.
      (2)   All activities on the site shall be conducted in a logical sequence
to minimize the area of bare soil exposed at any one time.
      (3)   Runoff from the entire disturbed area on the site shall be
controlled by meeting either divisions (F)(3)(a) and (F)(3)(b) below or
divisions (F)(3)(a) and (F)(3)(c) below.
         (a)   All disturbed ground left inactive for 14 or more days shall be
stabilized by seeding or sodding (only available prior to September 15) or by
mulching, or covering, or other equivalent control measure.
         (b)   For sites with more than three acres disturbed at one time, or
if a channel originates in the disturbed area, one or more temporary or
permanent sedimentation basins shall be constructed. Each sedimentation basin
shall have a surface area of at least 1% of the area draining to the basin and
at least three feet of depth and constructed in accordance with accepted design
specifications. Sediment shall be removed to maintain a depth of three feet.
The basin discharge rate shall also be sufficiently low as to not cause erosion
along the discharge channel or the receiving water.
         (c)   For sites with less than ten acres disturbed at one time, silt
fences, straw bales, or equivalent control measure shall be placed along all
side slope and downslope sides of the site. If a channel or area of
concentrated runoff passes through the site, silt fences shall be placed along
the channel edges to reduce sediment reaching the channel. The use of silt
fences, straw bales, or equivalent control measure must include a maintenance
and inspection schedule.
      (4)   If remaining for more than seven days, they shall be stabilized by
mulching, vegetative cover, tarps, or other means. Erosion from piles which
will be in existence for less than seven days shall be controlled by placing
straw bales or silt fence barriers around the pile. In-street utility repair or
construction soil or dirt storage piles located closer than 25 feet of a
roadway or drainage channel must be covered with tarps or suitable alternative
control, if exposed for more than seven days, and the storm drain inlets must
be protected with straw bale or other appropriate filtering barriers.
   (G)   Storm water management criteria for permanent facilities. Storm water
management criteria for permanent facilities shall be in conformance with the
city’s current Comprehensive Water Resource Management Plan.
   (H)   Design standards. Storm water detention facilities constructed in the
city shall be designed in conformance with the city’s current Comprehensive
Water Resource Management Plan.
   (I)   Wetlands. Wetlands shall be maintained and protected in conformance
with the city’s current Comprehensive Storm Water Management Plan,
   (J)   Steep slopes. No land disturbing or development activities shall be
allowed on slopes of 18% or more.
   (K)   Catch basins. When deemed necessary by the Public Works Director or
designee, all newly installed and rehabilitated catch basins shall be provided
with a sump area for the collection of coarse-grained material. The basins
shall be cleaned when they are half filled with material.
   (L)   Drain leaders. When deemed necessary by the Public Works Director or
designee, all newly constructed and reconstructed buildings will route drain
leaders to pervious areas wherein the runoff can be allowed to infiltrate. The
flow rate of water exiting the leaders shall be controlled so no erosion occurs
in the previous areas.
   (M)   Inspection and maintenance. All storm water management facilities
shall be designed to minimize the need of maintenance, to provide access for
maintenance purposes and to be structurally sound. All storm water management
facilities be inspected and maintained in accordance with the city’s
Comprehensive Storm Water Management Plan. It shall be the responsibility of
the applicant to obtain any necessary easements or other property interests
allow access to the storm water management facilities for inspection
maintenance purposes.
   (N)   Models/methodologies/computations. Hydrologic models and design
methodologies used for the determination of runoff and analysis of storm water
management structures shall be approved by the Public Works Director or
designee. Plans, specifications, and computations for storm water management
facilities submitted for review shall be sealed and signed by a registered
professional engineer. All computations shall appear on the plans submitted for
review, unless otherwise approved by the Public Works Director or designee.
   (O)   Watershed management plans/ground water management plans. Plans shall
be consistent with adopted watershed management plans and ground water
management plans prepared in accordance with M.S. §§ 103B.231 and 103B.255, as
they may be amended from time to time, respectively, and as approved by the
State Board of Water and Soil Resources in accordance with the state law.
   (P)   Easements. If a plan involves direction of some or all runoff off of
the site, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain from
adjacent property owners any necessary easements or other property interests
concerning flowage of water.
   (Q)   Lawn maintenance education. The city shall participate in on-going
educational opportunities to inform the residents of the harmful impacts.
(Prior Code, § 153.08)
§ 155.09 OTHER CONTROLS.
   In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the
provisions of any other ordinance of the city, the more restrictive standard
prevails.
(Prior Code, § 153.09)
CHAPTER 156: FLOOD ISSUES
Section
   
156.01   Purposes
   
156.02   Permit requirements
   
156.03   Permit application
   
156.04   Duties of the Public Works Director
   
156.05   Review of permit application
   
156.06   Review of subdivision proposals
   
156.07   Water supply system
   
156.08   Sanitary sewage and waste disposal systems
   
156.09   Definitions
   
156.10   Abrogation and greater restrictions
§ 156.01 PURPOSES.
   The legislature of the state has in M.S. Chapter 103F and M.S. Chapter 462,
as they may be amended from time to time, delegated the responsibility to local
government units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. The
purpose of this chapter is to minimize potential losses due to periodic
flooding, including loss of life, loss of property, health, and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare,
and to establish eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program and in
order to do so, the city must meet the requirements of 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a).
(Prior Code, § 154.01)
§ 156.02 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   Permits are required as follows.
   (A)   No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, improve,
move, or demolish any building or structure without first obtaining a separate
permit for each building or structure from the designated responsible person.
   (B)   No human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including,
but not limited to, buildings or other structures, fences, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations, shall be
commenced until a separate permit has been obtained from the designated
responsible person for each change.
   (C)   No manufactured home shall be placed on improved or unimproved real
estate without first obtaining a separate permit for each mobile home from the
designated responsible person.
(Prior Code, § 154.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.03 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   To obtain a permit required under this chapter, the applicant shall first
file a permit application on a form furnished for that purpose. The form must
be completed and submitted to the designated responsible person before the
issuance of a permit will be considered.
(Prior Code, § 154.03)
§ 156.04 DUTIES OF THE PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.
   In connection with any permit required under this chapter, the following
shall apply.
   (A)   The Public Works Director, hereinafter referred to as the responsible
person, is appointed as the “person” responsible for receiving applications and
examining the plans and specifications for the proposed construction or
development.
   (B)   After reviewing the application, the responsible person may require
any additional measures which are necessary to meet the minimum requirements of
this chapter.
   (C)   The responsible person shall review proposed development to assure
that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies
from which approval is required by federal or state law, including § 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344.
(Prior Code, § 154.04)
§ 156.05 REVIEW OF PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   The responsible person shall review all applications for a permit
required under this chapter to determine whether proposed building sites will
be reasonably safe from flooding.
   (B)   If a proposed building site is in a flood prone area, all new
construction and substantial improvements (including the placement of
manufactured homes) shall be:
      (1)   Designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
floatation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
      (2)   Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage;
      (3)   Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage,
and
      (4)   Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and
air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/
or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
(Prior Code, § 154.05)
§ 156.06 REVIEW OF SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
   (A)   The responsible person shall review subdivision proposals and other
proposed new development to determine whether the proposals will be reasonably
safe from flooding.
   (B)   If a subdivision proposal or other proposed new development is in a
flood prone area, any such proposal shall be reviewed to assure that:
      (1)   All the proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage within the flood prone area;
      (2)   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage; and
      (3)   Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure of flood hazard.
(Prior Code, § 154.06)
§ 156.07 WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM.
   The responsible person shall require within flood prone areas, new and
replacement water supply systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the systems.
(Prior Code, § 154.07)
§ 156.08 SANITARY SEWAGE AND WASTE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
   The responsible person shall require within flood prone areas:
   (A)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems to be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from
the systems into flood waters; and
   (B)   On-site waste disposal systems to be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
(Prior Code, § 154.08)
§ 156.09 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to real estate, including, but not
limited to, construction or reconstruction of buildings, installing
manufactured homes or travel trailers, installing utilities, construction of
roads or bridges, erection of levees, walls, or fences, drilling, mining,
filling, dredging, and storage of materials.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source. See FLOOD.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures, and their contents.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is
later, and includes any subsequent improvements to the structures. For
floodplain management purposes, NEW CONSTRUCTION means structures for which the
start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by the city and includes any subsequent
improvements to the structures.
   PERSON. Includes any individuals, corporation, partnership, association, or
any other entity, including state and local governments and agencies.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. The land in the floodplain within the city
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may
be designated as Zone A on the FHBM. After detailed ratemaking has been
completed in preparation for publication of the flood insurance rate map, Zone
A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE,
AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, or V1-30, VE, or V. For purposes of these regulations,
the term SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA is synonymous in meaning with the phrase
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   STRUCTURE. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building,
including gas or liquid storage tanks, that is principally above ground. The
term includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers on site for more than
180 days.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure either, before the improvement or repair is started, or if the
structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred.
For the purposes of this definition, SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is considered to
occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other
structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure regardless of the actual work
performed. The term does not, however, include either any project for
improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure
safe living conditions or any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided
that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as
a historic structure.
(Prior Code, § 154.09)
§ 156.10 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTION.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restriction. However, where this chapter and
other ordinances, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 154.10)
CHAPTER 157: SIGNS
Section
General Provisions
   
157.01   Title
   
157.02   Findings, purpose, and effect
   
157.03   Definitions
Requirements and Regulations
   
157.15   Application of chapter
   
157.16   General requirements
   
157.17   Prohibited signs
   
157.18   Signs requiring no permits
   
157.19   Signs requiring permits
   
157.20   Permits; application; fees
   
157.21   Shopping centers and the like; plan required
   
157.22   Ground signs
   
157.23   Wall signs
   
157.24   Dynamic displays
   
157.25   District schedules
   
157.26   Adjustments and appeals
   
157.27   Variances
   
157.28   Nonconforming signs
   
157.29   Enforcement
   
157.30   Temporary signs
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 157.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “sign ordinance.”
(Prior Code, § 155.01)
§ 157.02 FINDINGS, PURPOSE, AND EFFECT.
   (A)   Findings. The City Council hereby finds as follows:
      (1)   Exterior signs have a substantial impact on the character and
quality of the environment;
      (2)   Signs provide an important medium through which individuals may
convey a variety of messages;
      (3)   Signs can create traffic hazards, aesthetic concerns, and
detriments to property values, thereby threatening the public health, safety,
and welfare;
      (4)   The city’s code of ordinances have, since as early as 1983,
established standards which would permit businesses in the city a reasonable
and equitable opportunity to identify themselves. The regulation of signs is an
effort to provide adequate means of expression and to promote the economic
viability of the business community;
      (5)   To preserve and promote civic beauty and protect the city and its
citizens from a proliferation of signs of a type, size, location, and character
that would adversely impact upon the aesthetics of the community and threaten
the health, safety, and welfare of the community; and
      (6)   To preserve and protect the value of land and buildings, and to
preserve and protect landscapes.
   (B)   Purpose and intent. It is not the purpose or intent of this chapter to
regulate the message displayed on any sign; nor is it the purpose or intent of
this chapter to regulate any building design or any display not defined as a
sign, or any sign which cannot be viewed from outside a building. The purpose
and intent of this chapter is to:
      (1)   Regulate the number, location, size, type, illumination, and other
physical characteristics of signs within the city in order to promote the
public health, safety, and welfare;
      (2)   Maintain, enhance, and improve the aesthetic environment of the
city by preventing visual clutter that is harmful to the appearance of the
community;
      (3)   Improve the visual appearance of the city while providing for
effective means of communication, consistent with constitutional guarantees and
the city’s goals of public safety and aesthetics; and
      (4)   Provide for fair and consistent enforcement of the sign regulations
set forth herein under the zoning authority of the city.
   (C)   Effect. A sign may be erected, mounted, displayed, or maintained in
the city if it is in conformance with the provisions of these regulations. The
effect of this sign chapter, as more specifically set forth herein, is to:
      (1)   Allow a wide variety of sign types in commercial zones, and a more
limited variety of signs in other zoning districts, subject to the standards
set forth in this sign chapter;
      (2)   Allow certain small, unobtrusive signs incidental to the principal
use of a site in all zoning districts when in compliance with the requirements
of this sign chapter;
      (3)   Prohibit signs whose location, size, type, illumination, or other
physical characteristics negatively affect the environment and where the
communication can be accomplished by means having a lesser impact on the
environment and the public health, safety, and welfare; and
      (4)   Provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this sign chapter.
(Prior Code, § 155.02) (Ord. 08-002, passed 4-22-2008)
§ 157.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED SIGN. Any sign and/or its supporting sign structure which remains
without a message or whose display surface remains blank for a period of one
year or more, or any sign which pertains to a time, event, or purpose which no
longer applies, shall be deemed to have been abandoned. Signs applicable to a
business temporarily suspended because of a change in ownership or management
of such business shall not be deemed abandoned unless the property remains
vacant for a period of one year or more. Any sign remaining after demolition of
a principal structure shall be deemed to be abandoned. Signs which are present
because of being legally established nonconforming signs or signs which have
required a conditional use permit or a variance shall also be subject to the
definition of ABANDONED SIGN.
   ANIMATED SIGN. A sign that features moving parts, motion, action, or
electronically controlled changeable message, either illuminated or not
illuminated.
   AWNING. A roof-like cover, often of fabric, plastic, metal or glass designed
and intended for protection from the weather or as a decorative embellishment,
and which projects from a wall or roof of a structure primarily over a window,
walk, or the like. Any part of an awning which also projects over a door shall
be counted as an AWNING.
   AWNING SIGN. A building sign or graphic printed on or in some fashion
attached directly to the awning material.
   BALLOON SIGN. A sign consisting of a bag made of lightweight material
supported by helium, hot, or pressurized air which is greater than 24 inches in
diameter.
   BILLBOARD. A sign which directs attention to a business, community service,
or entertainment not exclusively related to the premises where such sign is
located. See definition of OFF-PREMISES MESSAGES.
   BUILDING. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any
use or occupancy.
   BUILDING SIGN. Any sign attached or supported by any structure used or
intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy of off-premises
advertising.
   BUSINESS FRONTAGE. The linear frontage of that portion of a building facing
the right-of-way and occupied by one separate business.
   CABINET SIGN. Any box style or enclosed wall sign that is not of channel or
individually mounted letter construction.
   CANOPY. A permanent roof structure attached to and supported by the
building.
   CANOPY SIGN. Any sign that is part of or attached to a canopy.
   CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN. A sign, or a portion thereof, with characters,
letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering
the face or the surface of the sign. CHANGEABLE COPY SIGNS do not include non-
electric copy, or signs upon which characters, letters, or illustrations change
or rearrange only once in a 24-hour period.
   COMMERCIAL SPEECH. Speech advertising a business, profession, commodity,
service, or entertainment.
   DIRECTIONAL SIGN. An on-premises sign designed to guide or direct pedestrian
or vehicular traffic and a surface area not greater than five square feet.
   DYNAMIC DISPLAY SIGNS. A sign that appears to have movement or that appears
to change, caused by any method other than physically removing and replacing
the sign or its components. This includes any display that incorporates a
method or technology that allows the image on the sign face to change without
physically or mechanically replacing the sign face or its components. This also
includes signs containing parts that rotate, revolve, move, flash, blink,
utilize light emitting diodes (LED) or liquid crystal display (LCD) lights to
simulate motion or video, or which allow changeable copy at regular or
irregular intervals, digital ink, or any other technology that allows the sign
to display a series of images or displays.
   ELECTRIC SIGN. Any sign containing electric wiring but not including signs
illuminated by an exterior light source.
   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN. Any sign that displays a message electronically
through the use of pixel-based technology, such as, but not limited to, light
emitting diodes (LEDs), liquid crystal, and the like.
   ELEVATION. The view of the side, front, or rear of a given structure(s).
   ELEVATION AREA. The area of all walls that face any lot line.
   FLAG. Any fabric or similar lightweight material attached at one end of the
material, usually to a staff or pole, so as to allow movement of the material
by atmospheric changes and which contains distinctive colors, patterns,
symbols, emblems, insignia, or other symbolic devices.
   FLASHING SIGN. A directly or indirectly illuminated sign which exhibits
changing light or color effect by any means, so as to provide intermittent
illumination which includes the illusion of intermittent flashing light by
means of animation. Also any mode of lighting which resembles zooming,
twinkling, or sparkling.
   FREE-STANDING SIGN. Any sign which has supporting framework that is placed
on, or anchored in, the ground and which is independent from any building or
other structure.
   FRONTAGE. The line of contact of a property with the public right-of-way.
   GRADE. The final ground elevation after construction. Earth mounding or
berming criteria for landscaping and screening are not part of the final grade
for sign height computation.
   GROUND SIGN. Any free-standing sign with its sign face mounted on the ground
or mounted on a base at least as wide as the sign, that has no visibility
between the bottom of the sign and the base on which it is attached, and which
has a total height not exceeding eight feet, with landscaping to enhance the
appearance of the signage.
   HEIGHT OF SIGN. The height of the sign shall be computed as the vertical
distance measured from the base of the sign at grade to the top of the highest
attached component of the sign.
   IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A sign which is a non-commercial sign but is limited to
the name, address, and number of a building, institution, or person and to the
activity carried on in the building or institution, or the occupation of the
person.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign designed to give forth any artificial or reflected
light, either directly from a source connected with the sign or indirectly from
an artificial source, so shielded that no direct illumination from it is
visible except on the sign and in its immediate proximity.
   INTERIOR SIGN. A sign which is located within the interior of any building,
or within an enclosed lobby or court of any building.
   ISSUING AUTHORITY. The City Manager or designee.
   LEGALLY ESTABLISHED NONCONFORMING SIGN. Any sign and its support structure
lawfully erected prior to the effective date of this chapter which fails to
conform to the requirements of this chapter. A sign which was erected in
accordance with a variance granted prior to the adoption of this chapter and
which does not comply with this chapter shall be deemed to be a LEGAL
NONCONFORMING SIGN. A sign which was unlawfully erected shall be deemed to be
an illegal sign.
   MAJOR ANCHOR. A single tenant in a shopping center that is at least 20% of
the total square footage and in excess of 50,000 square feet.
   MARQUEE. Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or
extending along and projecting beyond the wall of that building, generally
designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.
   MARQUEE SIGN. Any building sign painted, mounted, constructed, or attached
in any manner, on a marquee or made part of a marquee.
   MONUMENT SIGN. Any free-standing sign with its sign face mounted on the
ground or mounted on a base at least as wide as the sign and which has a height
exceeding eight feet.
   MOTION SIGN. Any sign which revolves or rotates, has moving parts, has
changing messages, or displays a shimmering effect. Included in this category
are searchlights used for advertisement.
   MULTIPLE TENANT SITE. Any site which has more than one tenant, and each
tenant has a separate ground level exterior public entrance.
   NON-COMMERCIAL SPEECH. Dissemination of messages not classified as
commercial speech which include, but are not limited to, messages concerning
political, religious, social, ideological, public service, and informational
topics.
   OFF-PREMISES SIGN. A commercial speech sign which directs the attention of
the public to a business, activity conducted, or product sold or offered at a
location not on the same premises where such business sign is located. For
purposes of this chapter, easements and other appurtenances shall be considered
to be outside such platted parcel of land and any sign located or proposed to
be located in an easement or other appurtenance shall be considered an OFF-
PREMISES SIGN.
   ON-PREMISES MESSAGES. Identify or advertise an establishment, person,
activity, goods, products, or services located on the premises where the sign
is installed.
   PARAPET (WALL). That portion of building wall that rises above the roof
level.
   PEDESTAL. A foundation or base of a ground or monument sign which either
directly supports the signage or completely screens the supporting members of
the sign.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, association, organization, partnership, trust,
or corporation.
   PORTABLE SIGN. Any sign which is manifestly designed to be transported,
including by trailer or on its own wheels, even though the wheels of such sign
may be removed and the remaining chassis or support is converted to another
sign or attached temporarily or permanently to the ground since this
characteristic is based on the design of such a sign.
   PRINCIPAL BUILDING. The building in which the principal primary use of the
lot is conducted. Lots with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal
buildings, but storage buildings, garages, and other clearly accessory uses
shall not be considered PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS.
   PROFESSIONAL BUILDING. Any multi-story building of 50,000 square feet or
more occupied by professional, service-oriented businesses, such as legal,
clinical, or healthcare-related retail or service establishments with parking
provided on the tract of land for use in common by patrons and occupants.
   PROJECTING SIGN. Any sign which is affixed to a building or wall in such a
manner that its leading edge extends more than 15 inches beyond the surface of
such building or wall face.
   PROPERTY OWNER. Legal owner of property as officially recorded by Hennepin
or Ramsey County.
   PUBLIC NOTICES. Official notices posted by public officers, employees, or
their agents in the performance of their duties, or as directed by such
officers, employees, or agents.
   PUBLIC STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY. The planned right-of-way for a public street.
   PYLON SIGN. Any free-standing sign which has its supportive structure(s)
anchored in the ground, independent of any structure or object, and which has a
sign face elevated above ground level by pole(s) or beam(s) and with the area
below the sign face open.
   READERBOARD SIGN. Any sign having a message not permanently affixed to the
sign face, and the copy is manually changed.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. Any district zoned for residential purposes.
   ROOF. The exterior surface and its supporting structure on the top of a
building or structure. The structural make-up of which conforms to the roof
structures, roof construction, and roof covering sections of the State Building
Code.
   ROOF LINE. The upper-most edge of the roof or, in the case of an extended
facade or parapet, the upper-most height of said facade or parapet.
   ROOF SIGN. A sign erected upon the roof or parapet of a building, the entire
face of which is situated above the roof level of the building to which it is
attached, and which is wholly or partially supported by the building.
   ROTATING SIGN. A sign or portion of a sign which turns about on an axis.
   SETBACK, FRONT. The minimum horizontal distance permitted between the public
right-of-way and a structure on the premises. In instances in which a property
fronts on more than one street, FRONT SETBACKS are required on all street
frontages.
   SETBACK, REAR. The minimum horizontal distance permitted between the
property line opposite the principal street frontage and a structure on the
premises.
   SETBACK, SIDE. The minimum horizontal distance permitted between the side
lot line and a structure on the premises.
   SHIMMERING SIGNS. A sign which reflects an oscillating and/or sometimes
distorted visual image.
   SHOPPING CENTER. Any SHOPPING CENTER as defined in §
154.124.
   SIGN. Any letter, word or symbol, poster, picture, statuary, reading matter,
or representation in the nature of advertisement, announcement, message, or
visual communication, whether painted, posted, printed, affixed or constructed,
including all associated brackets, braces, supports, wires, and structures,
which is displayed for informational or communicative purposes.
   SIGN STRUCTURE. Any structure including the pedestal, base, supports,
uprights, bracing, and framework which supports or is capable of supporting any
sign.
   SIGN SURFACE AREA. The area in square feet of the sign including both sides
upon, against, or through which the message of the sign is exhibited.
   SITE. A plot or parcel of land, or combination of contiguous lots or parcels
of land, which are intended, designated, and/or approved to function as an
integrated unit.
   STREET. A public highway, road, alley, or thoroughfare.
   STRINGER. A line of string, rope, cording, or an equivalent to which is
attached a number of pennants.
   STRIP MALL. Any group of four or more occupant retail or service
establishments on one or more contiguous tracts of land in single ownership,
compromising 7,500 to 75,000 square feet of floor area with parking provided on
the tract or tracts of land for use in common by patrons.
   SUSPENDED SIGN. Any building sign that is suspended from the underside of a
horizontal plane surface and is connected to this surface.
   TEMPORARY SIGN. Any sign, banner, pennant, valance, or advertising display
constructed with light materials, with or without frames, intended to be
displayed for a limited time only. TEMPORARY SIGNS include, but are not limited
to: A-, H-, or T-frame signs, curb, sidewalk, sandwich signs, flags, banners,
and balloons.
   TOTAL SITE SIGNAGE. The maximum permitted combined area of all free-standing
and wall identification signs allowed on a specific property.
   VISIBLE. Capable of being seen by a person of normal visual acuity (whether
legible or not) without visual aid.
   WALL. Any structure which defines the exterior boundaries or courts of a
building or structure and which has a slope of 60 degrees or greater with the
horizontal plane.
   WALL SIGN. A flat sign which does not extend more than 18 inches from the
face or wall of the building upon which it is affixed, painted, or attached,
running parallel for its whole length to the face or wall of the building, and
which does not extend beyond the horizontal width of such building.
   WINDOW SIGN. Any sign, pictures, symbol, or combination thereof, designed to
communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale, or
service, that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes or glass and
is visible from the exterior of the window.
(Prior Code, § 155.03) (Ord. 08-002, passed 4-22-2008; Ord. 2014-07, passed 12-
9-2014; Ord. 2019-08, passed 9-18-2019; Ord. 2023-01, passed 7-11-2023)
REQUIREMENTS AND REGULATIONS
§ 157.15 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   Conformity. No sign may be erected, placed, altered, or moved unless
in conformity with this chapter.
   (B)   Other code provisions. Nothing in this chapter may be taken to relieve
any person from complying with the provisions of any other chapter of this code
of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 155.20) (Ord. 08-002, passed 4-22-2008)
§ 157.16 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Sign permit not required. The changing of the advertising message of a
painted or printed sign, theater marquee, or a changeable copy sign, and the
painting, repainting, and cleaning of signs will not require a sign permit, but
will otherwise be done in compliance with this chapter and any other applicable
law or section of this code.
   (B)   Hazard and hazardous signs.
      (1)   No sign may by reason of its location, color, or intensity, create
a hazard to the safe and efficient movement of vehicles or pedestrian traffic.
      (2)   No sign may contain words which might be construed as traffic
controls, such as “Stop,” “Caution,” “Warning,” or otherwise resemble any
official marker erected by a governmental body or agency, unless such sign is a
directional sign.
      (3)   Any sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be or is an
imitation of or resembles any official traffic control device or railroad sign
or signal, or emergency vehicle signal, or which attempts to direct the
movement of traffic or which hides from view or interferes with the
effectiveness of any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or
signal shall be deemed hazardous.
   (C)   Framework of signs.
      (1)   When possible, the framework for the lateral support of a sign must
be contained within the sign’s body or within the structure of the building to
which it is attached so as not to be visible.
      (2)   The area within the framework of a sign shall be used to calculate
the square footage except that the width of a frame exceeding 12 inches shall
constitute sign face, and if such letters or graphics be mounted directly on a
wall, fascia, or awning, or in such way as to be without a frame, the
dimensions for calculating the square footage shall be the area extending six
inches beyond the periphery formed around such letters or graphics in a plane
figure bounded by straight lines connecting the outermost points thereof.
      (3)   Each surface utilized to display a message or to attract attention
shall be measured as a separate sign and shall be calculated in the overall
square footage. Symbols, flags, pictures, wording, figures, or other forms of
graphics painted on or attached to windows, walls, awnings, or free-standing
structures are considered a sign and are included in calculating the overall
square footage.
   (D)   Placement of signs. No sign, or attachment to it, may be erected,
placed, or maintained by any person on rocks, fences, or trees, nor in such a
manner as to interfere with any electric lights, power, telephone or telegraph
wires, or the supports thereof.
   (E)   Maintenance. All signs, together with all of their supports, braces,
guys, and anchors, must be kept neatly painted and posted. Every sign must be
maintained by the owner or person in charge of the sign in a clean, safe,
sanitary, and inoffensive condition and free of litter, rubbish, and weeds.
   (F)   Inspections. All signs for which a permit is required may be inspected
by the City Manager or designee, and a permanent record, including photographs,
may be maintained. The City Manager, or the City Manager’s designated
representative, may, after notice to the owner, enter upon any property to
ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter are being complied with. The
City Manager or designee may order the removal of any sign that is not
maintained in accordance with this chapter. In addition, the following
inspections will be made.
      (1)   All signs requiring footings must be inspected to ensure that
suitable footings as determined by the City Building Official in accordance
with appropriate building codes have been used. Footing inspections will be
required for all ground signs and pylon signs before these signs are installed.
      (2)   Electrical signs must be installed in accordance with the current
electrical code and a separate permit from the Building Official must be
obtained prior to installation. Inspections will be required for any electric
sign.
   (G)   Illumination.
      (1)   External illumination for signs shall be so constructed and
maintained that the source of light is not visible from the public right-of-way
or residential property. All external illumination for signs shall have a
shielded light source.
      (2)   Any sign illuminated and located within 200 feet of a lot line of a
residence shall be diffused or indirect so as not to reflect rays of light into
adjacent residences or a street and shall not be illuminated between 10:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m.; provided, however, such signs may be illuminated at any time
when the use identified by the sign is open for business, unless otherwise
determined by the City Council through the conditional use permit process.
      (3)   Any sign or other illumination of the property incorporating LED
technology shall adhere to the limitations of §
157.24(G)(1), regulating dynamic display sign brightness.
(Prior Code, § 155.21) (Ord. 08-002, passed 4-22-2008; Ord. 2014-07, passed 12-
9-2014; Ord. 2019-08, passed 9-18-2019) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 157.17 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   (A)   In addition to the signs listed below, signs that are not specifically
permitted in this chapter are hereby prohibited.
   (B)   Without restricting or limiting the generality of the provisions of
the foregoing, the following signs are specifically unauthorized and therefore
prohibited:
      (1)   Balcony signs and signs mounted or supported on a balcony;
      (2)   Any sign that obstructs any part of a doorway or fire escape;
      (3)   Signs, including those intended for viewing only from the interior
of a building but which can reasonably be viewed from the exterior of the
building, which by reason of position, shape, color, or any other
characteristic would interfere with the proper function of a traffic sign or
signal, or otherwise constitute a traffic or safety hazard;
      (4)   Signs within the public right-of-way or public easement;
      (5)   Whirling devices;
      (6)   Signs on glass doors which have a total sign surface area exceeding
20% of the glass area of the door;
      (7)   Signs other than wall signs which have any surface area or
structural member closer than ten feet to a side lot line;
      (8)   Signs which project beyond the property line of the property upon
which the sign is located;
      (9)   Signs projecting more than five feet above the roof line of the
structure to which it is affixed;
      (10)   Signs intended to be for the purpose of advertising in R-1, R-1A,
R-2, R-3, and R-4 districts, including those intended for viewing only from the
interior of a building but which can reasonably be viewed from the exterior of
the building;
      (11)   Wall signs having a sign surface area exceeding 15% of the area of
the wall surface to which it is affixed;
      (12)   Signs constructed so that the message or communication is not flat
against the sign structure;
      (13)   Signs affixed to utility poles and fences. Signs painted, attached
or in any other manner affixed to trees, rocks, or similar natural surfaces, or
attached to utility poles, bridges, towers, fences, or similar public
structures;
      (14)   Signs which emit sound, odor, or visible matter;
      (15)   Animated signs;
      (16)   Flashing signs;
      (17)   Vehicles with incorporated or attached signage parked primarily
for use as a sign shall not be parked in any zone for more than 72 hours;
      (18)   Billboards;
      (19)   All types of signs except for bus schedules and identification
information;
      (20)   Off-premises signs; with the exception of bus/transit bench signs
as defined in §
94.03;
      (21)   Portable signs;
      (22)   Video display signs; and
      (23)   Fluorescent tubes, neon, LED banding or similar use of LED
lighting treatments, and fiber optic light sources.
      (24)   Any sign which no longer advertises a bona fide business, or a
product sold, or is otherwise considered an abandoned sign under this section,
shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent, or person having the
beneficial use of the building or structure upon which sign may be found within
30 days after written notification from the Code Official. Upon failure to
comply with such notice within the time specified in such order, the City
Council may declare the sign to be a public nuisance, remove it, and assess the
cost of removal to the property owner.
(Prior Code, § 155.22) (Ord. 08-002, passed 4-22-2008; Ord. 2014-07, passed 12-
9-2014; Ord. 2019-08, passed 9-18-2019; Ord. 2022-07, passed 10-11-2022; Ord.
2024-01, passed 4-9-2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 157.18 SIGNS REQUIRING NO PERMITS.
   The following signs shall not require a permit, if they meet all other
requirements of this chapter. These exemptions, however, shall not be construed
as relieving the owner of the sign from the responsibility of its erection and
maintenance, and its compliance with the provisions of this chapter or any
other law or ordinance regulating the same.
   (A)   Changing display surface. The changing of the display surface on a
painted or printed sign only. This exemption, however, shall apply only to
poster replacement and/or on-site changes involving sign painting elsewhere
than directly on a building.
   (B)   Signs of certain size. Signs six square feet or less in size.
   (C)   Window signs. Temporary or permanent window signs duly authorized by
zoning and other laws of this city, provided that all such signs on a frontage
shall not have a total sign surface area greater than 50% of the glass area,
excluding doors, on such frontage and provided that a minimum of one-half of
the open window space must be below a horizontal line which is five feet above
the interior floor of the commercial establishment. Merchandise displays in
windows shall not be considered a part of the sign area if such display is not
intended to be continued for a period of more than eight weeks.
   (D)   Bus/transit benches. Signs affixed on benches at public bus stops or
signs within bus/transit benches as defined in §
94.03.
   (E)   Replacement of existing commercial identification signs. A commercial
identification sign designed to replace an existing commercial identification
sign which lawfully exists under this code, so long as the new sign has the
same dimensions and is in the same location as the existing sign, and is not
prohibited sign under §
157.17.
   (F)   Non-commercial signs exemption. All non-commercial signs of any size
may be posted in any number from 46 days before the state primary in a state
general election year until ten days following the state general election.
These exempted non-commercial signs are not allowed to be placed within ten
feet from the curb and ten feet from the property lines. If these signs are
placed in violation of these setbacks, they will be removed by the City Manager
or designee.
   (G)   The owner of any property zoned R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, R-4, C, or I may
display one temporary sign of up to ten square feet in area per sign surface
relating to activities or events occurring in a R/OS, Recreation and Open Space
District, for a total of up to 28 days per calendar year. This temporary sign
display under this section shall be located entirely on the owner’s property,
and shall be in addition to the one permitted six square foot noncommercial
speech sign per §
157.25(D).
   (H)   Any property in the R/OS Recreation and Open Space District may
display one temporary sign per street frontage of up to ten square feet in area
per sign surface relating to activities or events occurring on property zoned
R/OS Recreation and Open Space District.
   (I)   For property zoned residential, one sign of up to six square feet in
area per sign surface may be displayed on days when an active garage or rummage
sale is occurring on-site, up to a maximum of nine days per calendar year.
   (J)   Residential zoned properties, with a current rental license, may place
one sign per street frontage with up to two sides. The sign may be placed
during or prior to a period during which a unit is vacant, or expected to be
vacant, and when the landlord is actively seeking prospective tenants to fill
said vacant unit. No single sign face shall exceed six square feet. Such signs
and sign structures shall be constructed of durable all-weather materials, such
as but not limited to steel, coreaplast plastic foam-core, alumacore,
polycarbonate (Lexan), vinyl and nylon.
(Prior Code, § 155.23) (Ord. 08-002, passed 4-22-2008; Ord. 10-001, passed 4-
13-2010; Ord. 2022-03, passed 5-24-2022; Ord. 2022-07, passed 10-11-2022; Ord.
2023-01, passed 7-11-2023; Ord. 2025-02, passed 4-22-2025)
§ 157.19 SIGNS REQUIRING PERMITS.
   No sign shall be erected, constructed, altered, reconstructed, maintained,
or moved in the city without first securing a permit from the city, other than
those described in §
157.18. The content of the sign shall not be reviewed or considered in
determining whether to approve or deny a sign permit.
(Prior Code, § 155.24) (Ord. 08-002, passed 4-22-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 157.20 PERMITS; APPLICATION; FEES.
   (A)   Permit fees. A sign permit fee must be paid in accordance with §
33.060.
   (B)   Application for a permit. Application for a permit shall be in writing
on forms provided by the city and must be accompanied by a sign permit fee. The
application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Names and addresses of the owners of the display structure and
property;
      (2)   The address at which any signs are to be erected or modified;
      (3)   The lot, block, and addition at which the signs are to be erected,
and the street on which they are to front;
      (4)   A complete set of plans showing the necessary elevations,
distances, dimensions to fully and clearly represent the construction and the
placement of the signs, including dimensions of the wall surface of the
building to which it is to be attached and linear footage of the right-of-way
frontage of the building;
      (5)   The cost of the sign;
      (6)   Type of sign (i.e., wall sign, monument sign) and if the sign is to
be illuminated, the technical means by which this is to be accomplished;
      (7)   Certification by applicant indicating the application complies with
all requirements of this chapter;
      (8)   If the proposed sign is along a county road or state trunk highway,
the application shall be accompanied by proof that the applicant has obtained a
permit from the county or state for the sign;
      (9)   Where a shopping center comprehensive sign plan is proposed, the
plan must include the location, size, height, color, lighting, and orientation
of all signs; and
      (10)   When a ground sign plan is submitted, the plan must include the
location of the sign in relation to the lot lines and the building height,
including any difference from the established grade, grade level, dimensions of
the berm, size, color, lighting, and hours of illumination.
   (C)   Permit issuance.
      (1)   Each application must be reviewed for compliance by the City
Manager or designee.
      (2)   If the proposed sign complies with this chapter, a permit will be
issued within 30 days after the application date.
      (3)   A sign permit will become null and void if the work for which the
permit was issued has not been completed within one year of issuance, or
renewed. Application for renewal will consist of the same procedures as the
initial application for permit, including payment of any fee.
(Prior Code, § 155.25) (Ord. 08-002, passed 4-22-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 157.21 SHOPPING CENTERS AND THE LIKE; PLAN REQUIRED.
   (A)   A comprehensive sign plan must be provided for the whole of a shopping
center, strip mall, or professional building development.
   (B)   This plan includes the location, size, height, color, lighting, and
orientation of all signs, and must be submitted for preliminary plan approval.
   (C)   When a comprehensive sign plan is submitted, exceptions to the
regulations of this chapter may be permitted if the sign areas and densities
for the plan as a whole are in conformity with the intent of this chapter and
if such exception results in an improved relationship between the various parts
of the sign plan as determined by the City Council.
   (D)   Comprehensive sign plans will be reviewed by the City Planning
Commission which will forward a recommendation to the City Council on the
appropriateness of the proposed sign plan.
(Prior Code, § 155.26) (Ord. 08-002, passed 4-22-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 157.22 GROUND SIGNS.
   (A)   Permitted. Ground signs are permitted in all districts but only to the
extent permitted in this section and in the District Schedules set forth in §
157.25.
   (B)   Permit application. A permit shall be applied for in accordance with §
157.20.
   (C)   Height. A sign must not exceed eight feet in height, including
pedestal and any berming.
   (D)   Surface area.
      (1)   Signs having one copy surface may have up to 34 square feet of
surface area.
      (2)   Signs having two or more copy surfaces may have up to 68 square
feet for all surfaces.
      (3)   Buildings with two or more businesses/tenants shall be allowed an
additional 12 square feet for two or more copy surfaces, for a total of 80
square feet.
   (E)   Landscaping. Ground signs must be landscaped. Landscaping may consist
of shrubs, plants, rocks, or other decorative materials located around the
pedestal. All signs shall be maintained in a safe, presentable, and good
structural condition at all times, including the replacement of defective
parts, cleaning, and other items required for maintenance of the sign.
Vegetation around, in front of, behind, and underneath the base of ground signs
for a distance of at least ten feet shall be neatly and free of weeds, and no
rubbish or debris that would constitute a fire or health hazard shall be
permitted under or near the sign.
   (F)   Design and location.
      (1)   Signs must maximize the use of natural materials in construction
and should conform to the material design of the principal structure.
      (2)   Signs must be located at least 15 feet from the curb line of any
public street and cannot be placed within any street right-of-way or government
easement.
      (3)   The pedestal width of a ground sign must be at least equal to the
sign width.
      (4)   The principal structure of a parcel of land will be allowed one
ground sign, regardless of the number of tenants in the structure.
(Prior Code, § 155.27) (Ord. 08-002, passed 4-22-2008; Ord. 2014-07, passed 12-
9-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 157.23 WALL SIGNS.
   The sign surface area of a wall sign may not exceed 15% of the area of the
wall to which it is applied.
(Prior Code, § 155.28) (Ord. 08-002, passed 4-22-2008; Ord. 2014-07, passed 12-
9-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 157.24 DYNAMIC DISPLAYS.
   (A)   Findings.
      (1)   Studies show that there is a correlation between dynamic displays
on signs and the distraction of roadway drivers. Distraction can lead to
traffic accidents. Drivers can be distracted not only by a changing message,
but also by knowing that the sign has a changing message. Drivers may watch a
sign waiting for the next change to occur. Additionally, drivers are more
distracted by special effects used to change the message, such as fade-ins and
fade-outs. Time and temperature signs appear to be an exception to these
concerns because the messages are short, easily absorbed, and become inaccurate
without frequent changes.
      (2)   Despite these public safety concerns, there is merit to allowing
new technologies to easily update messages. Except as prohibited by state or
federal law, sign owners should have the opportunity to use these technologies
with certain restrictions. The restrictions are intended to minimize potential
driver distraction and to minimize proliferation in residential districts where
signs can adversely impact residential character.
      (3)   Spacing requirements enforced by this code could interfere with the
equal opportunity to use such technologies and are not included. Without those
requirements, however, there is the potential for multiple dynamic displays to
exist along a corridor. If more than one dynamic display can be seen from a
given location on a corridor, the minimum display time becomes critical. If the
display time is too short, a driver could be subjected to a view that appears
to have constant movement. This impact would be compounded in a corridor with
multiple signs. If dynamic displays become pervasive and there are no
meaningful limitations on each sign’s ability to change frequently, drivers may
be subjected to an unsafe degree of distraction and sensory overload.
Therefore, a longer display time is appropriate.
      (4)   Additionally, a constant message is typically needed on a sign so
that the public can use it to identify and find an intended destination.
Changing messages detract from this way-finding purpose and could adversely
affect driving conduct through last-second lane changes, stops, or turns, which
could result in traffic accidents. Accordingly, dynamic displays generally
should not be allowed to occupy the entire copy and graphic area of a sign.
      (5)   The city finds that dynamic displays should be allowed on signs but
with significant controls to minimize their proliferation and their potential
threats to public safety.
   (B)   Permitted signs. Dynamic displays are not outright permitted within
any zoning district within the City.
   (C)   Conditionally permitted signs. Dynamic displays are conditionally
permitted solely as free- standing ground signs with the issuance of a
conditional use permit from the City Council only in the R-1 Single-Family
Residential District to display non-commercial or public service announcements
when displayed on the site of an approved public or quasi-public land use, the
C Commercial, I Industrial, and R/O Recreation/Open Space Districts. Dynamic
display signs shall comply with the height, size, arrangement, setback,
location, and other applicable provisions of this chapter and the district in
which the sign is located. The conditions with respect to the issuance of any
conditional use permit for a dynamic display sign shall cover at least the
following:
      (1)   Aesthetics of the sign, including, but not limited to, message
color, construction materials, and landscaping;
      (2)   Location of the sign with regard to the surrounding area; and
      (3)   Position/layout of the sign with regard to the surrounding area.
   (D)   Size of display. Dynamic displays may occupy no more than 35% of the
actual copy and graphic area allowed by the zoning district for which it is
located in. The remainder of the sign must not have the capability to have
dynamic displays even if not used. Only one contiguous dynamic display area is
allowed on a sign face. Additionally, the remainder of the sign must not have
the capability to have a readerboard sign as defined herein.
   (E)   Size of copy. Every line of copy and graphics in a dynamic display
must be at least seven inches in height on a road with a speed limit of 25 to
34 mph, nine inches on a road with a speed limit of 35 to 44 hour, 12 inches on
a road with a speed limit of 45 to 54 mph, and 15 inches on a road with a speed
limit of 55 miles per hour or more. If there is insufficient room for copy and
graphics of this size in the area allowed under division (D) above, then no
dynamic display is allowed.
   (F)   Duration of image. The images and messages displayed on a dynamic
display sign must be static. A dynamic display’s image, or any portion thereof,
may not change more often than once every eight seconds in R/O and R-
1 Districts, except one for which changes are necessary to correct hour-and-
minute, date, or temperature information. Due to the increased quantity and
distance between signs, a dynamic display’s image, or any portion thereof, may
not change more often than once every five minutes in C and LI Districts,
except one for which changes are necessary to correct hour-and-minute, date, or
temperature information.
   (G)   Transition. If a dynamic display’s image or any portion thereof
changes, the change sequence must be instantaneous without any special effects.
   (H)   Message. The images and messages displayed must be complete in
themselves, without continuation in content to the next image or message or to
any other sign.
   (I)   Color. The matrix elements of the display shall be monochromatic in
color with a solid black background.
   (J)   Sign construction and maintenance.
      (1)   All permanent free-standing ground signs shall have self-supporting
structures erected on and permanently attached to concrete foundations. The
base of dynamic display signs must maximize the use of natural materials, such
as stone, brick, rock, or similar decorative material, in construction and
should conform to the material design of the principal structure.
      (2)   All signs shall be maintained in a safe, presentable, and good
structural condition at all times, including the replacement of defective
parts, cleaning and other items required for maintenance of the sign.
Vegetation around, in front of, behind, and underneath the base of ground signs
for a distance of at least ten feet shall be neatly trimmed and free of weeds,
and no rubbish or debris that would constitute a fire or health hazard shall be
permitted under or near the sign.
   (K)   Prohibition on video display. No portion of a dynamic display may
change any part of its sign face by a method of display characterized by motion
or pictorial imagery, or depict action or a special effect to imitate movement,
or display pictorials or graphics in a progression of frames that gives the
illusion of motion of any kind.
   (L)   Prohibition on fluctuating or flashing illumination. No portion of a
dynamic display image may fluctuate in light intensity or use intermittent,
strobe or moving light, or light that changes in intensity in sudden transitory
bursts, streams, zooms, twinkles, sparkles, or in any other manner that creates
the illusion of movements.
   (M)   Audio. Dynamic displays shall not be equipped with audio speakers.
   (N)   Malfunctions. Dynamic displays must be designed and equipped to freeze
the sign face in one position if a malfunction occurs. Dynamic displays must
also be equipped with a means to immediately discontinue the display if it
malfunctions, and the sign owner or operator must immediately turn off the
display when notified by the city that it is not complying with the standards
of this chapter.
   (O)   Brightness. All dynamic displays shall meet the following brightness
standards.
      (1)   No dynamic display may exceed a maximum illumination of 4,500 nits
(candelas per square meter) during daylight hours and a maximum illumination of
450 nits (candelas per square meter) between dusk to dawn as measured from the
sign’s face at maximum brightness.
      (2)   All dynamic displays having illumination by means other than
natural light must be equipped with a dimmer control or other mechanism that
automatically controls the sign’s brightness to comply with the requirements of
this section.
      (3)   No dynamic display may be of such intensity or brilliance that it
interferes with the effectiveness of an official traffic sign, device, or
signal.
      (4)   The owner or controller of the dynamic display must adjust the sign
to meet these brightness standards in accordance with the city’s instructions.
The adjustment must be made immediately upon notice of noncompliance from the
city.
      (5)   A written certification from the sign manufacturer that light
intensity has been preset to conform to the brightness levels established by
the city’s code and that the preset level is protected from end user
manipulation by password protected software or other method. This would offer
the advantage of ensuring that electronic signs at a minimum cannot exceed the
standards. The sign manufacturer must submit this certification at the time of
sign permit issuance that the sign has the mechanical capabilities to control
luminance at the levels noted in division (O)(1) above.
   (P)   Nonconforming signs. Dynamic display signs existing on January 1, 2015
must comply with the operational standards listed herein. An existing dynamic
display sign that does not meet the structural requirements as outlined in
divisions (B) and (C) above may continue as a nonconforming development. An
existing dynamic display sign that cannot meet the minimum size requirements in
division (E) above must use the largest size possible for one line of copy to
fit in the available space.
   (Q)   Prohibited signs. Dynamic display signs shall not be used to display a
listing of tenant names, nor can they create distractions which are detrimental
to the public health, welfare, and safety as determined by the City Manager or
designee.
(Prior Code, § 155.29) (Ord. 2014-07, passed 12-9-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 157.25 DISTRICT SCHEDULES.
   Signs shall be permitted as set forth in the following provisions:
   (A)   Residential. The following signs are permitted in a residential
district:
      (1)   R-1, R-1A, and R-2.
         (a)   One identification sign per dwelling unit per right-of-way
frontage stating the street address, and/or the name of the resident. One
address sign may also be located on the curb in front of each dwelling unit or
on a free-standing mailbox.
         (b)   Only one non-commercial sign with a maximum sign area of six
square feet per surface with a total area of 12 square feet all sign area
surfaces will be permitted per lot. Signs may not have any surface area or
structural member closer than ten feet to a side lot line or sited in a public
right-of-way or public easement.
         (c)   The following types of signs are not permitted in residential
zoning districts:
            1.   Awning signs;
            2.   Balloon signs;
            3.   Canopy signs;
            4.   Flashing signs;
            5.   Marquee signs;
            6.   Pole signs;
            7.   Pylon signs;
            8.   Shimmering signs; and
            9.   Commercial signs.
      (2)   R-3 and R-4. Each multiple dwelling complex (nine or more units)
allowed one free-standing sign identifying the complex. The sign may not exceed
50 square feet in sign surface area. The sign structure, including the sign
surface area, may not exceed 150 square feet in area. The highest point of the
sign may not be more than eight feet above ground level.
      (3)   Each religious institution/place of worship located within the
corporate limits of this city, subject to approval of size, location and type
by the City Manager or designee, may construct and maintain a maximum of three
directional signs on municipal rights-of-way. Not more than one such sign may
be installed or maintained at any intersection.
      (4)   Each of the following may install and maintain one ground sign
subject to the provisions of §
157.22 on the property to which the sign pertains, with the exception of a
dynamic display sign, which requires the issuance of a conditional use permit
(CUP) as outlined in §
157.24 herein:
         (a)   Schools and publicly owned facilities listed in §
154.036(B) and (C) and §
154.051 (B) and (C).
         (b)   Religious institution/place of worship, and city buildings
listed in §
154.037(A) and (C) and §
154.052(B).
   (B)   Commercial. The following signs are allowed in a “C” Commercial
District and may be installed after obtaining a permit and paying a required
license fee.
      (1)   One identification sign per right-of-way frontage per commercial
establishment. The sign may have no more than two square feet of surface area
per lineal foot of business frontage, up to a maximum of 150 square feet. The
total area of all wall signs affixed to a wall may not exceed 15% of the total
area of that wall. Dynamic display signs are conditionally permitted with the
issuance of a conditional use permit, subject to the provisions of §
157.24. If a dynamic display sign is installed, only one identification sign is
permitted for that property, regardless of right-of-way frontage.
      (2)   Upon submittal of a comprehensive sign plan, and subject to
approval of the City Council, a shopping center over 75,000 square feet may
have major anchor/tenant ground sign(s) depending upon the number of major
anchors. The total sign area shall not exceed 300 square feet.
      (3)   Upon submittal of a comprehensive sign plan, and subject to
approval of the City Council, a shopping center over 75,000 square feet may be
allowed additional wall signs for commercial establishments that need
additional exposure from different vantage points. The number of additional
wall signs will not exceed one-half the total number of commercial
establishments and will be allowed a surface sign area of one-half of that
which is allowed.
      (4)   A commercial establishment located within a shopping center, having
no outside frontage, will be allowed a surface sign area of one-half of that
which it would be allowed if it had outside frontage.
      (5)   Commercial establishments will be allowed, in addition to all other
authorized signs, one historical identification symbol, not exceeding five
square feet in sign surface area.
      (6)   Subject to approval of the City Council, and as a conditional use,
a movie theater may have a marquee. The total sign area for a marquee sign
shall not exceed 200 square feet.
      (7)   Subject to approval of the City Council, and submittal of a
comprehensive sign plan, a strip mall under 75,000 square feet and a shopping
center over 75,000 square feet, may be allowed a ground sign with a surface
sign area not to exceed 150 square feet.
      (8)   Upon submittal of a comprehensive sign plan, and subject to
approval of the City Council, a major anchor/tenant over 50,000 square feet in
a shopping center over 75,000 square feet may have a wall sign that is up to
four times the sign surface area of which is allowed for other commercial
establishments.
      (9)   Subject to approval of the City Manager or designee, a searchlight
is permitted for a special event.
   (C)   Light industrial. The following signs are permitted in a Light
Industrial District and may be installed after obtaining a permit and paying
the required license fee.
      (1)   One business or identification canopy or wall sign per right-of-way
frontage as regulated in division (B)(1) above and one free-standing sign as
regulated and permitted in §
157.22. Dynamic display signs are conditionally permitted with the issuance of
a conditional use permit, subject to the provisions of §
157.24.
      (2)   In a district zoned for light industrial businesses, signs
containing one square foot for every 100 square feet of ground floor space will
be allowed up to a total sign surface area of 150 square feet.
   (D)   Recreational open space. The following signs are permitted in a
Recreational Open Space District and may be constructed after obtaining a
permit and paying the required license fee.
      (1)   Subject to approval of the City Council, only ground and wall signs
are allowed in this district. The ground sign may have a sign surface area not
to exceed 150 square feet.
      (2)   Subject to the approval of the City Council, and as a conditional
use, dynamic display signs are conditionally permitted with the issuance of a
conditional use permit, subject to the provisions of §
157.24.
(Prior Code, § 155.30) (Ord. 2014-07, passed 12-9-2014; Ord. 2023-01, passed 7-
11-2023)
§ 157.26 ADJUSTMENTS AND APPEALS.
   (A)   Composition. The Commission of Adjustments and Appeals will be
comprised of all of the members of the Planning Commission.
   (B)   Powers and duties. The Commission will hear and make recommendations
to the Council regarding:
      (1)   Appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative officer in
the enforcement of this chapter; and
      (2)   Petitions for variances from the literal provisions of ordinances
in instances where their strict enforcement would cause hardship because of
circumstances unique to the individual property under consideration. The
Commission may recommend the granting of such variances only when it appears
upon evidence presented that:
         (a)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the
other property in the neighborhood or city; and
         (b)   A particular hardship to the applicant would result if the
strict letter of the regulations are adhered to; or
         (c)   The conditions upon which the application for a variance is
based are unique to the sign or to the parcel of land for which the variance is
sought and are not applicable, generally, to other property within the same
land use classification.
(Prior Code, § 155.31) (Ord. 08-002, passed 4-22-2008)
§ 157.27 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Variances granted. Variances may be granted by the City Council after
a public hearing is held by the Planning Commission and a recommendation is
made to the City Council. Notices will be given, and a public hearing will be
held, in the manner provided in §§
30.45 through
30.48. The installation of sign(s) must take place within one year after a
variance has been granted by the City Council.
   (B)   Majority vote. A majority affirmative vote of the City Council members
present is required to approve a variance.
   (C)   Fee. An application for a variance must be accompanied by the fee
provided in §
33.060.
(Prior Code, § 155.32) (Ord. 08-002, passed 4-22-2008)
§ 157.28 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   Legal conforming. All signs existing as of January 1, 2009 conforming
to the requirements of this chapter and not requiring a permit under the
provisions of this chapter, may be maintained so long as they continue to
comply with the provisions of this chapter, as it may from time to time be
amended.
   (B)   Legal nonconforming signs. All signs existing as of January 1, 2009,
which would be prohibited by this chapter, or which would require a permit
under this chapter but have not received a permit, will be deemed to be legal
nonconforming signs. Legal nonconforming signs may continue to exist without a
permit and without constituting a violation of this chapter until one or more
of the following occurs:
      (1)   The sign is structurally altered (except for normal maintenance) in
a way which makes the sign less in compliance with this chapter than it was
before the alteration;
      (2)   The sign is relocated to a position making it less in compliance
with this chapter than it was before the relocation;
      (3)   The sign is replaced; or
      (4)   Any new primary sign is constructed or placed in connection with
the enterprise using the legal nonconforming sign.
(Prior Code, § 155.33) (Ord. 08-002, passed 4-22-2008)
§ 157.29 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   If a sign is in violation of this chapter, or is in danger of falling,
or is otherwise a menace to the safety of persons or property, the City Manager
or designee may give to the owner of the property on which the sign is located,
written notice specifying the violation, ordering the cessation to the
violation and requiring either the removal of the sign or remedial work in the
time and manner specified in the notice.
   (B)   In the event of failure to comply with the notice within 30 days, the
City Manager or designee may remove the sign or cause such remedial work to be
done.
   (C)   The cost of the work performed by the city must be paid to the city by
the owner of the property on which the sign is located. If payment is not made
within 30 days after a statement for such costs is sent to the owner, the costs
may be assessed against the property by certifying the costs to the County
Treasurer for collection in the same manner as real estate taxes.
   (D)   If a sign which has been removed is not reclaimed and costs paid
within 30 days after its removal, the sign may be sold or otherwise disposed of
by the city.
   (E)   If a sign is found to be an immediate danger to the public because of
its unsafe condition, it may be removed without notice, and written notice of
removal and reasons for the removal will be given to the property owner of the
property on which the sign is located as soon as possible.
(Prior Code, § 155.34) (Ord. 08-002, passed 4-22-2008)
§ 157.30 TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   (A)   All temporary signs shall require a permit under this section.
Required regulations applying to permanent signs shall apply to temporary
signs, except where this section specifically provides otherwise.
   (B)   Temporary sign permits may be issued by the Zoning Administrator for
use only within commercial, light industrial, Planned Unit Development (PUD),
and Recreation/Open Space (R/OS) zones.
   (C)   Temporary signs and sign structures shall be constructed of durable
all-weather materials, such as, but not limited to, steel, coreaplast plastic
foam-core, alumacore, polycarbonate (Lexan), vinyl, and nylon.
   (D)   Every temporary sign permitted under the section shall be placed
entirely on the property of the principal business use which it is identifying.
   (E)   No more than two temporary signs, obtained by a single permit,
advertising the same business or entity shall be upon any single property at
the same time.
   (F)   The surface area of all temporary sign(s) issued under a single permit
shall not exceed 32 square feet of surface area, measuring one side of each
two-sided sign. This area shall be in addition to permanent, window, or other
signage allowed elsewhere in this section.
   (G)   No temporary sign, if freestanding, shall be greater than eight feet
in height, measured from the natural grade at the base of the sign to the top
of any component of the sign or sign structure.
   (H)   During any calendar year, temporary signs may be in place no more than
30 consecutive days, and through the issuance of a maximum of three permits
issued, temporary signs may be displayed for a total not exceeding 90 days per
calendar.
   (I)   Temporary signs shall be set back a minimum often feet from a property
line and in no case shall be placed closer than 15 feet from any roadway.
   (J)   In addition to the permit time allowances in this section, a property
that has a newly established business may display one temporary sign for 30
days leading up to and/or following the opening date. A property that has a
business that is going out of business may display a temporary sign for 30 days
leading up to the final date of operations.
(Ord. 2023-01, passed 7-11-2023)
   St. Anthony - Parallel References
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Minnesota Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES
 
M.S. Cite Code Section
M.S. Cite             Code Section
Chapter 13            32.50
13.37, Subd. 1(b)     94.26
13D.001 et seq.       32.26
13D.01                115.002
14.57—14.69         116.14
15.73, Subd. 3        94.03
15.99                 90.18
18K.02, Subd. 3       117.03
Chapter 84            73.15
88.01—88.22         97.37
88.75                 97.37
88.76                 97.37
103B.231              155.08
103B.255              155.08
Chapter 103F          156.01
103G.005, Subd. 15    155.04
115A.03, Subd. 7      151.04
116.06, Subd. 11      151.04
120A.05               154.188
120A.24               154.188
144.50—144.703      114.020
144.391               115.001
144.411 et seq.       116.10
144.412               115.001
144A.01, Subd. 5      154.007
Chapter 151           117.04
151.01, Subd. 18      117.03
                      117.01;
151.72                117.02;
                      117.99
151.72, Subd. 1(c)    117.03
151.72, Subd. 1(h)    117.03
151.72, Subd. 1(j)    117.03
151.72, Subd. 3       117.16
151.72, Subd. 4       117.16
151.72, Subd. 5       117.16
151.72, Subd. 5a      117.17
151.72, Subd. 6       117.19
                      131.01;
Chapter 152           131.21;
                      152.13
152.01                131.21
152.01, Subd. 9       131.20
152.02                117.16
152.02, Schedules I—131.37
152.0263, Subd. 5     154.188
152.0974              131.03;
                      131.20
152.11                131.03;
                      131.20
152.12                131.03;
                      131.20
152.18                131.20
152.22                154.007
160.02                94.32
160.2715(a)(1)        95.15
168.27                113.46
Chapter 168A          113.46
168B.011, Subd. 3     92.03;
                      154.179
Chapter 169           70.02;
                      73.23
169.011, Subd. 92     70.01;
                      71.30
169.87                95.01
169.999               10.98
Chapter 171           70.03
171.03                70.03
Chapter 201           30.16
203B.121              30.17
216B.02               94.03
216B.02, Subd. 4      94.03
216B.02, Subd. 6      94.03
216B.34               94.27
Chapter 216D          94.06
216D.01—216D.09     94.18;
                      94.29
216D.04, Subd. 3      94.03
237.16                94.01
237.162               94.01;
                      94.03
237.162, Subd. 2      94.03
237.162, Subd. 4      94.03
237.162, Subd. 8(3)   94.20
237.163               94.01;
                      94.03
237.163, Subd. 2(b)   94.02
237.163, Subd. 4      94.24
237.163, Subd. 4(c)   94.19
237.163, Subd. 4(f)   94.19
237.163, Subd. 8      94.20
237.79                94.01
237.81                94.01
Chapter 238           94.03
238.086               94.01
243.166               132.02;
                      132.04
243.167               132.04
245.462, Subd. 23     154.188
Chapter 245A          154.122;
                      154.142
273.124(1c)           152.09
278.01—278.14       114.073
292(1)                151.13
297F.01, Subd. 3      115.002
299F.011              97.01
300.06                94.09
Chapter 303           114.022
303.06                113.05;
                      113.38
Chapter 308A          94.03
325J.04, Subd. 2      113.46
325J.095              113.46
326B.082, Subd. 16    150.999
326B.091—326B.998   112.51
326B.101—326B.16    150.015;
                      150.018
326B.103, Subd. 11    150.016
326B.103, Subd. 13    150.016
326B.133, Subd. 1     150.016
326B.148              150.016;
                      150.017
326B.33, Subd. 1(1)   150.031
326B.33, Subd. 2(b)   150.031
326B.36, Subd. 3      150.031
326B.36, Subd. 6      150.030
326B.43, Subd. 2(n)   150.016
326B.44               50.03
327.14, Subd. 3       154.007
327.31, Subd. 6       154.007
Chapter 329           115.067
Chapter 333           114.022
333.01                113.05;
                      113.38
Chapter 336           113.46
                      116.09;
Chapter 340A          116.16;
                      152.13
                      110.02;
340A.101              116.08;
                      116.10;
                      116.30
340A.402              116.08
340A.409              116.05
340A.414              116.10
340A.503              116.35
340A.504              116.10;
                      116.34
340A.801              116.05
Chapter 342           154.188
342.01                115.002,
                      154.188
342.01, Subd. 50      154.188
342.11                154.188
342.13                154.188
342.13(c)             154.188
342.17                154.188
342.22                154.188
342.22, Subd. 4(b)    154.188
342.22, Subd. 5(e)    154.188
342.24                154.188
342.39, Subd. 2       154.188
347.50                91.32
347.50, Subd. 2       91.30
347.50, Subd. 3       91.30
347.50, Subd. 2       91.30
347.50, Subd. 3       91.30
347.50—347.565      91.32;
                      91.35
                      113.22;
Chapter 349           113.46;
                      116.10
349.30                116.10
Chapter 349A          113.22;
                      113.46
                      113.11;
                      113.23;
                      113.45;
364.03, Subd. 2       113.51;
                      114.026;
                      114.072;
                      114.076
                      113.11;
                      113.45;
364.03, Subd. 3       114.026;
                      114.072;
                      114.076
364.06                32.50;
                      111.02
364.09                32.50;
                      111.02
394.34                90.39
415.11                31.12
Chapter 429           154.179
                      33.078;
429.061               33.107;
                      92.10
429.071               33.107
429.081               33.107
                      33.075;
                      33.106;
429.101               92.01;
                      92.10;
                      92.11;
                      95.35
444.075               33.106;
                      51.01
444.075, Subd. 2      51.06
444.075, Subd. 3      51.09
Chapter 453           94.03
Chapter 453A          94.03
461.12                115.011
Chapter 462           156.01
462.351—462.365     32.01;
                      155.01
462.355               90.39
462.357               154.188
462.357, Subd. 1e     154.227
462.357, Subd. 7      154.036;
                      154.051
462.367, Subd. 14     154.188
462.3593              154.189
462.3593, Subd. 9     154.189
463.15—463.26       92.11
463.15—463.261      131.44
463.16                90.20
463.17                92.09
471.924               113.05;
                      113.38
500.30                154.187
514.67                92.11
Chapter 515           152.02;
                      154.007
Chapter 515A          152.02
Chapter 515B          152.02
Chapter 609           152.13
609.02, Subd. 7a      91.30
617.241               130.37
Chapter 624           152.13
                      114.065;
624.20, Subd. 1(c)    114.066;
                      130.65;
                      130.66
624.711—624.717     130.19
624.712               113.22;
                      113.46
624.714               130.17
624.715               130.17
626.862               10.20
631.48                10.99
                      
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section Code Section
Prior Code Section Code Section
30.01              30.01
30.02              30.02
30.03              30.03
30.15              30.15
30.16              30.16
30.17              30.17
30.30              30.30
30.31              30.31
30.32              30.32
30.33              30.33
30.34              30.34
30.45              30.45
30.46              30.46
30.47              30.47
30.48              30.48
31.01              31.01
31.02              31.02
31.03              31.03
31.04              31.04
31.05              31.05
31.06              31.06
31.07              31.07
31.08              31.08
31.09              31.09
31.10              31.10
31.11              31.11
31.12              31.12
32.01              32.01
32.02              32.02
32.03              32.03
32.04              32.04
32.05              32.05
32.06              32.06
32.07              32.07
32.08              32.08
32.20              32.20
32.21              32.21
32.22              32.22
32.23              32.23
32.24              32.24
32.25              32.25
32.26              32.26
32.27              32.27
32.28              32.28
32.29              32.29
32.39              32.30
32.40              32.45
32.41              32.46
32.42              32.47
32.43              32.48
32.44              32.49
32.50              32.50
33.001             33.001
33.002             33.002
33.015             33.015
33.016             33.016
33.017             33.017
33.018             33.018
33.020             33.019
33.021             33.020
33.022             33.021
33.035             33.035
33.036             33.036
33.038             33.037
33.039             33.038
33.040             33.039
33.043             33.040
33.044             33.041
33.055             33.055
33.056             33.056
33.058             33.057
33.059             33.058
33.060             33.059
33.061             33.060
33.062             33.061
33.075             33.075
33.076             33.076
33.077             33.077
33.078             33.078
33.079             33.079
33.090             33.090
33.105             33.105
33.106             33.106
33.107             33.107
50.01              50.01
50.02              50.02
50.03              50.03
50.04              50.04
50.05              50.05
50.06              50.06
50.07              50.07
50.08              50.08
50.09              50.09
50.10              50.10
50.11              50.11
50.12              50.12
50.13              50.13
50.14              50.14
50.15              50.15
50.16              50.16;
                   50.99
50.30              50.30
50.31              50.31
50.32              50.32
50.33              50.33
50.34              50.34
50.35              50.35
50.36              50.36
50.37              50.37
50.38              50.38
50.39              50.39
50.40              50.40
50.41              50.41
50.42              50.42
50.43              50.43
50.44              50.44
50.45              50.45
50.46              50.46
50.47              50.47
50.48              50.99
51.01              51.01
51.02              51.02
51.03              51.03
51.04              51.04
51.05              51.05
51.06              51.06
51.07              51.07
51.08              51.08
51.09              51.09
51.10              51.10
52.01              52.01
52.02              52.02
52.03              52.03
52.04              52.04
52.05              52.05
52.06              52.06
52.07              52.07
52.08              52.08
52.09              52.09
52.10              52.10
52.11              52.11
53.01              53.01
54.01              54.01
54.02              54.02
54.03              54.03
54.04              54.04
70.01              70.01
70.02              70.02
70.03              70.03
70.04              70.04
70.05              70.05
70.06              70.06
70.07              70.07
70.08              70.08
70.09              70.09
70.10              70.10
70.25              70.25
70.26              70.26
70.27              70.27
70.28              70.28
70.29              70.29
70.40              70.40
70.41              70.41
71.01              73.01
71.02              73.02
71.03              73.03
72.01              71.01
72.15              71.15
72.30              71.30
72.31              71.31
72.32              71.32
72.33              71.33
72.34              71.34
72.35              71.35
72.36              71.36
72.37              71.37
73.01              72.01
73.02              72.02
73.03              72.03
73.04              72.04
73.05              72.05
74.01              73.15
74.02              73.16
74.03              73.17
74.04              73.18
74.05              73.19
74.06              73.20
74.07              73.21
74.08              73.22
74.09              73.23
74.10              73.24
74.11              73.25
90.01              90.01
90.02              90.15
90.03              90.16
90.04              90.17
90.05              90.18
90.06              90.19
90.07              90.20
90.08              90.21
90.09              90.22
90.10              90.23
91.02              91.01
91.04              91.02
91.05              91.03
91.20              91.15
91.21              91.16
91.35              91.31
91.36              91.32
91.38              91.34
91.39              91.35
91.40              91.36
91.41              91.37
91.42              91.38
91.43              91.39
91.44              91.40
91.45              91.41
91.55              91.55
91.56              91.56
91.57              91.57
92.01              92.11
92.02              92.01
92.15              92.02
92.16              92.03
92.17              92.04
92.18              92.05
92.19              92.06
92.21              92.07
92.22              92.08
92.23              92.09
92.24              92.10
93.01              93.01
93.02              93.02
94.01              95.01
94.15              95.15
94.16              95.16
94.30              95.30
94.31              95.31
94.32              95.32
94.33              95.33
94.34              95.34
94.35              95.35
94.50              95.50
94.51              95.51
94.52              95.52
94.53              95.53
95.01              96.01
95.02              96.02
96.01              94.01
96.02              94.02;
                   94.99
96.03              94.03
96.04              94.04
96.05              94.05
96.06              94.06
96.07              94.07
96.08              94.08
96.09              94.09
96.10              94.10
96.11              94.11
96.12              94.12
96.13              94.13
96.14              94.14
96.15              94.15
96.16              94.16
96.17              94.17
96.18              94.18
96.19              94.19
96.20              94.20
96.21              94.21
96.22              94.22
96.23              94.23
96.24              94.24
96.25              94.25
96.26              94.26
96.27              94.27
96.28              94.28
96.29              94.29
96.30              94.30
96.31              94.31
96.32              94.33
96.33              94.34
96.34              94.35
96.35              94.36
96.37              94.37
97.01              97.01
97.02              97.02;
                   97.99
97.03              97.03
97.04              97.04
97.05              97.05
97.06              97.06
97.07              97.07
97.08              97.08
97.09              97.09
97.10              97.10
97.11              97.11
97.12              97.12
97.13              97.13
97.14              97.14
97.30              97.25
97.31              97.26
97.32              97.27
97.33              97.28
97.34              97.29
97.35              97.30
97.36              97.31
97.37              97.32
97.38              97.33
97.39              97.34
97.40              97.35
97.41              97.36
97.42              97.37
98.010             90.35
98.020             90.36
98.030             90.38
98.040             90.37
98.050             90.39
98.060             90.40
98.070             90.41
98.080             90.42
98.090             90.43
98.100             90.44
98.110             90.45
98.120             90.46
98.130             90.47
98.140             90.48
98.150             90.49
110.01             110.01
110.02             110.02
111.001            111.01
111.002            111.02
111.003            111.03
111.004            111.04
111.005            111.05
111.006            111.06
111.007            111.07
111.008            111.08
111.009            111.09
111.010            111.10
111.011            111.11
111.012            111.12
111.013            111.13
111.014            111.14
111.025            114.001
111.026            114.002
111.027            114.003
111.028            114.004
111.029            114.005
111.030            114.006
111.045            115.001
111.046            115.002
111.047            115.003
111.048            115.004
111.049            115.005
111.050            115.006
111.052            115.007
111.053            115.008
111.054            115.009
111.055            115.010
111.055            115.999
111.056            115.012
111.059            115.013
111.110            115.025
111.111            115.026
111.112            115.027
111.113            115.028
111.114            115.029
111.115            115.030
111.116            115.031
111.117            115.032
111.118            115.033
111.119            115.034
111.120            115.035
111.121            115.036
111.150            112.30
111.151            112.31
111.152            112.32
111.153            112.33
111.154            112.34
111.155            112.35
111.156            112.36
111.157            112.37
111.170            114.050
111.171            114.051
111.172            114.052
111.185            112.01
111.186            112.02
111.187            112.03
111.188            112.04
111.189            112.05
111.190            112.06
111.191            112.07
111.192            112.08
111.193            112.09
111.194            112.10
111.195            112.11
111.196            112.12
111.197            112.13
111.198            112.14
111.199            112.15
111.200            112.16
111.201            112.17
111.202            112.18
111.215            115.050
111.216            115.051
111.217            115.052
111.218            115.053
111.219            115.054
111.230            112.50
111.231            112.51
111.232            112.52
111.233            112.53
111.234            112.54
111.235            112.55
111.236            112.56
111.250            113.01
111.251            113.02
111.252            113.03
111.253            113.04
111.254            113.05
111.255            113.06
111.256            113.07
111.257            113.08
111.258            113.09
111.259            113.10
111.260            113.11
111.261            113.12
111.262            113.13
111.263            113.14
111.264            113.15
111.265            113.16
111.266            113.17
111.267            113.18
111.268            113.19
111.269            113.20
111.270            113.21
111.271            113.22
111.272            113.23
111.273            113.99
111.285            113.35
111.286            113.36
111.287            113.37
111.288            113.38
111.289            113.39
111.290            113.40
111.291            113.41
111.292            113.42
111.293            113.43
111.294            113.44
111.295            113.45
111.296            113.46;
                   113.99
111.297            113.47
111.298            113.48
111.299            113.49
111.300            113.50
111.301            113.51
111.302            113.99
111.340            114.020
111.341            114.021
111.342            114.022
111.343            114.023
111.344            114.024
111.345            114.025
111.346            114.026
111.347            114.027
111.348            114.028
111.349            114.029
111.350            114.030
111.351            114.031
111.352            114.032
111.353            114.033
111.354            114.034
111.355            114.035
111.356            114.036
111.370            114.065
111.371            114.066
111.372            114.067
111.373            114.068
111.374            114.069
111.375            114.070
111.376            114.071
111.377            114.072
111.378            114.073
111.379            114.074
111.380            114.075
111.381            114.076
111.382            114.999
112.01             116.01
112.02             116.02
112.03             116.03
112.04             116.04
112.05             116.05
112.06             116.06
112.07             116.07
112.08             116.08
112.09             116.09
112.10             116.10
112.11             116.11
112.12             116.12
112.13             116.13
112.14             116.14
112.15             116.15
112.16             116.16
112.30             116.30
112.31             116.31
112.32             116.32
112.33             116.33
112.34             116.34
112.35             116.35
113.01             115.065
113.02             115.066
113.03             115.067
113.04             115.068
113.05             115.069
113.06             115.070
113.07             115.071
113.08             115.072
113.09             115.073
130.01             130.01
130.02             130.02
130.03             130.03
130.04             130.04
130.15             130.15
130.16             130.16
130.17             130.17
130.18             130.18
130.19             130.19
130.20             130.20
130.21             130.21
130.35             130.35
130.36             130.36
130.37             130.37
130.38             130.38
130.39             130.39
130.50             130.50
130.51             130.51
130.65             130.65
130.66             130.66
131.01             131.01
131.02             131.02
131.03             131.03
131.04             131.04
131.05             131.05
131.06             131.06
131.20             131.20;
                   131.99
131.21             131.21;
                   131.99
131.35             131.35
131.36             131.36
131.37             131.37
131.38             131.38
131.39             131.39
131.40             131.40
131.41             131.41
131.42             131.42
131.43             131.43
131.44             131.44
131.45             131.45
131.46             131.46
131.47             131.47
131.48             131.99
132.1              132.01
132.2              132.02
132.3              132.03
132.4              132.04
132.5              132.99
150.001            150.001
150.002            150.002
150.003            150.003
150.015            150.015
150.016            150.016
150.017            150.017
150.018            150.999
150.019            150.018
150.020            150.030
150.021            150.031
150.022            150.032
150.023            150.999
150.024            150.033
150.030            150.045
150.031            150.046
150.032            150.047
150.033            150.048
150.034            150.049
150.035            150.050
150.036            150.051
150.037            150.052
150.050            150.065
150.051            150.066
150.052            150.067
150.053            150.068
150.054            150.069
150.055            150.070
150.056            150.071
150.057            150.072
150.058            150.073
150.070            150.085
150.071            150.086
150.072            150.087
150.073            150.088
150.074            150.089
150.085            151.01
150.086            151.02
150.087            151.03
150.088            151.04
150.089            151.05
150.090            151.06
150.091            151.07
150.092            151.08
150.093            151.09
150.094            151.10
150.095            151.11
150.096            151.12
150.097            151.13
150.120            152.01
150.121            152.02
150.122            152.03
150.123            152.04
150.124            152.05
150.125            152.06
150.126            152.07
150.127            152.08
150.128            152.09
150.129            152.10
150.130            152.11
150.131            152.12
150.132            152.13
150.133            152.14
150.134            152.15
151.01             153.01
151.02             153.02
151.03             153.03
151.04             153.04
151.05             153.05
151.06             153.06
151.07             153.07
151.08             153.08
151.09             153.09
151.10             153.10
151.11             153.11
151.12             153.12
152.001            154.001
152.002            154.002
152.003            154.003
152.004            154.004
152.005            154.005
152.006            154.006
152.008            154.007
152.020            154.020
152.021            154.021
152.022            154.022
152.03             154.103
152.035            154.035
152.036            154.036
152.037            154.037
152.038            154.038
152.039            154.039
152.04             152.104
152.05             154.105
152.050            154.050
152.051            154.051
152.052            154.052
152.053            154.053
152.054            154.054
152.065            154.065
152.066            154.066
152.067            154.067
152.068            154.068
152.069            154.069
152.070            154.070
152.085            154.085
152.086            154.086
152.087            154.087
152.088            154.088
152.089            154.089
152.100            154.100
152.101            154.101
152.102            154.102
152.120            154.120
152.121            154.121
152.122            154.122
152.123            154.123
152.124            154.124
152.125            154.125
152.140            154.140
152.141            154.141
152.142            154.142
152.143            154.143
152.144            154.144
152.155            154.155
152.156            154.156
152.157            154.157
152.158            154.158
152.159            154.159
152.160            154.160
152.175            154.175
152.176            154.176
152.177            154.177
152.178            154.178
152.179            154.179
152.180            154.180
152.181            154.181
152.182            154.182
152.183            154.183
152.184            154.184
152.185            154.185
152.186            154.186
152.187            154.187
152.188            154.188
152.189            154.189
152.200            154.205
152.201            154.206
152.202            154.207
152.203            154.208
152.204            154.209
152.205            154.210
152.206            154.211
152.207            154.212
152.208            154.213
152.209            154.214
152.220            154.225
152.226            154.226
152.227            154.227
152.240            154.240
152.241            154.241
152.242            154.242
152.243            154.243
152.244            154.244
152.245            154.245
153.01             155.01
153.02             155.02
153.03             155.03
153.04             155.04
153.05             155.05
153.06             155.06
153.07             155.07
153.08             155.08
153.09             155.09
154.01             156.01
154.02             156.02
154.03             156.03
154.04             156.04
154.05             156.05
154.06             156.06
154.07             156.07
154.08             156.08
154.09             156.09
154.10             156.10
155.01             157.01
155.02             157.02
155.03             157.03
155.20             157.15
155.21             157.16
155.22             157.17
155.23             157.18
155.24             157.19
155.25             157.20
155.26             157.21
155.27             157.22
155.28             157.23
155.29             157.24
155.30             157.25
155.31             157.26
155.32             157.27
155.33             157.28
155.34             157.29
                   
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.   Date Passed Code Section
10-23-2012 - -         113.07
2012-11    - -         154.037;
                       154.039
2012-13    - -         33.058;
                       33.059
2013-02    - -         154.007;
                       154.158
2015-03    - -         116.15
                       154.007;
2015-04    - -         154.038;
                       154.053;
                       154.187
2016-01    - -         154.007
07-003     9-11-2007   31.01
07-005     11-13-2007  115.051
                       32.49;
                       97.01—
08-001     4-8-2008    97.14;
                       97.25—
                       97.37;
                       97.99
                       157.02;
                       157.03;
08-002     4-22-2008   157.15—
                       157.23;
                       157.26—
                       157.29
                       151.01—
                       151.05;
08-003     4-22-2008   151.07—
                       151.12;
                       152.01—
                       152.15
08-004     5-13-2008   33.059
08-005     5-27-2008   71.36
                       91.31;
                       91.32;
08-007     12-8-2008   91.34—
                       91.39;
                       91.41
                       50.30—
2009-002   2-24-2009   50.47;
                       50.99
2009-003   2-24-2009   32.04
                       32.48;
                       113.07;
2009-008   6-23-2009   113.40;
                       114.025;
                       114.069;
                       115.067
2009-005   7-28-2009   71.36
2009-006   11-24-2009  33.036
2009-007   11-24-2009  33.018
10-001     4-13-2010   157.18
2011-01    4-26-2011   115.002;
                       115.013
2011 03    6-28-2011   33.060
2011-05    6-28-2011   154.226
2011-06    6-28-2011   154.245
2012-01    1-24-2012   115.013
2012-04    4-10-2012   33.018;
                       33.036
2012-05    6-12-2012   30.17
2012-06    10-1-2012   32.07
                       32.48;
                       111.02;
2012-08    10-23-2012  113.40;
                       114.025;
                       114.069;
                       115.067
2012-11    11-12-2012  154.007
2012-09    11-13-2012  31.12
                       33.002;
2012-10    11-27-2012  33.038—
                       33.041
2012-13    1-8-2013    33.060
2013-01    9-10-2013   150.089
2013-05    11-12-2013  154.179;
                       154.180
2014-01    4-8-2014    154.225—
                       154.227
2014-02    9-3-2014    115.013
2014-03    9-3-2014    131.21;
                       131.99
                       32.04;
                       32.05;
2014-04    11-10-2014  32.07;
                       32.24;
                       32.26
2014-06    12-9-2014   33.018;
                       33.036
                       157.03;
                       157.16;
2014-07    12-9-2014   157.17;
                       157.22—
                       157.25
2015-05    10-13-2015  31.12
2016-01    3-8-2016    154.188
2016-02    5-24-2016   32.30
2016-03    5-24-2016   116.10
2016-04    7-16-2016   154.189
                       132.01—
2017-02    2-22-2017   132.04;
                       132.99
2017-01    3-14-2017   33.018;
                       33.036
2017-04    12-12-2017  33.018;
                       33.036
2018-02    12-11-2018  33.018;
                       33.036
2019-01    3-20-2019   32.07
                       32.20;
2019-02    4-23-2019   32.21;
                       32.25
2019-04    4-9-2019    33.060
                       94.03;
2019-05    4-9-2019    94.07;
                       94.11;
                       94.13
2019-06    5-28-2019   116.09
2019-07    7-23-2019   33.060
                       157.03;
2019-08    9-18-2019   157.16;
                       157.17
2019-09    10-8-2019   115.013
                       33.018;
2019-10    11-26-2019  33.037;
                       33.060
2019-11    11-15-2019  154.007;
                       154.177
2020-01    3-10-2020   151.13
2020-02    9-8-2020    91.32;
                       91.35
                       33.018;
2020-03    12-8-2020   33.036;
                       33.060
2020-04    12-8-2020   154.020
2021-01    4-13-2021   154.020
2021-02    4-27-2021   154.176
2021-03    8-13-2021   154.100—
                       154.105
2021-04    10-26-2021  154.020
                       33.018;
2021-05    12-14-2021  33.036;
                       33.060
2022-01    4-26-2022   154.120—
                       154.125
2022-02    4-26-2022   154.140—
                       154.144
                       33.041;
                       70.40;
                       94.03;
                       95.32;
                       97.10;
                       112.13;
                       112.51;
                       115.050;
2022-03    5-24-2022   150.065—
                       150.068;
                       151.06;
                       151.07;
                       151.10;
                       152.07; 154.176;
                       154.179;
                       155.04;
                       157.18
                       91.30;
                       91.56—
                       91.58;
                       94.02;
                       94.03;
2022-07    10-11-2022  94.32;
                       94.99;
                       150.086;
                       150.087;
                       157.17;
                       157.18
                       33.018;
                       33.036;
2022-08    12-13-2022  33.037;
                       33.060;
                       33.090
2022-09    1-24-2023   50.16
2022-10    1-10-2023   33.060
                       10.99;
                       94.03;
                       151.06;
                       151.10;
                       154.007;
2023-01    7-11-2023   154.176;
                       154.179;
                       154.190;
                       157.03;
                       157.18;
                       157.25;
                       157.30
                       150.015—
2023-02    7-11-2023   150.018;
                       150.999
                       117.01—
                       117.04;
2023-03    7-25-2023   117.15—
                       117.19;
                       117.99
2023-06    11-28-2023  115.002;
                       115.013
                       33.018;
                       33.036;
2023-10    12-12-2023  33.037;
                       33.060;
                       33.090
                       92.03;
                       92.05;
                       92.06;
                       151.06;
                       152.06;
2024-01    4-9-2024    152.07;
                       154.122;
                       154.142;
                       154.176;
                       154.183;
                       157.17
2024-02    7-9-2024    91.30,
                       91.56
2024-03    7-9-2024    154.188
2024-05    10-22-2024  154.188
2024-06    11-12-2024  154.141
                       33.018;
                       33.036;
2024-07    12-10-2024  33.037;
                       33.060;
                       33.090
                       115.003;
                       115.006;
2025-01    4-8-2025    115.008;
                       115.010—
                       115.013
                       33.001;
                       91.30;
                       91.56;
                       92.05;
                       97.36;
                       112.18;
2025-02    4-22-2025   115.067;
                       151.04;
                       151.10;
                       152.04;
                       152.05;
                       154.007;
                       157.18
2025-03    9-9-2025    154.179
2025-04    10-14-2025  91.32;
                       91.40
                       152.05;
                       152.08;
                       154.007;
                       154.036;
2025-05    10-28-2025  154.051;
                       154.066;
                       154.086;
                       154.088;
                       154.101;
                       154.102
                       152.05;
2025-06    10-28-2025  152.06;
                       152.09—
                       152.15
                      
 
