ST. BONIFACIUS, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-10 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance 2025-04, passed 9-3-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
CITY OF ST. BONIFACIUS
CITY OFFICIALS
Mayor                              Tim Eiler
Council                            Terrill Anderson
                                  Thomas Schufman
                                  Randy Ebert
                                  Carolyn Brooks
City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer Brenda Fisk
Assistant Clerk                    Kristine De Boer
Secretary/Receptionist             Tania Duke
Parks and Street Supervisor        Bruce Meuleners
Utility Supervisor                 Peter Hilgers
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF ST. BONIFACIUS
REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL
ORDINANCES OF THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH
CODE OF ORDINANCES, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
   WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the political
subdivision are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in
form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of
its affairs; and
   WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Minnesota empower and
authorize the political subdivision to revise, amend, restate, codify and
compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted
or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book
form; and
   WHEREAS, the Legislative Authority of the Political Subdivision has
authorized a general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances
of the Political Subdivision of a general and permanent nature and publication
of such ordinance in book form; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date.
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE POLITICAL
SUBDIVISION OF THE CITY OF ST. BONIFACIUS:
   Section 1.   The general ordinances of the Political Subdivision as revised,
amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as
and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the City of St. Bonifacius/
Minnesota."
   Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist
of the following titles:
            TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
            TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
            TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
            TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
            TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
            TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
            TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
            TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed
or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of
this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances
levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
   Section 4.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the
Political Subdivision is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such
Code of Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk.
   Section 5.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in
Section 6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places
of the ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations
therein contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly
signed, attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and
notices thereof as required by law have been given.
   Section 6.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
   PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Legislative Authority of the Political Subdivision
on this 3rd day of May, 2017.
   Mayor Ruotsinoja      Aye x    Nay       
   Council Anderson      Aye x    Nay       
   Council Bishop      Aye x    Nay       
   Council Brooks      Aye x    Nay       
   Council Smestad, Jr.      Aye x    Nay       
                        
                                                   /s/ Shawn Ruotsinoja
                                                    Shawn Ruotsinoja, Mayor
ATTEST:
/s/ Brenda Fisk
Brenda Fisk, Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Rules of interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Official time
   
10.11   Reasonable time
   
10.12   Ordinances repealed
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
   
10.18   Copies of code
   
10.19   Adoption of statutes and rules and supplements by reference
   
10.20   Enforcement
 
   
10.98   Supplemental administrative penalties
   
10.99   General penalty and enforcement
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city, as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the “St.
Bonifacius City Code”, for which designation “code of ordinances”, “codified
ordinances” or “code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter and section
headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to the
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “Traffic Code”. Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§
10.01”. Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of
state law.
   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances
of the city shall be by the following rules, unless that construction is
plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of
the same ordinance.
      (1)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or”, whenever the context requires.
      (2)   Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions or ordinance
requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as
the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the
act by an authorized agent or deputy.
      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
      (4)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ADMINISTRATOR/CLERK/TREASURER. The Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer of the
City of St. Bonifacius, Minnesota.
      CITY. The City of St. Bonifacius, Minnesota. The term CITY, when used in
this code, may also be used to refer to the City Council and its authorized
representatives.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This city code as modified by
amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or sections.
      COUNCIL. The City Council of St. Bonifacius, Minnesota.
      COUNTY. The County of Hennepin, Minnesota.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED. All terms shall mean a pledge
taken by the person and administered by an individual authorized by state law.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, OFFICIAL, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An
officer, office, employee, commission or department of the city unless the
context clearly requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as
applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Minnesota.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of
any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the
word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published.
   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.10 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within the city for the transaction of all city
business.
§ 10.11 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
§ 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this
indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.17 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   (A)   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date
of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those
laws.
   (B)   This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties
incurred or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The
liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or
forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted.
   (C)   In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway
rights-of-way, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance,
establishment or vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate
officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been
enacted.
§ 10.18 COPIES OF CODE.
   The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer for public inspection. The Administrator/Clerk/
Treasurer shall provide a copy for sale for a reasonable charge.
§ 10.19 ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES AND SUPPLEMENTS BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this code
of ordinances, all future amendments to any state or federal rules and statutes
adopted by reference in this code or referenced in this code are hereby adopted
by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this
code was adopted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the code to the
contrary.
   (B)   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting the code
of ordinances, all future supplements are hereby adopted as if they had been in
existence at the time this code was enacted, unless there is clear intention
expressed in the code to the contrary.
§ 10.20 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any licensed peace official of the city’s Police Department, or the
County Sheriff, or any Deputy Sheriff shall have the authority to enforce any
provision of this code.
   (B)   As permitted by M.S. § 626.862, as it may be amended from time to
time, the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall have the authority to
administer and enforce this code. In addition, under that statutory authority,
certain individuals designated within the code or by the City Administrator/
Clerk/Treasurer or City Council shall have the authority to administer and
enforce the provisions specified. All and any person or persons designated may
issue a citation in lieu of arrest or continued detention to enforce any
provision of the code.
   (C)   The City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer and any city official or
employee designated by this code who has the responsibility to perform a duty
under this code may, with the permission of a licensee of a business or owner
of any property or resident of a dwelling, or other person in control of any
premises, inspect or otherwise enter any property to enforce compliance with
this code.
   (D)   If the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of a
premises objects to the inspection of or entrance to the property, the City
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer, peace official or any employee or official
charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon a
showing that probable cause exists for the issuance of a valid search warrant
from a court of competent jurisdiction, petition and obtain a search warrant
before conducting the inspection or otherwise entering the property. This
warrant shall be only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted
to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people are being complied with
and to enforce these provisions only, and no criminal charges shall be made as
a result of the warrant. No warrant shall be issued unless there be probable
cause to issue the warrant. Probable cause occurs if the search is reasonable.
Probable cause does not depend on specific knowledge of the condition of a
particular property.
   (E)   Every licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of property
within the city shall permit at reasonable times inspections of or entrance to
the property by the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer or any other authorized
city official or employee only to determine whether the provisions of this code
enacted to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people are being
complied with and to enforce these provisions. Unreasonable refusal to permit
the inspection of or entrance to the property shall be grounds for termination
of any and all permits, licenses or city service to the property. Mailed notice
shall be given to the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of
the property, stating the grounds for the termination, and the licensee, owner,
resident or other person in control of the property shall be given an
opportunity to appear before the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer to object
to the termination before it occurs, subject to appeal of the City
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer’s decision to the City Council at a regularly
scheduled or special meeting.
   (F)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of
the city to enter private property in urgent emergency situations where there
is an imminent danger in order to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
§ 10.98 SUPPLEMENTAL ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.
   (A)   In addition to those administrative penalties established in this code
and the enforcement powers granted in §
10.20 of this chapter, the City Council is authorized to create by resolution,
adopted by a majority of the members of the Council, supplemental
administrative penalties. Such resolution may not proscribe administrative
penalties for traffic offenses designated by M.S. § 169.999, as it may be
amended from time to time.
   (B)   These administrative penalty procedures in this section are intended
to provide the public and the city with an informal, cost effective and
expeditious alternative to traditional criminal charges for violations of
certain provisions of this code. The procedures are intended to be voluntary on
the part of those who have been charged with those offenses.
   (C)   Administrative penalties for violations of various provisions of the
code, other than those penalties established in the code or in statutes that
are adopted by reference, may be established from time to time by resolution of
a majority of the members of the City Council. In order to be effective, an
administrative penalty for a particular violation must be established before
the violation occurred.
   (D)   In the discretion of the peace official, City Administrator/Clerk/
Treasurer or other person giving notice of an alleged violation of a provision
of this code, in a written notice of an alleged violation, sent by first class
mail to the person who is alleged to have violated the code, the person giving
notice may request the payment of a voluntary administrative penalty for the
violation directly to the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer within 14 days of
the notice of the violation. In the sole discretion of the person giving the
notice of the alleged violation, the time for payment may be extended an
additional 14 days, whether or not requested by the person to whom the notice
has been given. In addition to the administrative penalty, the person giving
notice may request in the notice to the alleged violator to adopt a compliance
plan to correct the situation resulting in the alleged violation and may
provide that if the alleged violator corrects the situation resulting in the
alleged violation within the time specified in the notice, that the payment of
the administrative penalty will be waived.
   (E)   At any time before the payment of the administrative penalty is due,
the person who has been given notice of an alleged violation may request to
appear before the City Council to contest the request for payment of the
penalty. After a hearing before the Council, the Council may determine to
withdraw the request for payment or to renew the request for payment. Because
the payment of the administrative penalty is voluntary, there shall be no
appeal from the decision of the Council.
   (F)   At any time after the date the payment of the administrative penalty
is due, if the administrative penalty remains unpaid or the situation creating
the alleged violation remains uncorrected, the city, through its Attorney, may
bring criminal charges in accordance with state law and this code. Likewise,
the city, in its discretion, may bring criminal charges in the first instance,
rather than requesting the payment of an administrative penalty, even if a
penalty for the particular violation has been established by Council
resolution. If the administrative penalty is paid, or if any requested
correction of the situation resulting in the violation is completed, no
criminal charges shall be initiated by the city for the alleged violation.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for
any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota Statutes
specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90 days
or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which
is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
   (C)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time, in
either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
   (D)   The failure of any official or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the official or employee
to the penalty imposed for a violation.
   (E)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section or in §
10.98 of this chapter, if any person, firm or corporation fails to comply with
any provision of this code, the Council or any city official designated by it,
may institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct
or abate the violation.
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   CITY COUNCIL
      
31.   CITY ADMINISTRATOR/CLERK/TREASURER
      
32.   ORGANIZATIONS
      
33.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
      
34.   GENERAL POLICIES
CHAPTER 30: CITY COUNCIL
Section
   
30.01   Meetings
   
30.02   Presiding officer
   
30.03   Minutes
   
30.04   Order of business
   
30.05   Agenda
   
30.06   Quorum
   
30.07   Voting
   
30.08   Communications
   
30.09   Committees
   
30.10   Suspensions and amendments of rules
   
30.11   Elections and terms of Council members
   
30.12   Salaries
§ 30.01 MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings of the Council shall be held on the first and third
Wednesdays of each month at 7:00 p.m. Any regular meeting falling on a holiday
shall be held on the next following Tuesday at the same time and place. All
meetings, both special and regular, shall be held at the city office unless the
notice of a special meeting designates a different location.
   (B)   Special meetings of the Council may be called by the Mayor or any two
members by notifying the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer. The City
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall immediately notify all other members, at
least 72 hours in advance, of the special meeting. A notice of a special
meeting shall be posted in a conspicuous public place at least 72 hours in
advance of the meeting.
   (C)   Closed meetings of the City Council shall be a closed agenda business
meeting where the Council may deal with administrative concerns.
   (D)   At the first regular meeting of the year, the Council shall do each of
the following:
      (1)   Designate the depositories of funds;
      (2)   Designate the official newspaper;
      (3)   Select the acting Mayor; and
      (4)   Appoint all such officers and officials and members of boards and
commissions as may be necessary.
(1994 Code, § 5-1)
§ 30.02 PRESIDING OFFICER.
   (A)   The Mayor, or the acting Mayor in his or her absence, shall preside at
all Council meetings. In the absence of both, the City Administrator/Clerk/
Treasurer shall preside until the Council members choose one of their number to
act temporarily as presiding officer.
   (B)   The presiding officer shall preserve order and enforce the rules of
procedure, according to “Robert’s Rules of Order”.
   (C)   The rulings of the presiding officer are subject to appeal from
Council members. Any member may appeal a ruling by the presiding officer and,
if the appeal is seconded, the member may speak to the issue one time. The
ruling may be explained by the presiding officer, but no other member may
participate in the discussion. The appeal shall be sustained if approved by a
majority of the members present. The presiding officer may not vote on the
appeal.
   (D)   The presiding officer shall not be deprived of any of the privileges
such as moving, seconding or debating by reason of acting as the presiding
officer.
(1994 Code, § 5-2)
§ 30.03 MINUTES.
   (A)   The minutes of each Council meeting shall be kept by the City
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer or other person assigned to this task.
   (B)   Ordinances, resolutions and claims need not be recorded in full in
minutes if they appear in full in other permanent records.
   (C)   Copies of the minutes shall be sent to each member and other persons
directly involved as soon as practicable after being reduced to typewritten
form.
   (D)   The minutes shall be approved as written or as amended at the next
Council meeting.
(1994 Code, § 5-3)
§ 30.04 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   Each meeting of the Council shall convene at the time and place
appointed and business shall be conducted in the following order:
      (1)   Call to order;
      (2)   Roll call;
      (3)   Approval of minutes;
      (4)   Public hearings;
      (5)   Petitions, requests and communications;
      (6)   Ordinances and resolutions;
      (7)   Reports of officers, boards and committees;
      (8)   Claims and bills;
      (9)   Unfinished business;
      (10)   New business;
      (11)   Miscellaneous; and
      (12)   Adjournment.
   (B)   The order of business may be varied by the presiding officer, but all
public hearings shall be held at the time specified in the public notice of
hearing.
(1994 Code, § 5-4)
§ 30.05 AGENDA.
   An agenda of business for each regular meeting shall be prepared and filed
in the office of the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer not later than noon of
the Friday preceding the next meeting. The agenda shall be prepared according
to the order of business and, if possible, distributed to all concerned
persons. Only that business which is on the agenda shall be considered unless
the Council approves the consideration by a majority vote of members present.
(1994 Code, § 5-5)
§ 30.06 QUORUM.
   At all Council meetings, three members shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.
(1994 Code, § 5-6)
§ 30.07 VOTING.
   (A)   The votes of the members may be by voice vote, standing vote or any
other manner which signifies the intention of the members. If the vote is not
unanimous, there shall be a roll call vote of the entire Council for recording
in the minutes. If any member is present and does not wish to cast a vote, the
minutes shall indicate the person’s name and vote which shall be recorded as
“abstained”.
   (B)   Three votes in favor shall be necessary for the approval of any
ordinance unless a larger number is required by statute.
(1994 Code, § 5-7)
§ 30.08 COMMUNICATIONS.
   (A)   Every ordinance and resolution shall be presented in writing and shall
be read in full before a vote is taken thereon, except when reading in full is
dispensed with by unanimous consent. All motions shall be stated in full and
recorded in the minutes before they are submitted to a vote. All petitions and
communications shall be read in full and then shall be recorded by title in the
minutes before being filed with the minutes in the office of the City
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer.
   (B)   Every ordinance and resolution passed shall be signed by the Mayor,
attested by the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer, and filed in the ordinance
or resolution book. Proof of publication of every ordinance shall be attached
to and filed with the ordinance.
   (C)   Every ordinance or resolution repealing a previous action shall give
the number, if any, and the title of the resolution to be repealed. No
ordinance or resolution shall be amended or repealed by reference to the title
alone. If only a part of an ordinance or resolution is to be amended or
repealed, that part shall be referred to in each and every part by title and
number. The amending or repealing ordinance shall be sufficiently explained so
the general public may interpret the communication in their interest.
(1994 Code, § 5-8)
§ 30.09 COMMITTEES.
   The Council may create such committees, standing or special, as it deems
necessary. Such committees shall consist of as many members and perform such
duties as the Council from time to time may require. Any matter brought before
the Council for consideration may be referred, by the presiding officer, to a
committee for a special report and recommendation before action is considered
by the Council as a whole. Each committee report shall be signed by a majority
of the members and shall be filed with the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer.
Minority reports may be submitted. Each committee shall act promptly and
faithfully on any matter referred to it.
(1994 Code, § 5-9)
§ 30.10 SUSPENSIONS AND AMENDMENTS OF RULES.
   The rules of the Council may be temporarily suspended by a majority vote of
all of the Council members, but shall not be repealed, except by a majority
vote of the whole Council after notice has been given at some preceding Council
meeting in accordance with “Robert’s Rules of Order”.
(1994 Code, § 5-10)
§ 30.11 ELECTIONS AND TERMS OF COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   (A)   The regular city election shall be held on the first Tuesday after the
first Monday in November in every even numbered year, beginning with the 2016
election.
   (B)   The Mayor shall be elected for a term of two years at each biannual
election. Two Council members shall be elected in 2016 and two in 2018 for
four-year terms at the appropriate biannual election.
(1994 Code, § 5-11)
§ 30.12 SALARIES.
   (A)   The salary of the Mayor shall be set at $3,600 per year.
   (B)   The salary of each Council member shall be set at $2,400 per year.
(1994 Code, § 5-12) (Ord. 85, passed 10-5-2005)
CHAPTER 31: CITY ADMINISTRATOR/CLERK/TREASURER
Section
   
31.01   City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer
§ 31.01 CITY ADMINISTRATOR/CLERK/TREASURER.
   (A)   Established. The positions of Administrator, Clerk and Treasurer are
combined to establish the position of City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer.
   (B)   Duties of the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer. Within limits of
approved programs, policies and procedures, the City Administrator/Clerk/
Treasurer is responsible for and has authority to accomplish the following
duties and any other duties as deemed appropriate by the City Council.
      (1)   The City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall develop and administer
procedures governing the manner in which the functions of the City
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer’s office shall be conducted within the framework
of approved policy.
      (2)   Aid shall be provided by the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer to
the department heads upon request or assignment, utilizing both specialized and
professional knowledge.
      (3)   The City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall ensure that emergency
matters are brought to the attention of the City Council.
      (4)   This person shall attend regional and state meetings as a
representative of the city.
      (5)   The City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall perform other duties
as described on the position job description.
   (C)   Responsibilities of the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer. Within
limits of approved programs, policies and procedures, the City Administrator/
Clerk/Treasurer is required and has authority to accomplish the following
responsibilities and any other responsibilities as deemed appropriate by the
City Council.
      (1)   This person shall be responsible for the care and custody of city
license fees, bonds and records.
      (2)   The City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall be responsible for
meeting budgetary costs and performance objectives of the city. This includes
planning for materials, supplies and personnel that will be needed and
requisitions or orders accordingly.
      (3)   The City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall formulate and
establish policies and procedures and maintain constant alert to ensure that
said policies and procedures are followed at the directive of the City Council.
      (4)    This person is expected to be informed of current trends, new
concepts, techniques or principles that affect the office of the City
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer and maintain current knowledge of the principles
of city government.
      (5)   It shall be the responsibility of the City Administrator/Clerk/
Treasurer to efficiently utilize the working space assigned to the city office.
      (6)   This person shall inform the City Council of problems and progress
within the city and shall provide advice to the City Council when requested and
perform special assignments when directed.
      (7)   The City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall be responsible for
conforming to legislation affecting the city.
(1994 Code, § 1-2)
CHAPTER 32: ORGANIZATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
32.01   Other advisory boards
   
32.02   Other independent boards
Specific Board, Commissions and the Like
   
32.15   Park/Planning Commission
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01 OTHER ADVISORY BOARDS.
   (A)   Upon approval by a majority of the entire City Council, other advisory
boards may be established to assist the Council in the efficient, safe and
proper operation of the city if the establishment of such advisory boards is
not specifically prohibited by statute, the courts or other higher authority.
The establishment shall be by amendment to this section as provided by law and
such amendment shall list the composition of the board, set meeting dates,
define duties, regulate and define powers and list qualifications for
membership.
   (B)   Such advisory boards may include, but are not limited to, an
Industrial Development Commission, a Human Rights Commission and an
Environmental Concerns Commission.
(1994 Code, § 3-4)
§ 32.02 OTHER INDEPENDENT BOARDS.
   Upon approval by a majority of the entire City Council, other independent
boards as defined by statute and use may be established to assist the Council
and the city if the establishment of such independent boards is not
specifically prohibited by statute, the courts or other higher authority. The
establishment shall be by amendment to this section as provided by law and such
amendment shall list the composition of the board, set meeting dates, define
duties, regulate and define powers and list qualifications for membership.
(1994 Code, § 3-5)
SPECIFIC BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND THE LIKE
§ 32.15 PARK/PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Established. The Park/Planning Commission is hereby established.
   (B)   Members.
      (1)   The Commission shall consist of at least three members appointed by
the Council. No member of the Park/Planning Commission shall be an elected
official.
      (2)   The members of the Park/Planning Commission shall be appointed by
the City Council for two-year terms.
      (3)   The Park/Planning Commission shall appoint one of its members as a
Chairperson. The Commission may also appoint other members to chair such
committees as deemed necessary to perform the Commission’s duties.
   (C)   Meetings. The Commission may hold two meetings per month at the City
Hall on the second and last Tuesday of each month after 5:00 p.m. at a time
suitable for all members. The Commission may hold additional meetings when
necessary and with the approval of the Council and only after notification of
such meetings is in conformity with existing requirements.
   (D)   Duties.
      (1)   The Park/Planning Commission shall review and report to the City
Council all actions, whether contemplated or taken, by private citizens, firms
or governmental units which may affect the use of land or the regulation
thereof within the city. The Commission shall also review and report their
findings to the Council on the need, adequacy or efficiency of any ordinance of
the city and on any other action or need which the Council deems fit to refer
to the Commission for study.
      (2)   The Park/Planning Commission shall review all site plans for all
new structures as described in the Zoning chapter. Such plans shall go through
the City Council and Council ex-officio only upon recommendation of the Park/
Planning Commission. This does not pertain to variances which must still go
through the Park/Planning Commission and the City Council. The City Council may
direct the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer to issue single-family building
permits.
      (3)   The Park/Planning Commission shall prepare a coordinated program of
proposed park and beautification projects. Such program shall be recommended by
the Commission to the Council, departments, boards or public bodies as have
jurisdiction over the recommendation, planning or construction of such park and
beautification projects.
   (E)   Powers. The Park/Planning Commission is established as an advisory
commission with no powers of approval or denial, and only such powers of review
and requirement as those granted by this section and in other sections of this
code. In particular these sections are, but are not limited to, Ch. 150 and 157
of this code of ordinances.
   (F)   Qualifications.
      (1)   In order for a person to qualify for Park/Planning Commission
membership, this person must meet the following criteria in the judgement of
the Council.
         (a)   The person must be representative of the community.
         (b)   The person must be of sound character.
         (c)   The person must have experience to perform and interest in the
duties of the Commission.
      (2)   The provisions of §
34.03 of this code of ordinances shall also pertain to the selection of Park/
Planning Commission members.
(1994 Code, § 3-1) (Ord. 11, passed 9-28-1995; Ord. 23, passed 5-8-1997; Ord.
2019-4, passed 11-20-2019; Ord. 2023-01, passed 12-6-2023)
CHAPTER 33: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
   
33.01   Policy and purpose
   
33.02   Definitions
   
33.03   Emergency Management Organization
   
33.04   Director; powers and duties
   
33.05   Local emergencies
   
33.06   Emergency regulations
   
33.07   Government functions
   
33.08   Participation in labor disputes or politics
   
33.09   Dispatch and use of city equipment and services; mutual aid
§ 33.01 POLICY AND PURPOSE.
   Because of the existing possibility of the occurrence of disasters of
unprecedented size and destruction resulting from fire, flood, tornado,
blizzard, destructive winds or other natural causes, or from sabotage, hostile
action or from hazardous material mishaps of catastrophic measure or other
major incidents, and in order to ensure that preparations of the city will be
adequate to deal with such disasters and generally, to provide for the common
defense and to protect the public peace, health and safety, and to preserve the
lives and property of the people of the city, it is hereby found and declared
to be necessary:
   (A)   To establish a city emergency management organization responsible for
city planning and preparation for emergency government operations in time of
disasters;
   (B)   To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during emergencies and
disasters;
   (C)   To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between the city and other
political subdivisions with respect to the carrying out of emergency
preparedness functions;
   (D)   To comply with the provisions of M.S. Ch. 12, as it may be amended
from time to time, known as the state’s Emergency Management Act of 1996; and
   (E)   To participate as a member of the Lake Minnetonka Regional Emergency
Management, Preparedness Planning and Review Committee and accept its emergency
plan as the city’s basic plan for responses to emergencies, disasters, major
incidents, mutual aid and other projects consistent with this chapter and M.S.
Ch. 12, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 33, passed 4-23-1998)
§ 33.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISASTER. A situation which creates an immediate and serious impairment to
the health and safety of the public, or a situation which has resulted in or is
likely to result in major loss to property, and for which traditional sources
of relief and assistance within the affected area are unable to repair or
prevent the injury or loss without exhausting local resources and/or mutual
aid.
   EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances which calls for
immediate action to respond, or prevent from developing or occurring.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. The preparation for and the carrying out of all
emergency functions, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage
resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood, tornado and other acts of
nature, or from sabotage, hostile action or from industrial hazardous material
mishaps or other major incidents. These functions include, without limitation,
firefighting services, police services, emergency medical services,
engineering, warning services, communications, radiological and chemical,
evacuation, congregate care, emergency transportation, existing or properly
assigned functions of plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility
services and other functions related to civil protection, together with all
other activities necessary or incidental for carrying out of the foregoing
functions. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT includes those activities sometimes referred to
as CIVIL DEFENSE or EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS functions.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES. The total personnel resources engaged in city-
level emergency management functions in accordance with the provision of this
chapter or any rule or order thereunder. This includes personnel from city
department, authorized volunteers and private organizations and agencies.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT MUTUAL AID. Any disaster or major incident which
requires the dispatching of city personnel, equipment or other necessary
resources within or without the city limits.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION. The staff element responsible for
coordinating city-level planning and preparation for disaster response. This
ORGANIZATION provides city liaison and coordination with federal, state and
local jurisdictions relative to disaster preparedness activities, major
incidents, mutual aid and other projects consistent with this chapter and
assures implementation of federal, state, county and other program
requirements.
   LAKE MINNETONKA REGIONAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT, PREPAREDNESS PLANNING AND
REVIEW COMMITTEE. A committee made up of the Lake Minnetonka area emergency
management directors which develops, renews and establishes a basic emergency
plan, and identifies and coordinates training for member communities and
reviews local plans, exercises, major incidents and disaster responses which
are consistent with this chapter.
   MAJOR INCIDENT. Any incident which exhausts local resources.
(Ord. 33, passed 4-23-1998)
§ 33.03 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.
   There is hereby created with the city government an emergency management
organization which shall be under the supervision and control of the Emergency
Management Director, hereinafter called the “Director”. The Director shall be
the Chief of Police, as so stated in the joint powers agreement or contract for
services for public safety services. The Director shall have direct
responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the
emergency preparedness organization.
(Ord. 33, passed 4-23-1998)
§ 33.04 DIRECTOR; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Director shall represent the city on any regional or state
conference for emergency management. The Director shall develop proposed mutual
aid agreements with other political subdivisions of the state for reciprocal
emergency management aid and assistance in an emergency too great to be dealt
with unassisted, and shall present these agreements to the Council for its
action. These arrangements shall be consistent with the state emergency plan.
   (B)   The Director shall make studies and surveys of the human resources,
industries, resources and facilities of the city as deemed necessary to
determine their adequacy for emergency management and to plan for their most
efficient use in time of an emergency or disaster. The Director shall establish
the economic stabilization systems and measures, service staffs, boards and
sub-boards required, in accordance with state and federal plans and directions
subject to the approval of the Mayor.
   (C)   The Director shall prepare a comprehensive emergency plan for the
emergency preparedness of the city and shall present the plan to the Council
for its approval. When the Council has approved the plan, it shall be the duty
of all city agencies and all emergency preparedness forces of the city to
perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved. The plan may
be modified in like manner from time to time. The Director shall coordinate the
emergency management activities of the city to the end that they shall be
consistent and fully integrated with the emergency plans of the federal
government and the state and correlated with emergency plans of the county and
other political subdivisions within the state.
   (D)   In accordance with the state and city emergency plan, the Director
shall institute training programs, public information programs and conduct
practice warning alerts and emergency exercises as may be necessary to assure
prompt and effective operation of the city emergency plan when a disaster
occurs.
   (E)   The Director shall utilize the personnel, services, equipment,
supplies, and facilities of existing departments and agencies of the city to
the maximum extent practicable. The officers and personnel of all city
departments and agencies shall, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperate
with and extend services and facilities to the city’s emergency management
organization and to the Governor upon request. The head of each department or
agency in cooperation with the Director shall be responsible for the planning
and programming of those emergency activities as will involve the utilization
of the facilities of the department or agency.
   (F)   The Director shall, in cooperation with those city departments and
agencies affected, assist in the organizing, recruiting and training of
emergency management personnel, which may be required on a volunteer basis to
carry out the emergency plans of the city and state. To the extent that
emergency personnel are recruited to augment a regular city department or
agency for emergencies, they shall be assigned to the departments or agencies
and shall be under the administration and control of the department or agency.
   (G)   Consistent with the state emergency services law, the Director shall
coordinate the activity of municipal emergency management organizations within
the city and assist in establishing and conducting training programs as
required to assure emergency operational capability in the several services as
provided by M.S. § 12.25, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (H)   The Director shall carry out all orders, rules and regulations issued
by the Governor with reference to emergency management.
   (I)   The Director shall prepare and submit reports on emergency
preparedness activities when requested by the Mayor.
(Ord. 33, passed 4-23-1998)
§ 33.05 LOCAL EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   A local emergency, including a disaster, major incident or mutual aid
response, may be declared by the Mayor, the Director or their legal successors.
It shall not be continued for a period in excess of three days, except by or
with the consent of the City Council and City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer.
Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local
emergency shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed
promptly by the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer.
   (B)   A declaration of a local emergency shall invoke necessary portions of
the response and recovery aspects of applicable plans including fiscal
expenditures which are consistent with this chapter.
   (C)   No other jurisdictional agency or official may declare a local
emergency unless expressly authorized by the agreement under which the agency
functions.
(Ord. 33, passed 4-23-1998)
§ 33.06 EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Whenever necessary to meet a declared emergency or to prepare for such
an emergency for which adequate regulations have not been adopted by the
Governor or the City Council, the Council may by resolution promulgate
regulations, consistent with the applicable federal or state law or regulation,
respecting: the conduct of persons and the use of property during emergencies;
the repair, maintenance and safeguarding of essential public services,
emergency health, fire and safety regulation, drills or practice periods
required for preliminary training, and all other matters which are required to
protect public safety, health and welfare in declared emergencies.
   (B)   Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be in writing: shall
be time stamp dated; shall refer to the particular emergency to which it
pertains, if so limited; and shall be filed in the office of the City
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer, which copy shall be kept posted and available
for public inspection during business hours. Notice of the existence of such
regulation and its availability for inspection at the Administrator/Clerk/
Treasurer’s office shall be conspicuously posted at the front of the City Hall
or other headquarters of the city or at such other places in the affected areas
the Council shall designate in the resolution. By like resolution, the Council
may modify or rescind any such regulation.
   (C)   The City Council may rescind any such regulation by resolution at any
time. If not sooner rescinded, every such regulation shall expire at the end of
30 days after its effective date or at the end of the emergency to which it
relates, whichever comes first. Any resolution, rule or regulation inconsistent
with an emergency regulation promulgated by the Council shall be suspended
during the period of time and to the extent such conflict exists.
   (D)   During a declared emergency, the Director, with the consent of the
Mayor or City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer is, notwithstanding any statutory
or charter provision on the contrary, empowered through the city acting within
or without the corporate limits of the city, to enter into contracts and incur
obligations necessary to combat such disaster by protecting the health and
safety of persons and property and providing emergency assistance to the
victims of such disaster. The Director may exercise, with the consent of the
Mayor or City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer, such powers in the light of the
exigencies of the disaster without compliance with the time-consuming
procedures and formalities prescribed by law pertaining to the performance of
public work, entering rental equipment agreements, purchase of supplies and
materials, limitations upon tax levies and the appropriation and expenditure of
public funds including, but not limited to, publication of resolutions,
publication of call for bids, provisions of personnel laws and rules,
provisions relating to low bids and requirements for budgets.
(Ord. 33, passed 4-23-1998)
§ 33.07 GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTIONS.
   All functions thereunder and all other activities relating to emergency
management are hereby declared to be governmental functions. The provisions of
this section shall not affect the right of any person to receive benefits to
which he or she would otherwise be entitled under this chapter or under the
Worker’s Compensation Law, or under any pension law, nor the right of any such
person to receive any benefits or compensation under any act of Congress or the
state.
(Ord. 33, passed 4-23-1998)
§ 33.08 PARTICIPATION IN LABOR DISPUTES OR POLITICS.
   The emergency management organization shall not participate in any form of
political activity, nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for
political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a labor dispute. The Director
may express professional opinions on legislative or other legal regulations
consistent with the areas found in M.S. Ch. 12, as it may be amended from time
to time.
(Ord. 33, passed 4-23-1998)
§ 33.09 DISPATCH AND USE OF CITY EQUIPMENT AND SERVICES; MUTUAL AID.
   (A)   The city finds it desirable and necessary to authorize the Director to
dispatch city equipment and personnel to local communities who request aid to
combat their emergency, disaster or major incident consistent with §
33.04(E) of this chapter.
   (B)   The Director, with the consent of the Mayor or the City Administrator/
Clerk/Treasurer, shall evaluate the internal needs of the city and dispatch
appropriate available aid. The Director shall immediately recall, order and
terminate the use of any dispatched equipment and personnel when the need for
their use no longer exists, or earlier, when it appears in the best interest of
the city. Aid requested from outside the Lake Minnetonka regional area, or
extended local aid, shall require mutual agreement between the Director and the
City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer or their designee.
   (C)   The Director, with the consent of the Mayor or the City Administrator/
Clerk/Treasurer, shall be fully authorized as an act of the city, and all
provisions for compensation of personnel, rental of equipment, liability
insurance coverage, worker’s compensation insurance and all other safeguards
and matters pertaining to the city, its equipment and personnel, shall apply in
each case as if specifically authorized and directed at such time, whether or
not the governing body or authority of the place in which the disaster, major
incident, mutual aid or other occurrence exists, has previously requested and
provided for assistance and the use of equipment and personnel under a mutual
protection agreement or other type protection agreement within the city.
(Ord. 33, passed 4-23-1998)
CHAPTER 34: GENERAL POLICIES
Section
General Provisions
   
34.01   Annual audit
   
34.02   Unclaimed or confiscated property
   
34.03   Personnel policy adopted by reference
   
34.04   Levy of charges
Deferred Assessments
   
34.15   Special assessment deferral
   
34.16   Eligibility
   
34.17   Interest on deferred assessment
   
34.18   Termination of deferred status
   
34.19   Filing for deferred status
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01 ANNUAL AUDIT.
   The Council shall provide for an annual audit of the city’s financial
affairs by the state’s Auditor or a public accountant in accordance with
minimum auditing procedures prescribed by the state’s Auditor.
(1994 Code, § 1-3)
§ 34.02 UNCLAIMED OR CONFISCATED PROPERTY.
   (A)   Definition. In this section, RESPONSIBLE AUTHORITY means the Chief of
Police, City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer or any person designated by the
Council.
   (B)   Unclaimed property.
      (1)   Generally. Except as otherwise provided in this division (B) and
division (C) below, any money or personal property, other than animals, coming
into the possession of the city in the course of any municipal operation shall
be handled and disposed of in the manner provided in this section.
      (2)   Custody. Any money or personal property coming into possession of
any city officer, agent, employee or member of any city department shall,
within 24 hours, be turned over to the responsible authority by such officer,
agent or employee or member of a city department. The responsible authority
shall make provisions for receiving and safe keeping of property and money
delivered to and coming into the possession of this person in the course of
municipal operations. A receipt shall be issued to the person delivering such
property or money to the city. Such property shall be stored in a safe place
and such money deposited with the city’s Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer in a
special account for a period of three months unless claimed by the lawful
owner.
      (3)   Claims by owners. During such three-month period, the responsible
authority shall make a search to locate the lawful owner. The responsible
authority may deliver such property or order such money paid to the owner
thereof after receiving satisfactory proof of ownership and after providing ten
days’ notice by mail to the person, other than the police officer or city
employee, who delivered such property and to such other person who has asserted
a claim of ownership. The City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall not issue
any order for the disbursement of such money without the written order of the
responsible authority. If ownership cannot be determined to the satisfaction of
the responsible authority, this person may refuse to deliver such property or
order the payment of such money to anyone until ordered to do so by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
      (4)   Claim by finder. If the lawful owner does not claim the property or
money during this three- month period, the responsible authority may deliver
the property or order the money paid to the person, other than the police
officer or city employee, who found the property or money if such finder shall
have previously asserted in writing a claim to the property or money.
      (5)   Transfer to General Fund. If any such money is not claimed by the
lawful owner or finder within the three-month period, the responsible authority
shall so notify the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer and the money shall be
transferred to the General Fund of the city.
      (6)   Disposal. After the three-month period, property not delivered to
the lawful owner or finder shall be sold by the responsible authority at public
auction or appropriated to the use of the city. Instead of being sold at
auction, any article or property may be appropriated to the use of the city by
any department in need thereof. The method of appropriation by the City Council
will be the following:
         (a)   The property be converted to the use of the Public Safety
Department; if not then
         (b)   The property be converted to the use of the city; if not then
         (c)   The property be sold at public auction; if not then
         (d)   The property be given to a non-profit charitable organization;
if not then
         (e)   The property destroyed.
      (7)   Notice of sale. On behalf of the city, the responsible authority
shall sell all unclaimed property and all property not appropriated to or by
the city following at least one published notice thereof in the city’s official
newspaper not less than two weeks prior to such sale. The published notice
shall contain the following information:
         (a)   Time and place of sale;
         (b)   Description of property to be sold;
         (c)   Terms of payment; and
         (d)   The sale will be at public auction and to the highest bidder.
      (8)   Public sale. If the volume and value of unclaimed property is
insufficient in the opinion of both the Chief of Police and any appointed
responsible authority to justify a public auction, the unclaimed property may
be sold by public sale. The responsible authority shall follow the procedure in
division (B)(7) above; except that, the sale will be at a public sale to the
person with the first reasonable offer.
      (9)   Disposition of proceeds and unsold property. The responsible
authority shall remit the proceeds of the auction/sale to the City
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer for deposit in the General Fund. Any property
offered for sale, but not sold and not suitable for appropriation to the use of
the city shall be deemed worthless and shall be disposed of in such manner as
the responsible authority directs.
      (10)   Claim by owner after auction. The lawful owner of property sold at
public auction or sale shall, upon application to the City Administrator/Clerk/
Treasurer within six months from the date of sale and upon delivery of
satisfactory proof of ownership, be paid the sale price from the General Fund,
less the reasonable expenses incurred in the movement, storage, care and sale
of such property.
   (C)   Confiscated property. Any money or personal property, other than
animals, coming into the possession of the city’s Police Department in the
course of investigating or prosecuting any criminal offenses or ordinance
violations shall be handled and disposed of in the manner provided in division
(B) above; except that, the three-month custody period shall not begin until
such time as any prosecution and appeal proceedings, if any, shall have been
completed for any criminal offense or ordinance violation involving such
personal property or money.
   (D)   Unclaimed motor vehicles. Any unclaimed motor vehicles are defined by
M.S. Ch. 169, as it may be amended from time to time, coming into the
possession of the city in the course of any municipal operations shall be
handled and disposed of in the manner provided in M.S. §§ 168B.01 through
168B.10, as they may be amended from time to time.
   (E)   Summary disposal. The responsible authority may, without notice and in
such manner as this person determines to be in the public interest, summarily
dispose of any property, determined as being dangerous or perishable, coming
into the possession of this person. The responsible authority shall make a
record of the pertinent facts of the receipt and disposal of such property.
(1994 Code, § 1-4)
§ 34.03 PERSONNEL POLICY ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The city’s personnel policy is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated
herein as if set out in full.
(Ord. 7, passed 3-23-1995)
§ 34.04 LEVY OF CHARGES.
   The city shall have specific authority to levy certain charges incurred by
the city on behalf of a property owner as a special assessment against the
specific property and to certify said assessment roll to the county’s Auditor.
   (A)   (1)   The City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall have specific
authority to maintain separate records of costs incurred by the city to
rectify, correct or abate any violation of the following provisions of this
code of ordinances:
         (a)   Animals, Ch. 90;
         (b)   Junk vehicles;
         (c)   Fire Code (other than hazardous buildings), §
94.04;
         (d)   Weed control, §§
92.35 through
92.37;
         (e)   Diseased trees, §
92.02;
         (f)   Health nuisances, §
92.03;
         (g)   City utility services.
      (2)   In addition to any other method authorized by law or Charter, the
City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer may provide for the collection of unpaid
special charges as a special assessment against the property benefited for all
or any part of the cost of:
         (a)   Snow, ice or rubbish removal from sidewalks;
         (b)   Weed elimination from streets or private property;
         (c)   Removal or elimination of public health or safety hazards from
private property, excluding any structure included under the provisions of M.S.
§§ 463.15 to 463.26, as they may be amended from time to time;
         (d)   Installation or repair of water service lines, street sprinkling
or other dust treatment of streets;
         (e)   The trimming and care of trees and the removal of unsound trees
from any street;
         (f)   The treatment and removal of insect infested or diseased trees
on private property, the repair of sidewalks and alleys;
         (g)   The operation of a street lighting system;
         (h)   The operation and maintenance of a fire protection or a
pedestrian skyway system;
         (i)   Inspections relating to a municipal housing maintenance code
violation; or
         (j)   The recovery of any disbursements under M.S. § 504B.445, Subd. 4
(5), as it may be amended from time to time, including disbursements for
payment of utility bills and other services, even if provided by a third party,
necessary to remedy violations as described in M.S. § 504B.445, Subd. 4(2), as
it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   The owner of the property for which the service has been provided
shall be personally liable for the cost of such service. As soon as the service
has been completed and the cost determined, the City Administrator/Clerk/
Treasurer shall prepare a bill and mail it to the owner and thereupon the
amount shall be immediately due and payable at the city office.
   (C)   On or before November 1 of each year, the City Administrator/Clerk/
Treasurer shall list the total unpaid charges for each type of current service
provided for herein against each separate lot or parcel. The Council may then
spread the charges against the property benefitted as a special benefit
pursuant to the provisions of M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to
time, and other pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor and
collection with current taxes the following year or in annual installments, not
exceeding ten, as the Council may determine in each case. The City
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall, prior to adoption of the assessment roll
by the Council, provide the affected property owner with notice pursuant to
M.S. § 429.061, as it may be amended from time to time.
(1994 Code, § 1-6)
DEFERRED ASSESSMENTS
§ 34.15 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT DEFERRAL.
   Pursuant to M.S. §§ 435.193 through 435.195, as they may be amended from
time to time, senior citizens and retired disabled homeowners may defer special
assessments levied against homestead property owned by the applicant if the
criteria set forth in this subchapter are met by the applicant.
(Ord. 72, passed 10-15-2003)
§ 34.16 ELIGIBILITY.
   Any person 65 years of age or older or totally and permanently disabled (as
determined by the Social Security Administration or the city may adopt any
other standard or guideline) may defer special assessments levied against real
property for public improvements if the following conditions are met.
   (A)   Ownership. The applicant must be the fee simple owner of the property
or must be a contract vendee for fee simple ownership. An applicant must
provide either a recorded deed or contract for deed, with the application to
establish a qualified ownership interest as required herein.
   (B)   Homestead. The property must be the applicant’s principal place of
domicile and classified on the city’s and county’s real estate tax rolls as the
applicant’s homestead.
   (C)   Net income.
      (1)   The applicant’s net income and net income of all other joint
tenants, tenants in common or contract vendees in title to the property may not
exceed 150% of the U.S. Census Bureau’s poverty threshold during the preceding
year from the assessment levy.
      (2)   Net income determinations shall be made under a formula as set
forth on a form provided by the city (or use of federal or state tax forms).
(Ord. 72, passed 10-15-2003)
§ 34.17 INTEREST ON DEFERRED ASSESSMENT.
   All deferred special assessments shall be subject to and charged simple
interest at the prevailing interest rate applicable at the time the assessment
was originally levied. Said interest shall be payable upon termination of the
deferral status.
(Ord. 72, passed 10-15-2003)
§ 34.18 TERMINATION OF DEFERRED STATUS.
   Special assessment payments deferred pursuant to the eligibility
requirements set forth by this subchapter shall become payable effective upon
the occurrence of one of the following events:
   (A)   Sale of property. The subject property is sold, transferred,
subdivided or in any way conveyed to another by the fee owner qualified for
deferral status;
   (B)   Death of owner. The death of the fee owner qualified for deferral
status unless a surviving joint tenant, tenant in common or contract vendee is
eligible for the deferral benefit provided hereunder;
   (C)   Non-homestead property. The subject property loses its homestead
status for any reason; or
   (D)   No hardship. The City Council determines that there would be no
hardship to require an immediate or partial payment of the deferred special
assessment.
(Ord. 72, passed 10-15-2003)
§ 34.19 FILING FOR DEFERRED STATUS.
   An eligible applicant must file an application on or before September 15 of
the year preceding the year for which deferral status is requested in order to
implement the deferral program for said year. The filing date may be extended
to November 15 in such case as the City Council holds a final assessment
hearing after September 15. All deferral applications must be made on forms
approved by the County Auditor’s office and submitted to the City
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer. The applicant will be charged an administrative
filing fee as set forth in the annual fee schedule for the purpose of
processing the application.
(Ord. 72, passed 10-15-2003)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GENERAL WATER AND SEWER PROVISIONS
      
51.   WATER SYSTEM
      
52.   SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
      
53.   ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION
      
54.   STORM SEWER SYSTEM
      
55.   REFUSE DISPOSAL
CHAPTER 50: GENERAL WATER AND SEWER PROVISIONS
Section
   
50.01   Outdoor water and sewer connections and inspections
§ 50.01 OUTDOOR WATER AND SEWER CONNECTIONS AND INSPECTIONS.
   Tapping of any main must be cleared through Public Works. Hydrants and curb
stops are to be operated by city employees only, unless otherwise specified by
Public Works.
   (A)   Water service requirements.
      (1)   Water service lines must be type “K” copper with flared fittings
and a minimum of one inch in diameter for residential installations. Check with
the Building Inspector regarding multiple-family, commercial and industrial
connections.
      (2)   All lines over two inches will be ductile iron pipe, having
continuity straps and a hydrostatic test; must hold 150 pounds for one hour.
      (3)   Water shall be installed at a depth of seven feet or, if less, be
sufficiently insulated to protect against freezing.
      (4)   Splices are not allowed within ten feet of the building.
      (5)   The copper service line should have smooth gradual bends.
      (6)   The curb stop must be brought to proper grade.
      (7)   The curb stop cannot be in the driveway.
   (B)   Sewer service requirements.
      (1)   Four-inch sanitary sewer services are required on residential
homes. Commercial applications must be approved by the Building Inspector.
      (2)   Plastic pipe must be Schedule 40 for residential and commercial
installations.
      (3)   The sewer service line must be installed at a minimum of six feet
or, if less, insulated sufficiently.
      (4)   Services shall be installed at a slope of not less than one-fourth
inch per foot.
      (5)   Ninety-degree bends are not permitted on a sanitary sewer service.
The use of two 45- degree bends and a length of pipe to make a sweeping bend is
permitted.
      (6)   Use of a rubber donut gasket to connect to city sewer is not
acceptable. A four-inch by four-inch or six-inch by four-inch glued fitting is
acceptable.
      (7)   Glued or mechanical gasketed joints are acceptable, but must pass
the air test; four psi for five minutes.
      (8)   All sanitary sewers must be air tested at four psi for five to 15
minutes.
      (9)   Clean outs must be installed every 100 feet on lengthy sewer
services. Clean out caps must be metal and weather-tight.
      (10)   If any pipe is laid across a septic tank, the tank must be filled
and the portion of pipe over the tank must be ductile iron pipe.
   (C)   Water/sewer inspections.
      (1)   Sewer and water inspections can be scheduled during working hours.
A 24-hour notice is required prior to inspection.
      (2)   The orange building inspection card must be on site before an
inspection will be performed.
      (3)   If a job cannot be completed by the end of the day and a trench
must be left open overnight or over the weekend, the contractor must make
arrangements to fence or cover the trench so that it is safe and secure.
      (4)   All inspections of water and sewer lines from the city main to the
building structure, and any tests involved, are done by the Utility Department.
   (D)   Additional information.
      (1)   Curbs must be bridged when backing over them with equipment.
      (2)   The contractor is responsible for keeping the street clean of dirt,
mud and/or debris. This will be charged out if Public Works has to do any clean
up.
      (3)   A deposit as set forth in the annual fee schedule is required on
the building permit if any digging in the public right-of-way is to occur.
(Ord. passed - -)
CHAPTER 51: WATER SYSTEM
Section
   
51.01   Operation and revenue
   
51.02   Service connections
   
51.03   Use of city water without authority
   
51.04   Defective service
   
51.05   Discontinuance of service
   
51.06   Water rates, billing and payment
   
51.07   Water Revenue Fund
   
51.08   Joint powers agreement required
   
51.09   Curb boxes and service lines
   
51.10   Meters required; installation, testing and maintenance
   
51.11   Right to enter onto private lands
   
51.12   Private water systems not authorized; repair
   
51.13   Water sprinkling ban
   
51.14   Water trunk availability
   
51.15   Recycled water for car washes; alternatives
   
51.16   Water conservation restrictions
 
   
51.99   Penalty
§ 51.01 OPERATION AND REVENUE.
   The entire municipal water supply and distribution system shall be operated
as a public utility and convenience from such revenues will be derived subject
to the provisions of this chapter. The city shall supervise all construction,
installation and connections to the municipal water system and all excavation
and other work incidental to this supervised work.
(1994 Code, § 7-1.1)
§ 51.02 SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Application. Any owner or occupant of property desiring to make
connection with the city water system shall submit a written application for
this purpose to the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer. The application must
describe the premises to be served, the materials to be used, the general and
specific uses of the water and the estimated quantity of water to be used per
month.
   (B)   Connection fee. The number of unit determination of property is based
on the future use of the building. In the case of a shell building that will be
occupied by multiple tenants, with the use of each space not known, the number
of initial units is determined and collected based on the speculative use of
the shell building. The number of units shall be an estimate determined by
using the Metropolitan Council’s SAC unit determination. As uses for the
building are defined and/or additional building permits are applied for in
relation to the building, the city shall, based upon the use, determine the
appropriate number of city ERUs to apply and the appropriate charges shall be
paid accordingly.
   (C)   Bond and inspection fee. Each application for water connection shall
be accompanied by an inspection fee and a cash bond or surety bond in the penal
amount of $1,000. This surety bond shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory
performance of the work and saving the city harmless from all claims for
injuries or damages arising out of the course of the work.
   (D)   Separate connection for each premises. Unless special approval is
obtained from the City Council, each residential, commercial or industrial
establishment shall have a separate and distinct service connection. Where
approval is so obtained, each branch of the service system shall have a
separate meter and shall be billed separately at the separate unit service
rates and charges.
   (E)   Service installation cost. The cost of installing any service
connection between the water main and the fixture units of any consumer shall
be paid entirely by the consumer. All such installation shall be subject to
inspection at any time by the city and any repairs found necessary shall be
promptly made by the consumer. The city shall not be responsible for the costs
of any repairs made beyond the curb box, but shall make such necessary repairs
to the curb stop and box itself.
   (F)   Persons making installations. The installations of service connections
to the water system shall only be made by plumbers duly licensed under the laws
of the state and in accordance with any of the provisions of this chapter. The
plumber shall comply with any and all requirements of the state’s Plumbing Code
and other applicable ordinances, rules and regulations. The plumber will also
ensure that the service trench is properly backfilled to prevent settling.
(1994 Code, § 7-1.2) (Ord. 6, passed 2-9-1995; Ord. 100, passed 11-9-2007; Ord.
101, passed 11-14-2007; Ord. 101A, passed 12-5-2012; Ord. 101B, passed 3-5-
2014)
§ 51.03 USE OF CITY WATER WITHOUT AUTHORITY.
   It shall be a violation of this chapter to use water from any premises
without the consent of the owner or to take water from the municipal water
system, except upon payment of the established water use charge. No person,
except a properly authorized representative of the city, shall turn off or on
any valve, hydrant or curb stop, except in the case of an emergency. In such
case, the person shall inform the city of his or her act immediately
thereafter. Use of water without a permit shall be billed as an assumed use of
one-quarter year’s duration.
(1994 Code, § 7-1.3) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.04 DEFECTIVE SERVICE.
   All claims for defective or insufficient service shall be made in writing on
or before the tenth day of the month succeeding such service. Failure to notify
the city within this time shall be deemed as a waiver of any claim for that
period. Upon the filing of a claim, the city shall investigate the incident and
determine the amount, if any, which the claimant should be refunded. The amount
shall be reported to the City Council and, if approved, the amount shall be
allowed as a credit on succeeding water bills or as a regular claim for
damages. No claim against the city shall be allowed for any loss by fire or
injury to persons or property.
(1994 Code, § 7-1.4)
§ 51.05 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
   The city reserves the right to discontinue service for repairs, non-payment
of bills and disregard of the rules and regulations concerning proper use of
the water system. If possible, notice will be given to the affected users,
except in the case of an emergency affecting the health, safety or welfare of
any person, persons or property. It shall be mandatory to give notice of the
discontinuance of service for non-payment and such notice shall be given by the
city in writing at least ten days prior to the discontinuance. Discontinued
service for non-payment will only be resumed upon payment of all past-due
bills, plus 6% interest per annum from the date that the payment was due, and a
payment to the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer in the amount as set forth in
the annual fee schedule for re-establishing service must also be paid.
(1994 Code, § 7-1.5)
§ 51.06 WATER RATES, BILLING AND PAYMENT.
   (A)   The rates and charges for water service are as set out in the annual
fee schedule.
   (B)   All accounts shall be carried in the name of the owner of the premises
and any unpaid and delinquent water charges may be recovered from the owner of
the premises billed therefore in a civil action by the city in any court of
competent jurisdiction or may, in the discretion of the City Council, be
certified to the county’s Auditor as taxes against such property to be
collected and paid over to the city along with other taxes. Either or both of
such methods of collection thereof may be pursued by the city until payment in
full has been made, and the initiation of one such method of collection shall
not be deemed to be an election preventing the city from thereafter using the
other method of collection until paid in full.
(1994 Code, § 7-1.6)
§ 51.07 WATER REVENUE FUND.
   A special Water Revenue Fund is established and shall be kept and maintained
by the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer. All collections for water service
connection charges and other water charges and monies shall be paid into the
Water Revenue Fund whenever deemed appropriate by the City Council. All costs
of operation of the water system and such other liabilities or obligations as
may be ordered by the City Council shall be paid out of this Fund.
(1994 Code, § 7-1.7)
§ 51.08 JOINT POWERS AGREEMENT REQUIRED.
   No building or premises located outside the limits of the city shall be
connected to the city water system unless there is a properly executed joint
agreement between the city and the other local government containing the
building or premises served. Any such non-resident connection now installed at
the time of the effective date of this chapter shall be disconnected from the
water system within six months from said effective date unless such a joint
agreement has been executed.
(1994 Code, § 7-1.8) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.09 CURB BOXES AND SERVICE LINES.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be the responsibility of the city to make any
mechanical repairs necessary for the proper functioning of the curb boxes and
curb stops. This responsibility shall include, but not necessarily be limited
to the straightening, raising or lowering of curb boxes upon the written
request of the water user on whose property the box is located.
      (2)   If the city is making repairs to a curb box that is located in a
driveway, the city will be responsible for the moving of the curb box out of
the driveway, if necessary. The expense will be the city's, however, the
property owner will be responsible for expenses of repairs to the driveway and
landscaping.
   (B)   It shall not be the responsibility of the city to determine whether
repair or adjustment is needed.
   (C)   The costs of all such maintenance and repair of curb boxes or stops
shall be the expense of the city. If it is determined that the repair or
maintenance was required due to faulty materials or faulty installation, the
city may require the property owner to pay for all or a portion of the expense.
   (D)   Replacement of landscaping, paved or concrete driveways, walkways,
steps or other permanent structure shall be the responsibility and expense of
the property owner.
   (E)   From this date of adoption forward, no service or water shutoff shall
be installed under concrete walks, steps, driveways or other permanent
structures, either existing or contemplated, between the property line and the
building to be supplied. Exceptions may be granted by written approval of the
City Engineer.
   (F)   It shall be the responsibility and expense of the property owner to
maintain the service line from the curb box into the house or building. The
expense shall not include the curb box. In case of failure upon the part of any
property owner to repair any leak or malfunction occurring in the service line
within 24 hours after written notice has been given to the owner or occupant of
the premises, the water will be shut off and will not be turned on until
repairs are made and the sum as established by ordinance of the City Council
has been paid.
   (G)   When the waste of water is great or when damage is likely to result in
a leak, the water will be turned off if repair is not commenced immediately
upon the giving of such notice.
(Ord. 63, passed 11-21-2001) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.10 METERS REQUIRED; INSTALLATION, TESTING AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   No water service connection shall be extended into a building or
structure of any sort unless the connection terminates in a water meter
obtained from the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer. The deposit or charge for
such meter shall be fixed by resolution when deemed necessary by the City
Council. Replacement of water meters is the city’s responsibility: residential,
commercial, industrial.
      (2)   All water meters shall be installed horizontally.
      (3)   Gate valves of proper size and construction shall be placed on both
sides of each meter so that it may be removed for repair and maintenance. The
gate valve on the service connection side shall be placed in the line at the
same time the meter is installed or prior to meter installation, but in no case
shall the meter be on the line without the required valve.
      (4)   The person making the connection shall notify the city prior to
extending the service into the building to ensure that the curb stop is closed.
After installation of the required valve and meter, the city must again be
notified to turn the curb stop on, at which time both the representative of the
city and the person making the connection shall enter the premises to make
certain that the valve is functioning properly without leakage.
(1994 Code, § 7-1.10)
   (B)   Installation, testing and maintenance of meters.
      (1)   Installation of water meters shall be in accordance with state
requirements and the provisions of division (A) above. If any person or user
feels that the meter as installed is not accurate, notification in writing
shall be given to the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer who will supervise the
testing of the meter.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to attempt to tamper, adjust or
perform any form of maintenance on a meter without the consent and approval of
the city. Costs of testing, adjustment or maintenance of meters shall be borne
by the city unless the meter has been misused through improper tampering. The
evidence of tampering with a meter shall be prima facie reason for adding the
costs of repair to the user’s water bill.
(1994 Code, § 7-1.11)
Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.11 RIGHT TO ENTER ONTO PRIVATE LANDS.
   Any authorized agent of the city may enter onto private lands and property
to perform required inspection, reading, testing or maintenance of any portion
of the water system, in accordance with §
10.20. However, when entry into a dwelling is required at such times as no
person of the user’s family allows entry or the dwelling is unoccupied, the
city’s agent shall notify the Police Department and enter the dwelling only
accompanied by a police officer, and then only in an emergency or highly
unusual situation.
(1994 Code, § 7-1.12)
§ 51.12 PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS NOT AUTHORIZED; REPAIR.
   (A)   (1)   Except with the specific consent and approval of the City
Council, no wells for the purpose of providing domestic water for human
household use shall be drilled, installed or constructed, and no existing well
shall be further developed to provide potable water.
      (2)   After receiving city approval, new wells may be drilled for
agricultural and horticultural use, but there shall be no cross-connections
between these wells and the city water system. A cross- connection shall be any
means by which a private system could contaminate the city water system and
need not be a direct pipe connection.
      (3)   Any private well now providing water shall be completely
disconnected from the plumbing system at such time as the consumer installs a
service connection to the city system. A fee shall be paid by the person
connecting to the city system for inspection costs. The inspection may be
necessary to guarantee that there is no cross-connection between the private
system and the city system.
(1994 Code, § 7-1.13)
   (B)   Existing private wells may not be repaired to the extent that well
drilling or pulling equipment is required unless the well is for agricultural
and horticultural use and then only with City Council approval.
(1994 Code, § 7-1.14)
§ 51.13 WATER SPRINKLING BAN.
   A periodic water sprinkling ban as deemed necessary by the City Council may
be imposed by means of a resolution adopted by the Council outlining
restrictions with respect to water sprinkling. The resolution will state the
effective time period of the ban, and will be published and posted prior to the
effective date of the ban.
(1994 Code, § 7-1.15) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.14 WATER TRUNK AVAILABILITY.
   (A)   The City Council has determined that the city has expended substantial
city resources developing a water distribution system including, but not
limited to, the construction of wells, pumps, a municipal water tower and trunk
lines to deliver water. The City Council has further determined that the water
distribution system provides a definite benefit to undeveloped property within
the corporate limits of the city, which undeveloped property has not paid its
fair share of the cost of creating the water distribution system.
   (B)   At the time of the application for a building permit for any
construction which requires a connection to the city’s water distribution
system a water trunk availability charge of an amount as set forth in the
annual fee schedule shall be paid for each equivalent residential unit (“ERU”).
Equivalent residential units shall be assigned by the city consistent with the
assignment table set forth in division (C) below. If a particular use is not
categorized in the table, the city, in its reasonable discretion will make the
ERU assignment. A request for determination should be made by the landowner
prior to the application for the building permit.
   (C)   ERU assignment:
Use Number of ERUs
Use                                      Number of ERUs
Agricultural retail                      1 ERU/10 employees
Apartment complexes (common laundry      1 ERU/1.25 dwelling units
area)
Apartment complexes (individual laundry  1 ERU/dwelling unit
hookups)
Automobile service                       1 ERU/2 service bays
Bank                                     1 ERU/10 employees
Barber shop                              1 ERU/4 chairs
Beauty salon                             1 ERU/4 cutting stations
Body repair shop                         1 ERU/2 bays
Bowling alley                            1 ERU/3 alleys
Car wash (self-service)                  3 ERUs/stall
Car wash (automatic)                     6 ERUs/stall
Churches                                 1 ERU/275 seats
Clinic (medical)                         1 ERU/17 fixture units
Cocktail lounge (bar, no food service)   1 ERU/23 seats
Daycare (based on number of children     1 ERU/14 children
licensed for)
Dry cleaners                             1 ERU/each
Elderly apartment housing                1 ERU/1.25 dwelling units
Elderly assisted living facility         1 ERU/1.25 dwelling units
Elderly board and lodging facility with  1 ERU/1.50 dwelling units
special services
Funeral home (with allowed dwelling      2 ERUs/each
unit)
Funeral home (no allowed dwelling unit)  1 ERU/each
Fire station (volunteer department       1 ERU/14 volunteers
force)
General commercial and retail            1 ERU/10 employees, plus 1 ERU/allowed
(facilities not explicitly named herein) dwelling unit
Government buildings                     1 ERU/each
Grocery stores/butcher shops             1 ERU/10 employees
Laundromats                              1 ERU/2 washing machines
Library                                  1 ERU/each
Manufactured housing                     1 ERU/each
Manufacturers                            1 ERU/8 employees
Motels and hotels                        1 ERU/2 rooms
Multiple-family housing units            1 ERU/dwelling unit
Nursing home                             1 ERU/3 beds
Restaurants (fast food, disposable paper 1 ERU/22 seats
plates, glasses and silverware)
Restaurants (full service, washable      1 ERU/16 seats
silverware, glasses and dishes)
Schools (nursery to grade 7)             1 ERU/18 students
Schools (grade 8 to grade 12)            1 ERU/14 students
Service station (convenience center and  1 ERU/each
gas pumping only)
Service station (with service center and 1 ERU/each, plus 1 ERU/2 service bays
pumps)
Single-family residence                  1 ERU/each
Theater                                  1 ERU/64 seats
Veterinary clinic                        1 ERU/exam station
Warehouse                                1 ERU/10 employees
NOTES TO TABLE:
All fractional ERUs obtained by using the determination methods outlined herein
shall be charged on a fractional method; rounding shall be excluded.
 
   (D)   For lots of record (as defined in §
157.003 of this code of ordinances) which exist as of the effective date of
this section, the water trunk availability charge will only be imposed for
building permits applied for on or after 6-1-1997. For all other lots, the
water trunk availability charge will be imposed for building permits applied
for on or after the effective date of the section.
(Ord. 15, passed 6-13-1996; Ord. 96, passed 8-15-2007; Ord. 100, passed 11-9-
2007; Ord. 101, passed 11-14-2007; Ord. 101A, passed 12-5-2012; Ord. 101B,
passed 3-5-2014)
§ 51.15 RECYCLED WATER FOR CAR WASHES; ALTERNATIVES.
   (A)   Any structure within the city which was put into service on or after
8-1-2007, for the purpose of washing the exterior of motor vehicles (both hand
wash and mechanical systems) for a fee, or as a service provided to the
operator of the motor vehicle purchasing a good or service, must have in place
a water recycling system that reclaims at least 60% of the water taken from the
city’s water system on a daily basis. In order to facilitate compliance, a
separate meter or submeter acceptable to the city must be installed.
   (B)   Any structure within the city which was put into service on or after
8-1-2007, for the purpose of washing the exterior of motor vehicles (both hand
wash and mechanical systems) for a fee, or as a service provided to the
operator of the motor vehicle purchasing a good or service, may, as an
alternative to the recycling requirements of division (A) above, operate on a
system that uses less than 45 gallons of water per vehicle washed. In order to
proceed under this section, the time of the installation of the car washing
equipment, the owner of the proposed car wash must provide detailed technical
information to the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer and the Building Official
demonstrating that less than 45 gallons of water are used per vehicle washed.
Additionally, each car wash must have a separate meter measuring the water
consumed therein and the owner of the car wash must, on an annual basis, on or
before February 15 of each year, provide documentation to the city, for the
prior calendar year, of the number of vehicles washed so the city can verify
compliance with the 45 gallons or less per wash standard. The exception within
this section is not available for any mechanical car wash which is hand-
operated by any individual, including, but not limited to, the driver and or
occupants of the vehicle being washed.
(Ord. 94, passed 8-15-2007; Ord. 94A, passed 5-7-2008)
§ 51.16 WATER CONSERVATION RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. This section establishes water conservation restrictions, and
those restrictions will be in effect at any time the Governor declares by
executive order a critical water deficiency, pursuant to M.S. § 103G.291.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CLERK. In statutory cities, the person assigned duties pursuant to M.S. §
412.151, or the City Manager pursuant to M.S. §§ 412.601 through 412.751; or in
charter cities, as determined by city charter.
      DEPARTMENT. The City Water Department.
      EMERGENCY. The declaration of a critical water deficiency by the
Governor.
      IRRIGATION. The watering of shrubs, trees, sod, seeded areas, gardens,
lawns, or any other outdoor vegetation, except outdoor vegetation utilized for
agricultural purposes.
      NOTIFICATION TO PUBLIC. Notification through local media, including
interviews and issuance of news releases.
      PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIER. The city or other entity that owns, manages, or
operates a public water supply, as defined in M.S. § 144.382, Subd. 4.
      RECLAIMED WATER. Water collected from rooftops, paved surfaces, or other
collection devices and all water utilized more than once before re-entering the
natural water cycle.
      WATER RE-CIRCULATION SYSTEM. Any system which enables a user to reuse
water at least once prior to returning the water to the natural water cycle.
   (C)   Application.
      (1)   This section applies to all customers of public water suppliers who
own or control water use on any premises.
      (2)   No person shall make, cause, use, or permit the use of water
received from a public water supply for residential, commercial, industrial,
governmental, or any other purpose in any manner contrary to any provision in
this section.
      (3)   Mandatory emergency conservation measures shall be implemented
based upon the declaration of a critical water emergency by the Governor.
   (D)   Declaration of critical water deficiency. Upon the declaration of a
critical water deficiency by the Governor, the public water supplier shall
immediately post notice of the emergency declaration at the usual meeting place
of the City Council, or the official city bulletin board. The city shall
provide notification to the public as quickly as possible or through
established water supply emergency response plans or procedures.
   (E)   Mandatory emergency water conservation measures. Upon declaration of a
water emergency and notification to the public, the following mandatory
restrictions upon nonessential water use shall be enforced.
      (1)   Outdoor irrigation of yards, gardens, golf courses, parklands, and
other non- agricultural land, except for those areas irrigated with reclaimed
water, is prohibited.
      (2)   Washing or spraying of sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis
courts, patios, or other paved areas with water from any pressurized source,
including garden hoses, except to alleviate immediate health or safety hazards
is prohibited.
      (3)   The outdoor use of any water-based play apparatus connected to a
pressurized source is prohibited.
      (4)   Restaurants and other food service establishments are prohibited
from serving water to their customers, unless water is specifically requested
by the customer.
      (5)   Operation of outdoor misting systems used to cool public areas is
prohibited.
      (6)   The filling of swimming pools, fountains, spas, or other exterior
water features is prohibited.
      (7)   The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, and other types of
mobile equipment is prohibited, except at facilities equipped with wash water
re-circulation systems, and for vehicles requiring frequent washing to protect
public health, safety, and welfare.
   (F)   Variances. The City Clerk or their designee is authorized to grant
variances to this section where strict application of its provisions would
result in serious hardship to a customer. A variance may be granted only for
reasons involving health or safety. An applicant may appeal the denial of a
variance within five days of the decision by submitting a written appeal to the
City Clerk. The City Council shall hear the appeal at the next City Council
meeting. The decision of the City Council is final.
   (G)   Violation.
      (1)   Violations shall be determined and cited by the City Clerk or his
or her designee. A violator may appeal the citation within five days of its
issuance by submitting written appeal to the city. The City Council shall hear
the appeal at the next City Council meeting. The decision of the City Council
is final. Violators may be granted an administrative waiver if evidence is
provided that equipment failure was the cause of the violation. A letter from a
qualified vendor or equipment invoice will be required to show proof of
equipment failure.
      (2)   Upon discovery of a first violation, the violator shall be issued,
either personally or by mail, a warning letter that sets forth the violation
and which shall describe the remedy and fines for future violations.
      (3)   Upon subsequent violations at the same location, the violator shall
be issued, either personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the
violation and shall describe the remedy. Fines shall be added to the monthly
water bill of the owner or current occupant of the premises where the violation
occurred. The imposition of the fine shall in no way limit the right of the
city to pursue other legal remedies.
   (H)   Enforcement. The City Clerk or his or her designee is authorized to
designate city employees or law enforcement personnel to enforce the provisions
of this section.
(Ord. 1, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violation of water sprinkling ban provisions will be subject to a fine
of $50, per repeated offense.
(1994 Code, § 7-1.15)
CHAPTER 52: SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Operation and revenue
   
52.02   Defective service
   
52.03   Right to enter onto private lands
   
52.04   Rates and charges
   
52.05   Permits for sewer connection services
   
52.06   Independent services required
   
52.07   Repair of public lands and right-of-way
Use of Sewers
   
52.20   Prohibited discharges generally
   
52.21   Discharge of untreated sewage prohibited
   
52.22   Prohibited discharge into sanitary sewer
   
52.23   Discharge of cooling water from air conditioning units into sanitary
sewer prohibited
   
52.24   Policy regarding use of sanitary sewers for industrial wastes
   
52.25   Certain discharges subject to approval of City Council
   
52.26   Survey data required
   
52.27   Sampling and analysis
   
52.28   Installation of control manhole
   
52.29   Oil traps
   
52.30   Pretreatment
   
52.31   Special agreements between city and industrial users
   
52.32   Connection to city sewer required
   
52.33   Certain connections prohibited
Cross-reference:
   Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination, see
Ch. 53
   Outdoor water and sewer connections and inspections, see §
50.01
   Storm Sewer System, see
Ch. 54
   Subdivisions, see
Ch. 156
   Zoning, see
Ch. 157
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 OPERATION AND REVENUE.
   The entire city sewer system shall be operate as a public utility and
convenience from which revenue shall be derived subject to the provisions of
this chapter. The city shall supervise all construction, installations and
connections to said system and all excavations and other work incidental
thereto.
(1994 Code, § 7-2.1)
§ 52.02 DEFECTIVE SERVICE.
   Sewer system connections shall not be made or maintained after the effective
date of this chapter unless the building has at least one vented main line.
(1994 Code, § 7-2.5)
§ 52.03 RIGHT TO ENTER ONTO PRIVATE LANDS.
   Any duly authorized agent or representative of the city may, after
presentation of proper credentials or identification, enter onto any and all
properties and premises in the city for the purpose of inspection, testing,
observation, measurement, sampling or maintenance in connection with the
operation of the municipal sanitary sewer system, in accordance with §
10.20. Representatives specifically so authorized are the Building Inspector,
the Public Works Department, the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer and any
member of the City Council. Any other agent or representative shall obtain
written authorization from the Mayor or the City Council. When entry into a
dwelling is required at such times as no person of the user's family allows
entry or the dwelling is unoccupied, the city’s agent shall notify the Police
Department and enter the dwelling only accompanied by a police officer and then
only in an emergency or highly unusual situation.
(1994 Code, § 7-2.6)
§ 52.04 RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   The rates and charges for sewer service are as set out in the annual
fee schedule.
   (B)   (1)   The number of unit determination of property is based on the
future use of the building. In the case of a shell building that will be
occupied by multiple tenants, with the use of each space not known, the number
of initial units is determined and collected based on the speculative use of
the shell building. The number of units shall be an estimate determined by
using the Metropolitan Council’s SAC unit determination. As uses for the
building are defined and/or additional building permits are applied for in
relation to the building, the city shall, based upon the use, determine the
appropriate number of city ERUs to apply and the appropriate charges shall be
paid accordingly.
      (2)   The same one-half unit charges computed on said amounts shall also
apply. Furthermore, any such unit charges shall be in addition to and exclusive
of any other applicable assessments or charges which may be imposed.
   (C)   The City Council reserves the right to impose a supplemental sewage
charge, in addition to any and all other rates and charges stated herein, on
any user discharging waste into the sewer system which is unusual in character
and/or amount. The determination of such charge by the Council shall be done in
a reasonable manner warranted by all relevant factors.
   (D)   The City Council may provide by resolution that any charge for sewer
connection as provided and required herein be transferred to the county’s
Auditor for collection of such payment by placement on the tax rolls. Payment
shall not be made in more than 15 annual installments of principal, plus
interest, not to exceed 8% per annum on the unpaid balance. All such charges
and interest collected by the county’s Auditor shall be paid over to the City
Treasurer in the same manner as other municipal taxes.
   (E)   Any application for connection permit shall state whether the subject
premises has paid an assessment. If so, the amount so assessed and the legal
description of the premises as originally assessed shall be also be stated.
   (H)   The charges established herein shall be a lien on the real estate
benefitted thereby and shall be of equal rank with liens or taxes levied under
the general statutes of the state. Such charges shall become due and payable as
fixed by the resolution establishing such charges. Due charges shall, at the
option of the city and by order of the Council, be enforced against the owner,
lessee or occupant of the benefitted property or against all of them in a civil
action without waiver of other remedies.
   (I)   Sewer rental charge statements for the preceding monthly period shall
be mailed to each customer at such dates as shall be prescribed by the Council.
Statements shall become due and payable to the City Treasurer on or before the
fifteenth day of the month following the date of the statement. A 2% late
charge shall be added to all bills not paid by the fifteenth day of the month
following the date of the statement.
   (J)   All accounts shall be carried in the name of the owner of the premises
and any unpaid and delinquent sewer charges may be recovered from the owner of
the premises billed therefor in a civil action by the city in any court of
competent jurisdiction or may, in the discretion of the City Council, be
certified to the county’s Auditor as taxes against such property to be
collected and paid over to the city along with other taxes. Either or both of
such methods of collection thereof may be pursued by the city until payment in
full has been made, and the initiation of one such method of collection shall
not be deemed to be an election preventing the city from thereafter using the
other method of collection until paid in full.
(1994 Code, § 7-2.7) (Ord. 6, passed 2-9-1995; Ord. 16, passed 6-13-1996; Ord.
100, passed 11-9-2007; Ord. 101, passed 11-14-2007; Ord. 101A, passed 12-5-
2012; Ord. 101B, passed 3-5-2014)
§ 52.05 PERMITS FOR SEWER CONNECTION SERVICES.
   (A)   Any person desiring to make connection to the municipal sewer system
shall comply with all of the provisions of this chapter and shall submit an
application of the person’s intentions on blanks furnished by the City
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer. The application shall be accompanied by such
plans, specifications and other information as the Building Inspector or other
agent of the city, together with a permit and inspection fee or such other
amount as the Council may deem appropriate by resolution. All costs and
expenses relating to such connection shall be borne by the applicant.
   (B)   The applicant shall, by the act of taking out such a permit, indemnify
and hold harmless the city for any losses or damages which may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the sewer connection. This
shall include any necessary repairs or restoration of the street or ground
surfaces. A street opening fee as set forth in the annual fee schedule shall be
paid at the time of application where applicable.
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall commence work of any kind
for which a permit is required under this chapter without first having received
such permit shall, when subsequently applying for the permit, be required to
pay double the fees provided therefor and shall also be subject to any penal
provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   Permits shall only be issued when the applications show that the
persons, firm or corporation engaged to perform the work have been duly
registered by the city to perform sewer connection installations, and who have
also paid the required fee and filed the required bonds and insurance
certificates indicated hereinafter. No permit shall be issued until all of the
plumbing in the building has been inspected by the City Inspector and, if
necessary, altered to meet standards of the state’s Plumbing Code and any other
pertinent requirements of this chapter. Upon completion of the work, a copy of
the permit shall be signed and dated by the licensed individual or firm making
the connection and said copy shall be delivered up to the City Inspector at the
time of the final inspection of the work. The City Inspector shall also sign
said permit to indicate that he or she has performed an inspection and the work
and materials conform with the requirements of this chapter and other
regulations. The permit shall be completed by filling in the information
regarding size and type of pipe used, the type of joint used, the length of the
connection, the depth of the pipe at the street, the depth of the pipe at the
house, the distance from either side of the house where the connection is made
to the house plumbing and any other information required on the form or by the
City Inspector.
   (E)   Before any person or firm is registered to engage in the business of
sewer installation within the city, that person shall make application to the
city and shall pay the required fee and shall file a bond, a certificate of
insurance and other information as follows.
      (1)   The applicant must be a master plumber currently registered and
licensed by the state or a plumber approved by the City Council; except that,
such licensing requirement shall not apply to any person who shall not be
involved in such sewer installation other than in the completing of the
necessary excavation.
      (2)   The fee for such registration shall be set by the Building Official
with the approval of the City Council.
      (3)   A certificate of insurance, acceptable to the City Council and
showing coverage of not less than $50,000 per person for injuries, shall be
filed. The insurance certificate shall also include provisions for accidental
death to any one person and subject to the same limit for each person in an
amount not less than $100,000 on account of any one accident and property
damages in an amount of not less than $25,000.
   (F)   Materials and construction requirements and techniques employed by the
plumber shall be subject to the approval of the Council, the City Inspector and
the City Engineer, but shall, in general, comply with the following minimum
requirements in addition to conforming with all of the requirements of the
state’s Plumbing Code.
      (1)   All pipe shall be four-inch extra heavy cast iron soil pipe or
four-inch polyvinyl chloride pipe, thick walled sewer pipe, Type W-1. If the
sewer service pipe is less than ten feet from the water service pipe or if the
sewer service pipe is closer than 20 feet from any well, plastic pipe shall not
be allowed. In addition, no plastic pipe shall be used on unstable ground or in
fill materials unless tests provided by the plumber indicate to the
satisfaction of the City Council that the fill is of a density of equal or
greater value than that density required to support the pipe and that the fill
will be displaced at any time in the future.
      (2)   Joints shall be made air-tight using O-ring rubber gaskets or, in
the case of plastic pipe, a solvent-cemented joint.
      (3)   Sewer service shall not contain more than four bends of any size
angle, nor shall it contain any bend or combination of bends totaling more than
45 degrees.
      (4)   Sewer service shall not be installed parallel to any bearing wall
or footing closer than three feet therefrom, nor shall it be installed with any
bend closer than three feet from such wall or footing.
      (5)   Clean-outs shall be provided in any sewer service on instructions
from the City Inspector, but in any case, clean-outs shall be installed at
intervals of 75 feet on long services.
      (6)   Sewer service connections shall not, in any manner, be connected
to, or be a part of, any septic tank or cesspool, and if any service pipe is
installed across any existing septic tank or cesspool, plastic pipe shall not
be allowed for that portion of the service.
      (7)   All existing septic tanks and cesspools shall be obliterated by
first pumping out all organic matter and then filling with granular material to
the level of the surrounding ground.
      (8)   Sewer service connections shall be made only at the location of the
existing stub from the sewer main unless expressly approved by the Council to
make such connection in a different location. In this case, the applicant shall
bear all of the costs of making such relocated connection. Connections directly
to the main sewer line shall be made with a PVC wye solvent-cemented on and
held in place with two stainless steel saddle clamps.
      (9)   The minimum cover over service connections shall be six feet unless
such cover is not practical at the building line, in which case the stated
minimum cover shall be approved by the City Inspector prior to any work being
done on the site.
(1994 Code, § 7-2.8)
§ 52.06 INDEPENDENT SERVICES REQUIRED.
   (A)   The drainage and plumbing system of each new building and of new work
installed in existing buildings shall be separate and independent from any
other building, except as provided herein. Each and every such building shall
have an independent connection to the city sewer system unless none is
available. If none is available, the City Council shall determine the solution
to the problem.
   (B)   Where the building to be so serviced stands to the rear of another
building on an interior lot and no sewer service can be provided to the rear
building, the Council may approve the connection of the rear building to the
service of the front building if clean-outs are provided immediately outside of
both of the buildings in the sewer service.
(1994 Code, § 7-2.9)
§ 52.07 REPAIR OF PUBLIC LANDS AND RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   Sewer service connections shall not be finally approved until all streets,
pavements, curb, walks, boulevard sod and topsoil or any other public
improvements thereon have been restored to their former condition to the City
Council’s satisfaction.
(1994 Code, § 7-2.10)
USE OF SEWERS
§ 52.20 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES GENERALLY.
   Except as otherwise provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described wastes or waters into any public
sewer:
   (A)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 190°F;
   (B)   Any water or waste containing more than 100 milligrams per liter by
weight of fats, oils or greases or other substances having similar congealing
affects;
   (C)   Any liquids, solids or gases which, by reason of their nature or
quality, may cause fire or explosion, or be in any other way injurious to
person, to the sewerage works structures or to the operation of these works;
   (D)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance, which either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, is capable of creating a public nuisance or
hazard to life, or which may prevent entry into sewers for their maintenance
and repair;
   (E)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal glass, cesspool
sludge, bones, feathers, rubber, ties, plastic, wood, paunch manure, swimming
pool sludge, blood, butchers’ offal or any other solid or viscous substances
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with
the proper operation of the sewerage system or sewage treatment works; and
   (F)   All other discharges which do not meet the minimum standards set forth
by the state, the Federal Government and their respective agencies.
(Ord. 78, passed 11-17-2004) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.21 DISCHARGE OF UNTREATED SEWAGE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or
in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sanitary sewage, industrial
waste or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 78, passed 11-17-2004) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.22 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE INTO SANITARY SEWER.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, ground
water, roof runoff, yard drainage, yard fountain, pond overflow or any
substance other than sanitary sewage into the sanitary collection system.
   (A)   No roof runoff, sump pump, swimming pool discharge or surface water
drainage shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system and no building shall
hereafter be constructed, nor shall any existing buildings be hereafter altered
in such a manner that the roof drainage or any other source of discharge or
drainage other than sanitary sewer shall connect with the sanitary sewer system
inside or outside the building.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation having a roof sump pump, swimming pool
discharge, cistern overflow pipe or surface drain now connected and/or
discharging into the sanitary sewer system shall disconnect and/or remove same
upon adoption of this subchapter. Any disconnects or openings in the sanitary
sewer shall be closed or repaired in an effective, workmanlike manner as
described in the next section.
   (C)   (1)   Effective 11-17-2004, all new residential construction having a
sump pump with a sump basket shall be in compliance with the state’s Plumbing
Building Code. Such work shall be completed prior to the final building
inspection and issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
      (2)   All sump pumps shall have a discharge pipe installed to the outside
wall of the building with one inch inside minimum diameter. The pipe attachment
must be a permanent fitting such as a PVC pipe with glued fittings. The
discharge shall extend at least three feet outside of the foundation wall. If a
public drain tile system has been installed in a street before a certificate of
occupancy has been issued for a lot abutting such street, a certificate of
occupancy may not be issued until the foundation drain tile system has been
constructed and connected to the public drain tile system.
      (3)   If a public drain tile system has not been installed in the street
before a certificate of occupancy has been issued, any property with a
foundation drain tile system abutting such street shall connect such system to
the public drain tile system within one year after the public drain tile system
is installed when water from the private drain tile is either being discharged
into a city boulevard or street or discharged onto property not owned by the
owner of the foundation drain tile system.
      (4)   All new residential construction having a foundation drain tile
system shall discharge into an abutting holding pond, drainage swale, ravine or
similar system. No foundation drain tile system shall be discharged into a
front yard boulevard area unless it can be connected to a public drain tile
system. Discharge pipes from sump pumps not connected to a public drain tile
system shall be located no closer than five feet from any property line, unless
authorized by the City Engineer.
   (D)   (1)   Every person owning improved real estate that discharges into
the city’s sanitary sewer system shall either:
         (a)   Following written notice to the property owner, allow city
employee(s) to enter upon and inspect the buildings and pipes therein to
confirm that there is not a sump pump or other prohibited discharge into the
sanitary sewer system; or
         (b)   The property owner, at his or her sole cost, shall, within 30
days of receiving notice from the city of a proposed inspection by city
employee(s), have the property inspected by a plumber licensed in Minnesota,
which plumber, on a form available from the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer,
shall attest that if the property has a sump pump, such sump pump does not
discharge into the sanitary sewer system and there are no other prohibited
discharges emanating from the property into the sanitary sewer system.
      (2)   The property owner of any property found to be in violation of this
section shall make the necessary changes to comply within 30 days of the
inspection and such changes shall be verified by city employee(s) or, at the
option and sole expense of the property owner, by a plumber licensed in the
state. It shall be the property owner’s responsibility to request a compliance
inspection from the city.
   (E)   A surcharge as set forth in the annual fee schedule is hereby imposed
and shall be added to every sewer bill mailed on or after 3-1-2008, to property
owners who are not in compliance with this section within 30 days after the
initial inspection of the subject property or to property owners who have not
complied with the inspection reports of division (B) above. The surcharge shall
be added every month until the property is in compliance. In the event a
violation of this section is discovered upon inspection of new construction,
the surcharge shall be paid to the city prior to the issuance of an occupancy
permit.
   (F)   Upon verified compliance with this section, the city reserves the
right to inspect such property at least yearly to verify compliance herewith,
in accordance with §
10.20.
(Ord. 78, passed 11-17-2004; Ord. 78A, passed 2-20-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.23 DISCHARGE OF COOLING WATER FROM AIR CONDITIONING UNITS INTO SANITARY
SEWER PROHIBITED.
   In as much as the sanitary sewers of the city are not designed to handle the
volume of cooling water produced by air conditioning units, the discharge of
cooling water from air conditioning units, three tons of refrigeration or air
conditioning and larger, draining into any one building drain, without cooling
towers or recirculating systems is prohibited unless no other alternative is
available. Under such circumstances, a flat per gallon fee shall be charged at
the same rate as a sewer charge. Cooling water which is free from bacteria and
harmful chemicals should be drained into storm water drains.
(Ord. 78, passed 11-17-2004) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.24 POLICY REGARDING USE OF SANITARY SEWERS FOR INDUSTRIAL WASTES.
   (A)   (1)   The economy and desirability of the combined treatment of
industrial wastes and sanitary sewage is recognized. However, not all types and
quantities of industrial wastes can be so treated.
      (2)   Therefore, it shall be the established policy of the city to admit
those types and quantities of industrial wastes that are not harmful or
damaging to the structures, processes or operation of the sewerage works or are
not specifically prohibited by this subchapter.
   (B)   (1)   It is also recognized that to provide this service additional
facilities are required, the cost of which must be borne by those persons
receiving its benefits.
      (2)   The types and quantities of industrial wastes which may be admitted
into the public sewerage system of the city without pretreatment shall be
established by the Engineer and approved by the City Council pursuant to
standards set forth by the appropriate government agency.
(Ord. 78, passed 11-17-2004)
§ 52.25 CERTAIN DISCHARGES SUBJECT TO APPROVAL OF CITY COUNCIL.
   The discharge into the public sewers of any of the following waters or
wastes shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Council:
   (A)   A five-day 20°C BOD greater than 400 milligrams per liter;
   (B)   A suspended solids content greater than four milligrams per liter;
   (C)   A chlorine demand greater than 20 milligrams per liter in any 15-
minute time period;
   (D)   An average daily flow greater than 2% of the average daily sewage
treatment works;
   (E)   Any toxic substance; and
   (F)   Any wastes which are considered by the Engineer to offer possibilities
of harm to structures, processes or operation of any facilities of the city.
(Ord. 78, passed 11-17-2004)
§ 52.26 SURVEY DATA REQUIRED.
   (A)   All users of the sewerage system who are now discharging industrial
wastes to the public sewers shall, upon request of the City Council, file with
the Engineer within 60 days, a questionnaire which shall furnish pertinent
data, including quantity of flow, and an analysis of the water discharged into
the sewerage works and treatment plant. Similarly, any persons desiring to make
a new connection to the sewerage system for the purpose of discharging
industrial wastes into the public sewers shall file with the Engineer an
industrial waste questionnaire which shall furnish pertinent or predicted data,
including quantity of flow and a complete analysis of the industrial waste to
be discharged into the sewer system, and shall submit same upon application for
building permit.
   (B)   Whenever any current user who discharges industrial wastes to the
sanitary sewers wishes to modify, in any manner, the quality or quantity of the
discharge, it shall furnish said data to the Council prior to making said
modification.
(Ord. 78, passed 11-17-2004)
§ 52.27 SAMPLING AND ANALYSIS.
   Samples shall be composite samples collected over a three-day period of
operation so as to be a truly representative sample of the actual quality of
the wastes. Samples for analysis must be collected by the Engineer or his or
her representative. An analysis shall be made by a qualified sanitary engineer
using the laboratory methods for the examination of industrial waste as set
forth in the latest edition of Standard Methods for Examination of Water and
Sewage as published by the American Public Health Association.
(Ord. 78, passed 11-17-2004)
§ 52.28 INSTALLATION OF CONTROL MANHOLE.
   (A)   Any establishment discharging industrial wastes into the sewage system
shall construct and maintain at its expense a suitable control manhole or
manholes downstream from any treatment, storage or other approved works, to
facilitate observation, measurement and sampling of all wastes, including
domestic sewage, from the establishment. The control manhole or manholes shall
be constructed at suitable and satisfactory locations and built in a manner
approved by the Engineer. The control manhole shall be accessible to the
Engineer at all times for observing, measuring and sampling of such wastes.
   (B)   Persons using the sewage system for industrial wastes shall also
provide a flow-measuring device, approved by the Engineer, to record total
flowage and rate of flow at no cost to the city for such device.
(Ord. 78, passed 11-17-2004)
§ 52.29 OIL TRAPS.
   Any established discharging oils or grease to the sewerage system shall
maintain a suitable device to trap and collect oil and grease before it enters
the sewerage system and accepted methods of cleaning and maintenance of the
disposal shall be the responsibility of the owner.
(Ord. 78, passed 11-17-2004)
§ 52.30 PRETREATMENT.
   Any person using the city sewer system shall provide, at his or her expense,
such preliminary treatment or handling as may be necessary to modify the
objectionable characteristics or constituent to come within the limits set
forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 78, passed 11-17-2004)
§ 52.31 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS BETWEEN CITY AND INDUSTRIAL USERS.
   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting any
special agreement or arrangement between the city and any person whereby an
industrial waste of unusual strength of character may be admitted into the
sanitary sewers for treatment by the city either before or after pretreatment.
(Ord. 78, passed 11-17-2004)
§ 52.32 CONNECTION TO CITY SEWER REQUIRED.
   Existing or future buildings intended for human habitation or use shall not
be allowed to use any method of sewage disposal other than the city sewer
system, and each and every building shall be connected with the city sewer
system.
(Ord. 78, passed 11-17-2004)
§ 52.33 CERTAIN CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   Buildings located outside of the city limits shall not be connected into the
city sewer system unless there is a properly executed contract between the city
and the other governmental unit in which the building is located. Sewer
connections shall not be made to any building unless said building has a
properly vented waste plumbing system.
(Ord. 78, passed 11-17-2004)
CHAPTER 53: ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION
Section
   
53.01   Purpose and objectives
   
53.02   Definitions
   
53.03   Applicability
   
53.04   Responsibility for administration
   
53.05   Severability
   
53.06   Ultimate responsibility
   
53.07   Discharge prohibitions
   
53.08   Suspension of MS4 access
   
53.09   Industrial or construction activity discharges
   
53.10   Monitoring of discharges
   
53.11   Best management practices
   
53.12   Notification of spills
   
53.13   Enforcement
   
53.14   Appeal of notice of violation
   
53.15   Enforcement measures after appeal
   
53.16   Cost of abatement of the violation
   
53.17   Injunctive relief
   
53.18   Compensatory actions
   
53.19   Violations deemed a public nuisance
   
53.20   Remedies not exclusive
 
   
53.99   Penalty
§ 53.01 PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of non-storm
water discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum through the
regulation of non-storm water discharges to the storm drainage system to the
maximum extent practicable as required by state and federal law. This chapter
establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with
requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) MS4
permit process.
   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:
      (1)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal
separate storm sewer system by storm water discharges by any user;
      (2)   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system; and
      (3)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection,
surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this
chapter.
(Ord. 79A, passed 10-21-2015)
§ 53.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Employees or designees of the city or the
state’s Pollution Control Agency as designated to enforce this chapter.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to
prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly into storm
water, receiving waters or storm water conveyance systems. BMPs also include
treatment practices, operating procedures and practices to control site runoff,
spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal or drainage from raw materials
storage.
   CITY. The City of St. Bonifacius
   CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251
et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
   COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE. A contiguous area where multiple
separate and distinct land disturbing activities may be taking place at
different times, on different schedules, but under one proposed plan. One plan
is broadly defined to include design, permit application, advertisement or
physical demarcation indicating that land-disturbing activities may occur.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Activities including clearing, grading, and
excavating, that result in land disturbance of equal to or greater than one
acre, including the disturbance of less than one acre of total land area that
is part of a larger common plan of development or sale if the larger common
plan will ultimately disturb equal to or greater than one acre. This includes a
disturbance to the land that results in a change in the topography, existing
soil cover, both vegetative and non-vegetative, or the existing soil topography
that may result in accelerated storm water runoff that may lead to soil erosion
and movement of sediment. CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY does not include a disturbance
to the land  of less than five acres for the purpose of routine maintenance
performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, and
original purpose of the facility. Routine maintenance does not include
activities such as repairs, replacement and other types of non-routine
maintenance. Pavement rehabilitation that does not disturb the underlying soils
(e.g., mill and overlay projects) is not construction activity.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material, including any substance, waste or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property
or the environment, when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of
or otherwise managed.
   ILLEGAL DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the
storm drain system, except as exempted in §
53.09 of this chapter.
   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS. As either of the following:
      (1)   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including,
but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any non-storm water discharge
including sewage, process wastewater and wash water to enter the storm drain
system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and
sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously
allowed, permitted or approved by the city; or
      (2)   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps
or equivalent records and approved by the city.
   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(14).
   MPCA. Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER
DISCHARGE PERMIT. A permit issued by EPA (or by the state under authority
delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the state, whether the permit is applicable on an
individual, group or general area-wide basis.
   NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is
not composed entirely of storm water.
   PERSON. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or
as the owner’s agent.
   POLLUTANT. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. POLLUTANTS may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquids, solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse,
rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and
accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables;
pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes;
sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal
wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or
structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
   PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel of land or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and boulevards.
   STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM. Publicly-owned facilities by which storm water is
collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm
drains, pumping facilities, infiltration, retention and detention basins,
natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs and other
drainage structures.
   STORM WATER. Any surface flow, runoff and drainage consisting entirely of
water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP). A document which describes
the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or
business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the
actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to storm water, storm water
conveyance systems and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
   WASTEWATER. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm
water, discharged from a facility or property.
   WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage
systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground,
natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow
through or border upon the state or any portion thereof.
(Ord. 79A, passed 10-21-2015; Ord. 2022-04, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 53.03 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system
generated on any developed or undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by
an authorized enforcement agency.
(Ord. 79A, passed 10-21-2015)
§ 53.04 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
   The city shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this
chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the MPCA may be delegated in
writing by the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer to persons or entities acting
in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the city.
(Ord. 79A, passed 10-21-2015)
§ 53.05 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this chapter or the application
thereof to any person, establishment or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this
chapter.
(Ord. 79A, passed 10-21-2015)
§ 53.06 ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY.
   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are
minimum standards; therefore, this chapter does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
(Ord. 79A, passed 10-21-2015)
§ 53.07 DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause
to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or waters of the state
any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality
standards, other than storm water. The commencement, conduct or continuance of
any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited, except as
described as follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided herein, the following discharges are
exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this chapter: water line
flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering,
diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm
drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not
including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air
conditioning condensation, springs, non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural
riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if de-chlorinated -
typically less than one PPM chlorine), firefighting activities and any other
water source not containing pollutants;
      (2)   Discharges specified in writing by the MPCA as being necessary to
protect public health and safety;
      (3)   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the City Engineer 48 hours prior to the start of the test;
      (4)   The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the MPCA or Federal
Environmental Protection Agency; provided that, the discharger is in full
compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver or order and other
applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the storm drain system; and
      (5)   Sump pumps may not discharge water directed toward an abutting
street, except in cases where no practical alternative exists.
   (B)   Prohibition of illicit connections.
      (1)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of
illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
      (2)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
      (3)   A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the
person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection
to continue.
   (C)   Pet waste management. All pet owners and keepers are required to
immediately and properly dispose of their pet’s solid waste deposited on any
property, public or private, not owned or possessed by that person.
   (D)   Salt storage. All facilities storing salt must require the following:
      (1)   Designated salt storage areas must be covered or indoors;
      (2)   Designated salt storage areas must be located on an impervious
surface;
      (3)   Implementation of practices to reduce exposure when transferring
material.
(Ord. 79A, passed 10-21-2015; Ord. 2022-04, passed 12-7-2022) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.08 SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS.
   (A)   Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The city
may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which
presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or
to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the state. If
the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency,
the city may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage
to the MS4 or waters of the state, or to minimize danger to persons.
   (B)   Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have their MS4 access
terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The
city will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access.
   (C)   Offense. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4
access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior
approval of the city.
(Ord. 79A, passed 10-21-2015) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.09 INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES.
   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES storm
water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof
of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city
prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
(Ord. 79A, passed 10-21-2015) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.10 MONITORING OF DISCHARGES.
   (A)   Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have storm
water discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction
activity.
   (B)   Access to facilities.
      (1)   The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities, in
accordance with §
10.20, subject to regulation under this chapter as often as may be necessary to
determine compliance with this chapter. If a discharger has security measures
in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into
its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow
access to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency.
      (2)   Facility operators shall allow the city ready access to all parts
of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and
copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of the NPDES permit
to discharge storm water, and the performance of any additional duties as
defined by state and federal law.
      (3)   The city shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility
such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city to conduct monitoring
and/or sampling of the facility’s storm water discharge.
      (4)   The city has the right to require the discharger to install
monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure
storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy per
manufacturer’s recommendations.
      (5)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall not be replaced.
The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
      (6)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a permitted
facility is a violation of the storm water discharge permit and of this
chapter. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to
discharge storm water associated with industrial activity commits an offense if
the person denies the city reasonable access to the permitted facility for the
purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this chapter.
      (7)   If the city has been refused access to any part of the premises
from which storm water is discharged, and he or she is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or
that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection
and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any
order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and
welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant
from any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 79A, passed 10-21-2015)
§ 53.11 BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.
   The city has adopted requirements identifying best management practices for
any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution
or contamination of storm water, the storm drain system or waters of the state.
The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall
provide, at his, her or their own expense, reasonable protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal
storm drain system or waters of the state through the use of these structural
and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or
premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be
required to implement, at said person’s expense, additional structural and non-
structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal
separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a
valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of storm water associated with
industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliant with
the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a storm water
pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements
of the NPDES permit.
(Ord. 79A, passed 10-21-2015)
§ 53.12 NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.
   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible
for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a
facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of
materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants
discharging into storm water, the storm drain system or waters of the state,
said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment
and cleanup of such a release. In the event of such a release of hazardous
materials, said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of
the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of
non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the city in person or by
phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person
or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the
city within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of
prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment,
the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site
written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its
recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
(Ord. 79A, passed 10-21-2015) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.13 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Whenever the city finds that a person has violated a prohibition or
failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the city may order compliance by
written notice of violation to the responsible person.
   (B)   Such notice may require without limitation:
      (1)   The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
      (2)   The elimination of illicit connections, illicit discharges, or pet
waste;
      (3)   The violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease and
desist;
      (4)   The installation of proper salt storage facilities and
implementation of proper salt handling procedures;
      (5)   The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
      (6)   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
      (7)   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs; and
      (8)   The deadline within which to remedy the violation.
   (C)   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation
or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should
the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the
work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the
expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
(Ord. 79A, passed 10-21-2015; Ord. 2022-04, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 53.14 APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of
the city. The notice of appeal must be received by the city within 15 days from
the date of the notice of violation. The appeal shall be heard by the City
Council within 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The
decision of the City Council shall be final.
(Ord. 79A, passed 10-21-2015)
§ 53.15 ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL.
   If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within the
deadline extended by the decision of the City Council, then representatives of
the city shall enter upon the subject private property, in accordance with §
10.20 and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the
violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person,
owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the
city or its designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes
set forth above.
(Ord. 79A, passed 10-21-2015) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.16 COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION.
   Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property
will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs, and
the deadline to pay the abatement costs. The property owner may file a written
protest objecting to the costs and payment terms of the abatement within 15
days. The appeal shall be heard by the City Council within 30 days from the
date of receipt of the notice of appeal. If the amount due is not paid within a
timely manner as determined by the decision of the City Council after hearing
the appeal, the charges be filed with Scott County and shall become a special
assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for
the amount of the assessment.
(Ord. 79A, passed 10-21-2015)
§ 53.17 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail
to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of
this chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary
or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would
create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or
remediation of the violation.
(Ord. 79A, passed 10-21-2015) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.18 COMPENSATORY ACTION.
   In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties and remedies authorized by
this chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a violator
alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at
compliance workshops, creek cleanup and the like.
(Ord. 79A, passed 10-21-2015)
§ 53.19 VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter is a threat to public health, safety and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the
violator’s expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel
the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
(Ord. 79A, passed 10-21-2015)
§ 53.20 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the
discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies.
(Ord. 79A, passed 10-21-2015)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   Any person that violates this chapter shall be shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, may be subject to the maximum fine
and imprisonment allowed by state law. Each such violation shall constitute a
separate offense punishable to the maximum extent of the law. The authorized
enforcement agency may recover all attorneys’ fees court costs and other
expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter, including sampling and
monitoring expenses.
(Ord. 79A, passed 10-21-2015)
CHAPTER 54: STORM SEWER SYSTEM
Section
   
54.01   Purpose and policy
   
54.02   Establishment of storm water drainage district
   
54.03   Authority to impose storm water drainage utility charge
   
54.04   Authority to impose storm water drainage connection charge
   
54.05   Operation and enforcement of storm water drainage
   
54.06   Collection of fees
   
54.07   Exemptions
   
54.08   Revenues
   
54.09   Enforcement for collection of fees
§ 54.01 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   (A)   The city has a very extensive storm water drainage system which
includes storm pipe, holding ponds, drainage ways and creeks to serve the needs
of the community. In order to help defray the cost of the establishment,
construction, repair, replacement, maintenance, enlargement and improvement of
said system it is hereby determined by the City Council that there shall be a
storm water drainage utility charge and a storm water connection charge payable
by every lot, parcel or piece of property which shall hereafter connect to the
storm water disposal system or by each additional use causing excessive
discharge of storm water, whether residential, commercial or industrial, or
upon the construction of additional units upon land already connected to the
system.
   (B)   It is hereby determined to be the policy of the city that the benefit
to any lot, piece or parcel of land developed within the city limits and
benefitting from storm sewer or availability is similar and that payment for
said services or availability should be collected on as fair, reasonable and
equitable basis as possible. It is further determined that any charge set forth
pursuant to this chapter is in addition to any connection charge, permit fee or
meter charge pursuant to any other ordinance of the city of any other
governmental entity or agency.
(Ord. 79, passed 12-15-2004)
§ 54.02 ESTABLISHMENT OF STORM WATER DRAINAGE DISTRICT.
   The entire corporate limits of the city is hereby established as the “St.
Bonifacius Storm Water Drainage District”.
(Ord. 79, passed 12-15-2004)
§ 54.03 AUTHORITY TO IMPOSE STORM WATER DRAINAGE UTILITY CHARGE.
   For the purpose of providing funds to defray the cost of maintenance and
operation of the storm water drainage system, the costs of construction,
maintenance and operation of storm pipe, holding ponds, drainage ways and
creeks, payment of capital charges represented by bonds, certificates of
indebtedness or otherwise, and the payment of reasonable requirements for
replacement and obsolescence thereof there is hereby levied and assessed upon
each lot, parcel of land, building or premises presently or hereafter having
any connection, directly or indirectly, with the storm water drainage system of
the city, a monthly storm water utility charge determined as provided in this
chapter.
(Ord. 79, passed 12-15-2004)
§ 54.04 AUTHORITY TO IMPOSE STORM WATER DRAINAGE CONNECTION CHARGE.
   In addition to charges for storm water drainage utility charges, the storm
water utility connection charge shall be required of each individual or entity
requesting or receiving a connection to the storm water drainage system shall
be deemed to have occurred whenever, in the opinion of the city, a use is made
of any parcel of property which increases the discharge of storm water from
said parcel.
(Ord. 79, passed 12-15-2004)
§ 54.05 OPERATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF STORM WATER DRAINAGE.
   The municipal storm water drainage system shall be operated as a public
utility pursuant to M.S. §§ 444.075 et seq., as they may be amended from time
to time, and this chapter. The storm drainage utility will be a part of the
city’s Utilities Department and under the administration of the City Council.
All revenues will be derived subject to the provisions of this chapter and
Minnesota Statutes.
(Ord. 79, passed 12-15-2004)
§ 54.06 COLLECTION OF FEES.
   A storm water drainage utility charge shall be charged to each residential
and commercial or industrial use. Storm water utility charges shall be
collected in conjunction with other city utility charges. Storm water utility
connection charges shall be as set forth in the annual fee schedule for each
equivalent residential unit (ERU). ERU shall be determined by §
51.15 of this code of ordinances and shall be payable with building permits.
All fees shall be just and equitable and in accordance with M.S. §§ 444.075 et
seq., as they may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 79, passed 12-15-2004; Ord. 100, passed 11-9-2007; Ord. 101, passed 11-
14-2007; Ord. 101A, passed 12-5-2012; Ord. 101B, passed 3-5-2014)
§ 54.07 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following land uses are exempt from storm water drainage fees:
   (A)   Public rights-of-way; and
   (B)   Vacant unimproved land with ground cover.
(Ord. 79, passed 12-15-2004)
§ 54.08 REVENUES.
   All revenues derived from those storm water drainage utility charges and
connection charges adopted by the City Council shall be credited to the Storm
Water Drainage Utility Fund.
(Ord. 79, passed 12-15-2004)
§ 54.09 ENFORCEMENT FOR COLLECTION OF FEES.
   Any unpaid or delinquent storm water utility connection charges may be
recovered from the occupant or owner of the premises billed therefor in a civil
action by the city in any competent jurisdiction or, in the discretion of the
City Council, may be certified to the county’s Auditor as taxes against any
such property to be collected and paid over to the city along with other taxes.
Either or both of such methods of collection thereof may be pursued by the city
until payment in full has been made, and the initiation of one such method of
collection shall not be deemed to be an election preventing the city from
thereafter using the other method of collection until paid in full. Payment of
delinquent storm drainage utility and connection charges shall be credited to
the same fund used for current storm utility charges, deducting therefrom any
costs of collection accruing to the city therefor.
(Ord. 79, passed 12-15-2004)
CHAPTER 55: REFUSE DISPOSAL
Section
   
55.01   Definitions
   
55.02   Disposal required
   
55.03   Containers
   
55.04   Contract for collection
§ 55.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. Organic waste resulting from the preparation of food and decayed
and spoiled food from any source.
   REFUSE. Garbage and rubbish.
   RUBBISH. Inorganic solid waste such as tin cans, glass, paper, ashes,
sweepings and the like.
(1994 Code, § 7-7.1)
§ 55.02 DISPOSAL REQUIRED.
   Every person shall, in a sanitary manner, dispose of refuse that may
accumulate upon property owned or occupied by him or her. Refuse shall be
collected, or otherwise lawfully disposed of, at least once each week and every
householder, occupant and owner of any residence shall use the refuse
collection service provided by the contractor for the city.
(1994 Code, § 7-7.2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 55.03 CONTAINERS.
   (A)   General requirements. Every householder, occupant or owner of any
residence and any restaurant, industrial establishment or commercial
establishment shall provide on the premises one or more containers to receive
and contain all refuse which may accumulate between collections. All normal
accumulations of refuse shall be deposited in such containers. Leaves,
trimmings from shrubs, grass clippings, shavings, excelsior and other rubbish
of similar volume and weight may be stored in closed containers not meeting the
requirements of this section.
   (B)   Container requirements. Each container shall be water-tight, shall be
impervious to insects and rodents and shall be fire-proof. Any commercial or
business establishment having refuse volume exceeding two cubic yards per week
shall provide bulk or box-type refuse storage containers of a type approved by
the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer. Containers shall be maintained in good
and sanitary condition. Any container not conforming to the requirements of
this section or having ragged or sharp edges or any other defect likely to
hamper or injure the person collecting the contents shall be promptly replaced
after notice by the city.
   (C)   Placement. Where an alley open to traffic is available, each container
for premises abutting the alley shall be placed at the rear of the property
next to the alley. Where no alley exists, the container shall be placed near
the rear door of the building to which it relates. In that case, the container
shall be placed at the front property line for collection but it shall not be
so placed before 6:00 p.m., the night before collection and shall be removed by
6:00 p.m., the day of collection.
   (D)   Use of containers. Refuse shall be drained of liquid and household
garbage shall be wrapped before being deposited in a container. Highly
inflammable or explosive material shall not be placed in containers.
   (E)   Contracts. City Council may enter into contracts with haulers in which
residential properties must use containers provided by the hauler.
(1994 Code, § 7-7.3) (Ord. 30, passed 11-25-1997) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 55.04 CONTRACT FOR COLLECTION.
   (A)   Council to let contract. Subject to the provisions of this chapter,
the Council shall grant, by contract, the authority to collect and dispose of
all residential refuse and recyclables originating from the city. The City
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall request quotes for such contract and the
City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall see that when let, the contract is
executed in accordance with its terms and this chapter.
   (B)   Terms. The contract shall be made for a term of one year, subject to
extension by mutual consent for additional one-year terms and to termination
during the period of the contract as provided in the contract. The Council may
choose to enter into contracts to include three- or five-year terms.
   (C)   Liability insurance.
      (1)   It shall be a condition of the contract that the applicant file
with the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer a current policy of public
liability insurance to be used by the applicant in the refuse collection
business. The limits of coverage of such insurance shall be as follows:
         (a)   Each person injured: at least $100,000;
         (b)   Each accident: at least $300,000; and
         (c)   Property damage: at least $10,000.
      (2)   In addition, the applicant shall be required to carry worker’s
compensation coverage on all employees and shall make such contributions as are
required to the state’s Unemployment Compensation Fund.
   (D)   Contract collector. No person shall collect refuse within the city,
except a person holding a contract or permit with the city to do so. No person
shall permit refuse to be picked up from said person’s premises except by such
contractor.
(1994 Code, § 7-7.4) (Ord. 29, passed 11-13-1997) Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Minnesota Traffic Code adopted by reference
   
70.02   Minnesota Traffic Devices Manual adopted by reference
   
70.03   Establishing traffic controls
   
70.04   Abandoned vehicles
   
70.05   Street lighting
   
70.06   Snow removal from public streets
Traffic
   
70.20   Vehicle and roadway load limits
   
70.21   Unreasonable acceleration
   
70.22   Compression release engine braking
Parking
   
70.35   On-street parking
 
   
70.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Citations, see §
130.03
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 MINNESOTA TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   M.S. Ch. 169, and specifically M.S. §§ 169.69 (muffler) and 169.693 (motor
vehicle noise limits), as they may be amended from time to time, are hereby
adopted by reference and are as much a part of this traffic code as if fully
set forth herein.
(1994 Code, § 9-5.3) (Ord. 111, passed 12-2-2009)
§ 70.02 MINNESOTA TRAFFIC DEVICES MANUAL ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The provisions, limitations, conditions and instructions of the Minnesota
Uniform Traffic Control Devices Manual and all applicable and related rules and
regulations now existing or hereinafter adopted by reference and made a part of
this traffic code as if fully set forth herein, except as herein modified.
(1994 Code, § 9-5.4)
§ 70.03 ESTABLISHING TRAFFIC CONTROLS.
   (A)   The Council may, from time to time, adopt resolutions limiting or
restricting traffic by the placement or marking in various manners according to
the Traffic Control Devices Manual. This action may include, but is not
necessarily limited to, speed limits on city streets, parking restrictions as
to location and duration for various types and classes of vehicles, load limit
restrictions, the placement of regulatory and warning signs and devices and the
designation of directional movements, all of the foregoing being limited to
public ways under the jurisdiction of the city and excluding those under county
or state jurisdiction.
   (B)   The existence of such traffic control devices shall be prima facie
evidence of the Council’s intentions with respect to traffic control and in
response to the need for the orderly movement of traffic while maintaining the
general health, safety and welfare of the public.
(1994 Code, § 9-5.5)
§ 70.04 ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   It shall be a violation of this traffic code to willfully abandon any
vehicle on any city street or public property. After 48 hours, the city may
remove and dispose of and enter into litigation for the collection of any costs
incurred together with the imposition of penalties for the violation of this
traffic code as set forth herein.
(1994 Code, § 9-5.2) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.05 STREET LIGHTING.
   (A)   The placement, maintenance and operation of street lighting shall
remain under the authority of the Council. No person or firm shall either
augment or reduce lighting devices which cast light onto the public streets
without the express permission of the Council.
   (B)   The Council shall have the authority to enter into agreement with any
competent firm or person for the purpose of maintenance.
(1994 Code, § 9-5.7) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.06 SNOW REMOVAL FROM PUBLIC STREETS.
   (A)   No person or firm shall allow or place any obstruction on any public
street so as to create a handicap to the proper removal of snow. The city is
hereby authorized to remove or cause such obstruction, whether a vehicle or
other object, to be removed.
   (B)   The owner shall be subject to actual costs of removal in addition to
the penalties set forth herein.
(1994 Code, § 9-5.8) Penalty, see §
70.99
TRAFFIC
§ 70.20 VEHICLE AND ROADWAY LOAD LIMITS.
   (A)   The Council may, from time to time, establish by resolution certain
vehicle and roadway restrictions for the preservation of the roadway.
   (B)   Vehicle restrictions shall be limited by axle weight and roadway
restrictions may be limited by either axle weight or by vehicle type and
classification.
(1994 Code, § 9-5.6)
§ 70.21 UNREASONABLE ACCELERATION.
   (A)   No person shall start or accelerate any motor vehicle with any
unnecessary exhibition of speed on any public or private roadway, driveway,
parking lot or other driving surface within the city limits.
   (B)   Prima facie evidence of such unnecessary acceleration of speed shall
be unreasonable squealing or screeching sounds emitted by tires or the throwing
of sand or gravel by the tires of said vehicle, or both.
(1994 Code, § 9-5.7) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.22 COMPRESSION RELEASE ENGINE BRAKING.
   No person shall use motor vehicle brakes that are, in any way, operated or
activated by the compression of the engine in any motor vehicle that make a
loud popping sound upon any public roadway located within the city, except in
an emergency situation.
(Ord. 111, passed 12-2-2009) Penalty, see §
70.99
PARKING
§ 70.35 ON-STREET PARKING.
   (A)   General. The Council may, from time to time, adopt resolutions
limiting or restricting parking on certain designated streets or portions
thereof and to order proper posting and/or marking of such designated areas for
general information. It shall be the general policy of the City Council to
discourage on-street parking on any street where such use creates any hazard,
inconvenience or nuisance to any person or property.
   (B)   Double parking. Double parking, whether or not attended, shall not be
allowed on any street in the city for any length of time.
   (C)   Commercial vehicles in residential areas. No commercial vehicle shall
be allowed to park on any residential street for a period longer than four
hours.
   (D)   Overtime and overnight parking in commercial areas. The Council has
the authority to set limits as required in particular areas.
   (E)   Winter parking. During the period from January 1 to April 1,
inclusive, and from November 1 to December 31, inclusive, of each calendar
year, no motor vehicle shall be parked on any city street between the hours of
3:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. Any motor vehicle parked contrary to the provisions of
this division (E) shall be considered an obstruction to the proper removal of
snow and shall be subject to removal pursuant to the provisions of §
70.06 of this chapter. Hardship exceptions may be issued by the City Council.
(1994 Code, § 9-5.1) (Ord. 73A, passed 6-3-2009) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this traffic code for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violation of any provision of §
70.22 of this chapter shall constitute a petty misdemeanor, subject to the
penalties provided by law for petty misdemeanors.
(Ord. 111, passed 12-2-2009)
CHAPTER 71: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Snowmobiles and All-Terrain Vehicles
   
71.01   Definitions
   
71.02   Use permitted
   
71.03   Crossing streets or highways
   
71.04   Traffic ordinances applicable
   
71.05   Yielding right-of-way
   
71.06   Operation by persons under 18
   
71.07   Use specifically prohibited
   
71.08   Equipment required
   
71.09   Ignition lock
   
71.10   Emergencies; operation permitted
SNOWMOBILES AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
§ 71.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES or ATV. Any vehicle licensed by the Department of
Natural Resources as a Class I or II ATV.
   DEADMAN THROTTLE or SAFETY THROTTLE. A device which, when pressure is
removed from the engine accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to be
disengaged from the driving mechanism.
   NATURAL TERRAIN. Areas other than roadways or driveways (private or public),
parking lots and other areas the surface of which has been intentionally
modified for motor vehicle operation thereon.
   OPERATE. To ride in or on and control the operation of a snowmobile or ATV.
   OPERATOR. Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
snowmobile or ATV.
   OWNER. A person, other than a lien holder, having the property in or title
to snowmobile or ATV entitled to the use or possession thereof.
   SNOWMOBILE. A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice
steered by skis or runners.
(1994 Code, § 9-6.1) (Ord. 2018-3, passed 12-19-2018)
§ 71.02 USE PERMITTED.
   Except as herein specifically permitted and authorized, it is unlawful for
any person to operate a snowmobile or ATV within the limits of the city:
   (A)   On the portion of any right-of-way of any public highway, street,
road, trail or alley used for motor vehicle travel; except that, a snowmobile
or ATV may operate upon the most right-hand lane of a municipal street or alley
and may in passing or making a left turn operate on other lanes which are used
for vehicle traffic in the same direction, for purposes of going to or
returning from a non-highway area of permissible operation, by the most direct
route. Snowmobiles may also be operated upon the ditch bottom or the outside
bank of trunk, county state-aid and county highways where such highways are so
configured within the corporate limits;
   (B)   On any portion of any area zoned for commercial business or industrial
land use;
   (C)   On a public sidewalk or walkway provided for pedestrian travel;
   (D)   On boulevards within any public right-of-way;
   (E)   On private property of another without specific permission of the
owner or person in control of said property;
   (F)   On any other public place, except as may be specifically permitted by
other provisions of the city;
   (G)   At a speed in excess of ten mph; or
   (H)   Without proper license displayed.
(1994 Code, § 9-6.2) (Ord. 2018-3, passed 12-19-2018) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.03 CROSSING STREETS OR HIGHWAYS.
   A snowmobile or ATV not licensed as a motor vehicle may make a direct
crossing of a street or highway, except an interstate highway or freeway;
provided:
   (A)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the street or highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents
a quick and safe crossing;
   (B)   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
shoulder or main traveled way;
   (C)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all on-coming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard;
   (D)   In crossing a divided street or highway, the crossing is made only at
an intersection of such street or highway with another public street or
highway; or
   (E)   If the crossing is made between the hours of one-half hour before
sunrise to one-half hour after sunset or, in conditions of reduced visibility,
only if both front and rear lights are on.
(1994 Code, § 9-6.3) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.04 TRAFFIC ORDINANCES APPLICABLE.
   City traffic regulations shall apply to the operation of snowmobiles or ATVs
not licensed as a motor vehicle upon streets and highways, except for those
relating to required equipment, those which, by their nature, have no
application and those inconsistent with the provisions herein.
(1994 Code, § 9-6.4)
§ 71.05 YIELDING RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   No snowmobile or ATV shall enter any intersection without yielding the
right-of-way to any vehicle or pedestrian at the intersection, or so close to
the intersection as to constitute an immediate hazard.
(1994 Code, § 9-6.5) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.06 OPERATION BY PERSONS UNDER 18.
   (A)   No person under 14 years of age shall operate on streets or the
roadway surface of highways or make direct crossing of a trunk, county state-
aid, county highway or city streets as the operator of a snowmobile.
   (B)   A person 14 years of age or older, but less than 18 years of age, may
operate a snowmobile or ATV on streets and highways as permitted under this
subchapter and make a direct crossing of such streets and highways only if the
person has in his or her possession a valid snowmobile safety certificate
issued pursuant to M.S. § 84.872, as it may be amended from time to time.
(1994 Code, § 9-6.6) (Ord. 2018-3, passed 12-19-2018) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.07 USE SPECIFICALLY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile, ATV not
licensed for highway use or ATV licensed for highway use when operating on
natural terrain within the limits of the city:
      (1)   At any place while under the influence of alcohol or drugs, as
defined in M.S. § 169A.03, as it may be amended from time to time, which is
hereby incorporated herein by reference;
      (2)   At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under all
surrounding circumstances;
      (3)   At any place in a careless, reckless or negligent manner or
heedlessly in disregard of the rights or safety of others, or in a manner so as
to endanger or be likely to endanger or cause injury or damage to any person or
property;
      (4)   During the hours from 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. of any day, closer
than 100 feet to any dwelling which is usually occupied by one or more persons
unless on a designated marked trail;
      (5)   So as to tow any person or thing, except through use of a rigid tow
bar attached to the rear of the snowmobile or ATV; or
      (6)   Within 100 feet of any fisherman, pedestrian, skating rink or
sliding area where the operation would conflict with use or endanger other
persons or property.
(1994 Code, § 9-6.7)
   (B)   It is unlawful to intentionally drive, chase, run over or kill any
animal with a snowmobile or ATV.
(1994 Code, § 9-6.11)
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.08 EQUIPMENT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile or ATV any place
within the limits of the city unless it is equipped with the following:
   (A)   Standard mufflers which are properly attached and which reduce the
noise of operation of the motor to the minimum necessary for operation. No
person shall use a muffler cutout, by-pass straight pipe or similar device on a
snowmobile or ATV motor;
   (B)   Brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold the
snowmobile or ATV under any condition of operation;
   (C)   A safety or so-called “deadman” throttle in operating condition;
   (D)   When operated between the hours of one-half hour after sunset and one-
half hour before sunrise or at time of reduced visibility, at least one clear
lamp attached to the front, with sufficient intensity to reveal persons and
vehicles at a distance of at least 100 feet ahead during the hours of darkness
and under normal atmospheric conditions. Such headlamp shall be so aimed that
glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of an oncoming snowmobile or ATV
operator. It shall also be equipped with at least one red tail lamp having a
minimum candlepower of sufficient intensity to exhibit a red light plainly
visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear during hours of darkness under
normal atmospheric conditions;
   (E)   Snowmobiles shall fly a pennant flag of red or blaze material, of a
size not less than 12 inches by nine inches, at a height of not less than six
feet from ground level at any time when the vehicle is operated on public
streets; and
   (F)   Reflective material at least 16 inches square on each side, forward of
the handlebars or steering device of a snowmobile or ATV and at the highest
practical point on any towed object, as to reflect light at a 90-degree angle.
(1994 Code, § 9-6.8) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.09 IGNITION LOCK.
   Every person leaving a snowmobile or ATV on a public place or way shall lock
the ignition, remove the key and take the key.
(1994 Code, § 9-6.9) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.10 EMERGENCIES; OPERATION PERMITTED.
   Notwithstanding any prohibitions in this subchapter, a snowmobile or ATV may
be operated on a public thoroughfare in an emergency during the period of time
and at locations where snow upon the roadway renders travel by automobile
impractical.
(1994 Code, § 9-6.10) (Ord. 2018-3, passed 12-19-2018)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   DRONES
      
92.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
      
93.   RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
      
94.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
      
95.   TOBACCO
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Licensing provisions
   
90.03   Restraint by owner required
   
90.04   Impoundment and reclamation
   
90.05   [Reserved]
   
90.06   Dogs
 
   
90.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Animal nuisances, see §
92.01
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL PET. Any animal which does not perform a useful occupational task is
hereby defined as an ANIMAL PET under the terms of this chapter. Such ANIMAL
PETS shall include, but need not be limited to, dogs, cats and similar pets,
but shall not include any hoofed animals, the keeping of which shall be
unlawful within the city. Farm animals when living on agricultural lands shall
not be classified as ANIMAL PETS regardless of task performance.
   AT LARGE. Off the property of the owner and not under the owner’s restraint
   ENCLOSURE. Any building or structure which disallows an animal from leaving
at its own will.
   IMPOUND. To seize and retain in legal custody in a designated pound or
kennel.
   KENNEL. An operation which may keep three or more dogs over three months of
age and may or may not engage in the breeding, training or boarding of dogs for
a profit.
(1994 Code, § 2-1)
§ 90.02 LICENSING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   License required. Any person who owns, harbors or keeps a dog or any
animal which the City Council may determine, shall be required to register,
license and number the animal. Licensing shall be valid for the life of the
animal.
   (B)   License fee. The fee for the licensing of any animal shall be as set
forth in the annual fee schedule for each animal so licensed. The fee shall
accompany the application for license.
   (C)   Registration.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of the city office to license animals.
      (2)   Upon presentation of a receipt to the city office in the amount of
the registration fee as set forth in the annual fee schedule, the City
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall enter the name of the owner or keeper of
every animal being licensed, together with a description of the animal, in a
book kept by the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer for such purpose.
      (3)   A list including this information shall periodically be given to
the Public Safety Department after payment has been made, the city office shall
then issue a written license for each animal so registered and a tag bearing
the registration number of the animal. The tag shall be securely fastened by
the owner to a collar around the animal’s neck to be worn at all times.
(1994 Code, § 2-2) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 RESTRAINT BY OWNER REQUIRED.
   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person owning or keeping an
animal required to be licensed to allow such animal to run at large within the
city limits. This section does not prohibit the appearance of animals upon the
streets when the animal is upon a leash, accompanied by an adult person and
under the control of that person.
(1994 Code, § 2-3) (Ord. 22, passed 4-24-1997) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 IMPOUNDMENT AND RECLAMATION.
   (A)   Poundkeeper. The Council shall appoint a poundkeeper. The St.
Bonifacius/Minnesota Department of Public Safety shall provide a community
service officer (CSO) to provide animal control within the city limits. City
police officers and the CSO may cite owners of animals for violations of this
chapter. The poundkeeper will be responsible for the impoundment and care of
animals in violation and disposal of said animals according to the terms of
this chapter.
   (B)   Impoundment.
      (1)   The CSO or police officers of the city may impound any dog in the
city without a registration tag or in violation of any other section of this
chapter. The CSO or police officers of the city shall, upon receiving a citizen
complaint, impound any dog running at large in violation of this chapter.
      (2)   The CSO or police officers may enter upon private property, in
accordance with §
10.20 if they have reasonable cause to believe there is a violation.
      (3)   Compensation shall be established by the poundkeeper and approved
by the City Council.
   (C)   Reclamation.
      (1)   Whenever an animal is picked up by the CSO or police officers, the
owner, if known, shall be notified as soon as possible.
      (2)   Upon notification, the owner will be given five days in which to
reclaim the animal.
      (3)   In order to reclaim the animal, the owner must pay the fees accrued
for impounding and feeding the animal. The owner of the animal shall also pay
such fine as set forth in §
90.99 of this chapter. A proper license, in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter, shall be obtained upon payment of the fine.
      (4)   The signed release form of the impounded animal must be shown to
the poundkeeper to redeem the animal.
(1994 Code, § 2-4) (Ord. 22, passed 4-24-1997)
§ 90.05 [RESERVED].
§ 90.06 DOGS.
   (A)   Abandonment prohibited. No dog owner shall abandon any dog or dog
carcass within the city limits.
   (B)   Dog bites. Any person knowing of a case of a human being bitten by a
dog shall immediately notify the poundkeeper/dog warden or Chief of Police, who
shall then impound the dog for a period of 14 days, at the owner’s expense,
before surrendering the dog to its owner. The dog warden or Chief of Police may
allow the owner of the dog to impound it if the owner has adequate facilities.
   (C)   Number of dogs restricted. Each family or household unit is limited to
the possession of three dogs.
   (D)   Running at large prohibited. The owner of any dog shall not allow it
to run at large. Any dog running at large, whether or not licensed, shall be
subject to the provisions in §§
90.04 and
90.99 of this chapter.
   (E)   Animal noise; disturbing peace and quiet.
      (1)   No person owning, operating, having charge of or occupying any
building or premises shall keep or allow to be kept any animal which shall, by
any noise, unreasonably disturb the peace and quiet of any person in the
vicinity.
      (2)   The phrase UNREASONABLY DISTURB THE PEACE shall include, but is not
limited to, the creation of any noise by any animal which can be heard by any
person (which may include members of the Police Department) from a location
outside of the building or premises where the animal is being kept and which
animal noise occurs repeatedly over at least a five-minute period of time with
one minute or less lapse of time between each animal noise during the five-
minute period.
   (F)   Animal clean-up.
      (1)   (a)   Any person having the custody or control of any animal shall
have the responsibility for cleaning up any feces of any animal and disposing
of such feces in a sanitary manner. It shall be the duty of any person having
custody or control of any animal on or about any public place to have in that
person’s possession suitable equipment for the picking up, removal and sanitary
disposal of animal feces.
         (b)   For the purposes of this division (F), PUBLIC PLACE shall
include any property open for the public use, such as privately owned parking
lots or other areas where the public is invited or allowed on private property.
      (2)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to seeing eye dogs
used by blind persons, service dogs for disabled persons or dogs used when
engaged in police activities in the city.
(1994 Code, § 2-6) (Ord. 22, passed 4-24-1997) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   If an animal is found to be in violation of any provisions of this
chapter, the owner of such animal shall pay a fine of $25. If, for some reason,
the owner does not pay this fine, the city shall reserve the right to access
the fine through the owners taxes.
   (B)   In addition to this fine, any person keeping any animal required to be
licensed, but which has not been properly licensed with the city, shall be
required to license said animal. The amount of the registration fees shall be
double the amount set forth in §
90.02(C)(2) of this chapter.
(1994 Code, § 2-4)
CHAPTER 91: DRONES
Section
   
91.01   Purpose
   
91.02   Definition
   
91.03   Prohibitions
   
91.04   Exceptions
 
   
91.99   Penalty
§ 91.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this chapter to provide the residents of the city
protection from invasions of privacy due to the rapid implementation of drone
technology being put into use by individuals, entities and law enforcement
agencies.
   (B)   Use of unmanned aerial vehicles also pose an unreasonable public
safety concern to other aircraft or objects in the air and to city residents
and their property on the ground in the event of drone malfunction, loss of
control or other inability to sustain flight as intended.
(Ord. 115, passed 3-20-2013)
§ 91.02 DEFINITION.
   DRONE means a powered, aerial vehicle that:
   (A)   Does not carry a human;
   (B)   Uses aerodynamic forces to provide vehicle lift;
   (C)   Can fly autonomously or be piloted remotely; and
   (D)   Can be expendable or recoverable.
(Ord. 115, passed 3-20-2013)
§ 91.03 PROHIBITION.
   No person, entity, governmental unit or law enforcement agency may operate a
drone within or above the boundaries of the city.
(Ord. 115, passed 3-20-2013; Ord. 2022-02, passed 10-19-2022) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.04 EXCEPTIONS.
   This chapter does not prohibit the use or operation of a drone from or above
city limits if:
   (A)   A law enforcement agency first obtains a warrant authorizing its use;
   (B)   A law enforcement agency determines, under particular circumstances,
that there is immediate danger of death or serious injury to any person;
   (C)   It is operated only within the boundaries of private property with the
owner’s consent;
   (D)   It is operated by an individual holding a pilot certificate or
temporary certificate issued under 14 CFR Part 107 with a small UAS rating; or
   (E)   It is in compliance with remote identification requirements as defined
in 14 CFR Part 89, and is operated greater than 100 feet above ground level; or
   (F)   The City Council approves drone use for a specific event or purpose.
   (G)   It is the intention of the City Council, when adopting this section,
all future amendments to any state or federal rules and statutes adopted by
reference in this section or referenced in this section are hereby adopted by
reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this
section was adopted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the section
to the contrary.
(Ord. 115, passed 3-20-2013; Ord. 2022-02, passed 10-19-2022)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   Use or operation of a drone within the airspace of the city in violation of
this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, punishable in accordance with state law.
(Ord. 115, passed 3-20-2013)
CHAPTER 92: HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Animal nuisances
   
92.02   Diseased trees
   
92.03   Health nuisances
   
92.04   Air quality standards; pollution
Nuisance Parking and Storage
   
92.15   Declaration of nuisance
   
92.16   Inoperable motor vehicles
   
92.17   Building maintenance and appearance
   
92.18   Duties of city officers
   
92.19   Abatement
   
92.20   Recovery of cost
Weeds and Grass
   
92.35   Prohibition
   
92.36   Cutting, removal or chemical treatment
   
92.37   Violation
 
   
92.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 ANIMAL NUISANCES.
   (A)   Any animal meeting the conditions of the definition stated is declared
to be a public nuisance. Such nuisance animals shall include, but not
necessarily be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Any licensed or unlicensed animal which is required to be so
licensed by this code;
      (2)   Any vicious or treacherous dog which is running at large;
      (3)   Any vicious or treacherous animal other than a dog which is not
safely confined and whose confining structure may allow personal injury to
persons aware or unaware of its presence;
      (4)   Any animal which habitually barks or cries at night between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., or which because of the peculiarity inherent
to its species, makes loud and disturbing noises during those and other hours;
or
      (5)   Any animal having a toxic or poisonous bite or scratch unless
securely confined against any possible escape.
   (B)   The City Council shall have the authority to determine and establish a
condition of “insecure confinement” for any animal and to require the owner or
keeper thereof to perform such revisions as are necessary to make the enclosure
secure.
(1994 Code, § 10-1) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.02 DISEASED TREES.
   (A)   Declared a public nuisance. Any tree, whether standing, cut, living or
dead which is infested with Dutch Elm fungus, Ceratocystis Ulmi (Buisman)
Mureau, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated as
quickly as possible and in a manner hereinafter described so as to prevent the
further infestation of other trees within the city.
   (B)   Inspection and investigation.
      (1)   The City Council shall appoint an authorized representative to make
an annual inspection of all trees within the city for the purpose of
determining the possibility of infestation. In the absence of such appointment,
the duly appointed Weed Inspector shall act as this representative.
      (2)   The Inspector shall have the right to enter onto private property,
in accordance with §
10.20 during the course of his or her work to make such inspections and no
person shall prevent or obstruct access to such entrance when performed in a
reasonable manner.
      (3)   Upon the finding of probable infestation or the suspicion of
possible infestation, the Inspector shall send a sample of bark to the U of M
Plant Disease Clinic, for a diagnosis. There shall be no action by the city to
remove or destroy any tree until such diagnosis has been received.
   (C)   Notice and abatement of nuisance. Upon receipt of a diagnosis
confirming the presence of the prohibited fungus, the City Administrator/Clerk/
Treasurer shall notify the owner of the property as indicated on the current
tax rolls. Such notice shall include the nature of the nuisance and an order to
abate within 20 days after the date of the notice. The City Administrator/
Clerk/Treasurer shall send such notice within five days after receipt of the
diagnosis. If the owner defaults, the city shall abate the nuisance by removal
of the tree and all costs incidental thereto shall be borne by the owner. Such
costs shall become a lien on the property and may be collected as a special
assessment.
   (D)   Minnesota statute incorporated. M.S. §§ 89.51 et seq., as it may be
amended from time to time, is incorporated by reference into this section.
(1994 Code, § 10-2) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.03 HEALTH NUISANCES.
   (A)   Activities and businesses prohibited.
      (1)   Subsequent to the effective date of this section, the following
acts, conditions, activities and businesses are hereby prohibited, except as
hereinafter permitted:
         (a)   Unwholesome substances, garbage, refuse, offal or similar
substances shall not be brought into, deposited, left, dumped or allowed to
accumulate within the city;
         (b)   A public nuisance is a crime against the order and economy of
the city and consists of an unlawful act or omission of an act which, and, as
such, any public nuisance is hereby prohibited, shall:
            1.   Annoy, injure or endanger the safety, health, comfort or
repose of any considerable number of persons;
            2.   Offend public decency;
            3.   Unlawfully interfere with or obstruct for passage of
pedestrians or vehicles on any public rights-of-way or public lands; and
            4.   In any way render a considerable number of persons insecure in
life or the use of property.
         (c)   The owners and occupants of lands shall remove such substances
described in division (A)(1)(b) above or eliminate any public nuisance within
30 days of a written notice from the City Council. In the event of refusal or
default, the Council may order such removal or abatement at the owner’s expense
and that expense shall become a lien upon the property to be collected as a
special assessment.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any trade or
employment which is harmful to the inhabitants or dangerous, obnoxious or
injurious to the public health or the repose of the public.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit garbage,
cans or other refuse to be thrown or scattered upon any private or public lands
within the city.
   (B)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to the
hauling, accumulation or spreading of manure or fertilizers for the purpose of
agriculture.
   (C)   Public nuisances affecting health. The following are declared to be
nuisances affecting public health:
      (1)   Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or vegetable
matter;
      (2)   All diseased animals running at large;
      (3)   Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent-free or fly-
tight or which are so maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to emit
foul and disagreeable odors; and
      (4)   The pollution of any public or private well or cistern, stream or
lake, canal or body of water by sewage, industrial waste or other subranges.
   (D)   Mosquito breeding sites.
      (1)   Declaration of policy. The City Council finds and determines that
the public health is threatened by the potential spread of the California
encephalitis virus via the Aedes Triseriatus (Tree Hole Mosquito). It is
declared to be the intention of the Council to control and prevent the spread
of this disease and this section is enacted for that purpose.
      (2)   Nuisances affecting the public health. Breeding sites of the Aedes
Triseriatus (Tree Hole Mosquito), including unused tires (not mounted on
wheels), pots, pans, cans, pails, bottles and other containers left outdoors in
which water or debris may accumulate, are declared to be public nuisances. No
person shall knowingly create or allow these breeding sites to exist on
property which they own or occupy.
      (3)   Penalties. Any person who violates the provisions of this division
(D) shall be subject to the penalties of §
92.99 of this chapter.
(1994 Code, § 10-4) (Ord. 35, passed 4-23-1998) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.04 AIR QUALITY STANDARDS; POLLUTION.
   (A)   Air quality standards adopted by references. The Ambient Air Quality
Standards and Air Pollution Control Regulations, as published by the state’s
Pollution Control Agency, and all subsequent revision, additions and deletions
therefrom are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this section as if
fully stated and written herein, except as modified hereafter.
(1994 Code, § 7-5)
   (B)   Other pollution standards.
      (1)   Water quality standards adopted by reference. The water pollution
control standards and the rules and regulations pertaining to said water
quality standards, as published by the state’s Pollution Control Agency, as in
effect on the effective date of this section, are hereby adopted by reference
and made a part of this section as if fully stated and written herein. This
includes compliance with the standards established by the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency’s NPDES/SDS Construction Stormwater General Permit MNR100001
(CSW Permit) and the MPCA’s Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems
General Permit MNR040000 (MS4 Permit).
      (2)   Watershed district standards adopted by reference. The rules and
regulations of the Minnehaha Creek Watershed District pertaining to water
quality, erosion control, permits and prevention of the pollution of surface
and subsurface water resources within the city are hereby adopted by reference
and made a part of this section as if fully stated and written herein.
      (3)   Department of Natural Resources standards adopted. The rules and
regulations of the state’s Department of Natural Resources pertaining to the
protection of land and water resources are hereby adopted by reference as they
exist on the effective date of this section and hereby made part of this
section as if fully stated and written herein.
(1994 Code, § 7-6) (Ord. 2022-03, passed 12-7-2022)
NUISANCE PARKING AND STORAGE
§ 92.15 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
   (A)   Declaration of nuisance. The outside parking and storage on
residentially-zoned property, (property identification number) or any parcel in
a MU-BR or B-2 district while the use is primarily residential, of more than
six vehicles (which includes all motor vehicles as defined in M.S. § 169.011,
as it may be amended from time to time, watercraft and trailers), materials,
supplies or equipment not customarily used for residential purposes in
violation of the requirements set forth below is declared to be a public
nuisance because it:
      (1)   Obstructs views on streets and private property;
      (2)   Creates cluttered and otherwise unsightly areas;
      (3)   Prevents the full use of residential streets for residential
parking;
      (4)   Introduces commercial advertising signs into areas where commercial
advertising signs are otherwise prohibited;
      (5)   Decreases adjoining landowners’ and occupants’ enjoyment of their
property and neighborhood; and
      (6)   Otherwise adversely affects property values and neighborhood
patterns.
   (B)   Unlawful parking and storage.
      (1)   A person must not place, store or allow the placement or storage of
ice fish houses from April 1 to November 1, skateboard ramps, playhouses or
other similar non-permanent structures continuously for longer than 72 hours in
the front yard area, including driveways, of residential property unless more
than 100 feet back from the front property line.
      (2)   A person must not place, store or allow the placement or storage
of, pipe, lumber, forms, steel, machinery or similar materials, including all
materials used in connection with a business, outside on residential property,
unless completely shielded from public view by a fence that is in compliance
with all ordinances.
      (3)   A person must not cause, undertake, permit or allow the outside
parking and storage of vehicles on residential property unless it complies with
the following requirements.
         (a)   There is a limit of six vehicles that may be parked or stored
anywhere outside on residential property; provided that, the parking of such
vehicles complies with this section.
         (b)   Vehicles subject to registration requirements must be currently
licensed and display current license tabs.
         (c)   Vehicles stored outside on residential property must be in
operable condition.
         (d)   Vehicles that are parked or stored outside must be on a paved or
graveled parking or driveway area.
         (e)   In order to qualify as a paved or graveled parking or driveway
area, the surface must meet the following requirements.
            1.   It must be constructed of an impervious material such as
bituminous, concrete or paving blocks or it must be constructed of clean gravel
or comparable material (not sand, organic soil or clay) compacted to a density
of at least two inches.
            2.   It cannot exceed 24 feet in width; except that, the portion
within 20 feet of a three- car garage may be up to 30 feet in width.
            3.   It may include an area on the side yard setback side of a
garage; provided, such parking area may not be longer than the length of the
garage or in excess of ten feet in width.
         (f)   Vehicles and other articles stored outside on residential
property must be owned by, and currently registered to, a person who resides on
that property. Students who are away at school for periods of time, but still
claim the property as their legal residence will be considered residents on the
property.
(Ord. 107, passed 6-4-2008) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.16 INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to keep, park, store or abandon any motor vehicle
which is not in operating condition, partially dismantled, used for repair of
parts or as a source of repair or replacement parts for other vehicles, kept
for scrapping, dismantling or salvage of any kind, or which is not properly
licensed for operation with the state, pursuant to M.S. § 168B.011, Subd. 3, as
it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   This section does not apply to a motor vehicle enclosed in a building
and/or kept out of view from any street, road or alley (with a limit of six
vehicles on each residential property), and which does not foster complaint
from a resident of the city. A privacy fence is permissible.
   (C)   Any motor vehicles described in this section constitute a hazard to
the health and welfare of the residents of the community in that such vehicles
can harbor noxious diseases, furnish a shelter and breeding place for vermin
and present physical danger to the safety and well-being of children and
citizens; and vehicles containing fluids which, if released into the
environment, can and do cause significant health risks to the community.
(Ord. 107, passed 6-4-2008) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.17 BUILDING MAINTENANCE AND APPEARANCE.
   (A)   Declaration of nuisance. Buildings, fences and other structures that
have been so poorly maintained that their physical condition and appearance
detract from the surrounding neighborhood are declared to be public nuisances
because they:
      (1)   Are unsightly;
      (2)   Decrease adjoining landowners’ and occupants’ enjoyment of their
property and neighborhood; and
      (3)   Adversely affect property values and neighborhood patterns.
   (B)   Standards. A building, fence or other structure is a public nuisance
if it does not comply with the following requirements.
      (1)   No part of any exterior surface may have deterioration, holes,
breaks, gaps, loose or rotting boards or timbers.
      (2)   Every exterior surface that has had a surface finish such as paint
applied must be maintained to avoid noticeable deterioration of the finish. No
wall or other exterior surface may have peeling, cracked, chipped or otherwise
deteriorated surface finish on more than 20% of:
         (a)   Any one wall or other flat surface; or
         (b)   All door and window moldings, eaves, gutters and similar
projections on any one side or surface.
      (3)   No glass, including windows and exterior light fixtures, may be
broken or cracked and no screens may be torn or separated from moldings.
      (4)   Exterior doors and shutters must be hung properly and have an
operable mechanism to keep them securely shut or in place.
      (5)   Cornices, moldings, lintels, sills, bay or dormer windows and
similar projections must be kept in good repair and free from cracks and
defects that make them hazardous or unsightly.
      (6)   Roof surfaces must be tight and have no defects that admit water.
All roof drainage systems must be secured and hung properly.
      (7)   Chimneys, antennas, air vents and other similar projections must be
structurally sound and in good repair. These projections must be secured
properly, where applicable, to an exterior wall or exterior roof.
      (8)   Foundations must be structurally sound and in good repair.
(Ord. 107, passed 6-4-2008) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.18 DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.
   For purposes of §§
92.15 and
92.17 of this chapter, city officers will include police personnel and city
employees and contractors and they may enforce the provisions relating to
nuisances. Any city officer shall have the power to inspect private premises
and take all reasonable precautions to prevent the commission and maintenance
of public nuisances. Except in emergency situations of imminent danger to human
life and safety, no city officer shall enter enclosed buildings for the purpose
of inspecting or preventing public nuisances without the permission of the
owner, resident or other person in control of the property, unless the city
officer has obtained a warrant or order from a court of competent jurisdiction
authorizing the entry. Officers and designated persons will have the authority
to enter curtailage and areas in open sight, in accordance with §
10.20 to inspect and take enforcement action.
(Ord. 107, passed 6-4-2008)
§ 92.19 ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Notice. Written notice of violation; notice of the time, date, place
and subject of any hearing before the City Council; notice of City Council
order; and notice of motion for summary enforcement hearing shall be given as
set forth in this section.
      (1)   Notice of violation. Written notice of violation shall be served by
a peace officer or designated person on the owner of record or occupant of the
premises either in person or by certified or registered mail. If the premises
are not occupied, the owner of record is unknown or the owner of record or
occupant refuses to accept notice of violation, notice of violation shall be
served by posting it on the premises.
      (2)   Notice of City Council hearing. Written notice of any City Council
hearing to determine or abate a nuisance shall be served on the owner of record
and occupant of the premises either in person or by certified or registered
mail. If the premises are not occupied, the owner of record is unknown, or the
owner of record or occupant refuses to accept notice of the City Council
hearing, notice of City Council hearing shall be served by posting it on the
premises.
      (3)   Notice of City Council order. Except for those cases determined by
the city to require summary enforcement, written notice of any City Council
order shall be made as provided in M.S. § 463.17 (Hazardous and Substandard
Building Act), as it may be amended from time to time.
      (4)   Notice of motion for summary enforcement. Written notice of any
motion for summary enforcement shall be made as provided for in M.S. § 463.17
(Hazardous and Substandard Building Act), as it may be amended from time to
time.
   (B)   Procedure.
      (1)   Whenever a city officer determines that a public nuisance is being
maintained or exists on a premises in the city, the officer or person
designated shall notify in writing the owner of record or occupant of the
premises of such fact and order that the nuisance be terminated or abated. The
notice of violation shall specify the steps to be taken to abate the nuisance
and a reasonable time within which the nuisance is to be abated. If the notice
of violation is not complied with within the time specified, the city officer
shall report that fact forthwith to the City Council, or cite the violator, or
take any other appropriate enforcement action. If the city officer issues a
citation or takes other appropriate enforcement action, they shall again
specify the steps to be taken to abate the nuisance and another reasonable time
within which the nuisance is to be abated. If the notice of violation is not
complied with within the time specified, the city officer shall report the fact
forthwith to the City Council.
      (2)   Thereafter, the City Council may, after notice to the owner or
occupant and an opportunity to be heard, determine that the condition
identified in the notice of violation is a nuisance and further order that if
the nuisance is not abated within the time prescribed by the City Council, the
city may seek injunctive relief by serving a copy of the City Council order and
notice of motion for summary enforcement or obtain an administrative search and
seizure warrant and abate the nuisance.
   (C)   Emergency procedure; summary enforcement. In cases of emergency, where
delay in abatement required to complete the notice and procedure requirements
set forth in divisions (A) and (B) above will permit a continuing nuisance to
unreasonably endanger public health safety or welfare, the City Council may
order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance. To proceed with summary
enforcement, the city officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists or
is being maintained on premises in the city and that delay in abatement of the
nuisance will unreasonably endanger public health, safety or welfare. The
officer or designated person shall notify in writing the occupant or owner of
the premises of the nature of the nuisance and of the city’s intention to seek
summary enforcement and the time and place of the City Council meeting to
consider the question of summary enforcement. The City Council shall determine
whether or not the condition identified in the notice to the owner or occupant
is a nuisance, whether public health, safety or welfare will be unreasonably
endangered by delay in abatement required to complete the procedure set forth
in division (A) above and may order that the nuisance be immediately terminated
or abated. If the nuisance is not immediately terminated or abated, the City
Council may order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance.
   (D)   Immediate abatement. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city,
without notice or other process, from immediately abating any condition which
poses an imminent and serious hazard to human life or safety.
(Ord. 107, passed 6-4-2008)
§ 92.20 RECOVERY OF COST.
   (A)   Personal liability. The owner of premises on which a nuisance has been
abated by the city shall be personally liable for the cost to the city of the
abatement, including administrative costs. As soon as the work has been
completed and the cost determined, the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer or
other official shall prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner.
Thereupon, the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the office of the
City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer.
   (B)   Assessment. After notice and hearing as provided in M.S. § 429.061, as
it may be amended from time to time, if the nuisance is a public health or
safety hazard on private property, the accumulation of snow and ice on public
sidewalks, the growth of weeds on private property or outside the traveled
portion of streets, or unsound or insect-infected trees, the City
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall, on or before September 1 next following
abatement of the nuisance, list the total unpaid charges along with all other
charges as well as other charges for current services to be assessed under M.S.
§ 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, against each separate lot or
parcel to which the charges are attributable. The City Council may then spread
the charges against the property under that statute and other pertinent
statutes for certification to the county’s Auditor and collection along with
current taxes the following year or in annual installments, not exceeding ten,
as the City Council may determine in each case.
(Ord. 107, passed 6-4-2008)
WEEDS AND GRASS
§ 92.35 PROHIBITION.
   Weeds and grass in excess of 12 inches in length on any occupied or
unoccupied lot or parcel of land less than five acres in size in the city is a
public nuisance and is prohibited. On vacant property where it would be
physically difficult to mow because of topography or other physical
constraints, the height limitation on weeds and grass shall only apply to a
ten-foot-wide strip abutting the lot line of the property. Noxious weeds or
plants as identified and defined by the state’s Department of Agriculture in
their current publication are also a public nuisance and are prohibited. Native
grasses and wild flower indigenous to Minnesota, planted and maintained on any
occupied lot or parcel of land as part of a garden or landscape treatment are
exempt from this subchapter.
(Ord. 80, passed 5-4-2005) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.36 CUTTING, REMOVAL OR CHEMICAL TREATMENT.
   The owner, lessee or occupant of any lot or parcel of land shall cut and
remove or chemically treat all such weeds, grass or other rank, poisonous or
harmful vegetation as often as necessary to comply with the provisions of this
section. Cutting, removing or chemically treating (posted by date) such weeds,
grass or other rank, poisonous or harmful vegetation at least once in every
three weeks, between May 15 and October 15 in a given year, is deemed to be in
compliance with this subchapter.
(Ord. 80, passed 5-4-2005; Ord. 80A, passed 7-6-2011) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.37 VIOLATION.
   After giving the owner or occupant of a lot not in compliance with the
previous sections seven days’ advance written notice of the non-compliance, the
city may cut, or cause to be cut, the grass, weeds or plants and may assess the
cost against the property in accordance with M.S. § 429.101, as it may be
amended from time to time.
(Ord. 80, passed 5-4-2005)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of §§
92.15 through
92.20 of this chapter, or shall fail to comply with an order made thereunder,
shall separately for each and every violation and non-compliance respectively
be guilty of a misdemeanor. The imposition of one penalty for any violation
shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and, all such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy such violation or defects within
reasonable time. When not otherwise specified, each day the prohibited
conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   The violation of any provision of §§
92.35 through
92.37 of this chapter is a misdemeanor and the violator shall be fined or
penalized not more than the maximum levels established by the state for
misdemeanor offenses.
(Ord. 80, passed 5-4-2005; Ord. 107, passed 6-4-2008)
CHAPTER 93: RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
Section
   
93.01   Election to manage the public rights-of-way
   
93.02   Definitions
   
93.03   Permit requirement
   
93.04   Permit applications
   
93.05   Issuance of permit; conditions
   
93.06   Permit fees
   
93.07   Right-of-way patching and restoration
   
93.08   Supplementary applications
   
93.09   Denial of permit
   
93.10   Installation requirements
   
93.11   Inspection
   
93.12   Work done without a permit
   
93.13   Supplementary notification
   
93.14   Revocation of permits
   
93.15   Mapping data
   
93.16   Location facilities
   
93.17   Pre-excavation facilities location
   
93.18   Damage to other facilities
   
93.19   Right-of-way vacation
   
93.20   Indemnification and liability
   
93.21   Abandoned and unusable facilities
   
93.22   Appeal
   
93.23   Reservation of regulatory and police powers
§ 93.01 ELECTION TO MANAGE THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under state and federal
statutory, administrative and common law, the city hereby elects, pursuant M.S.
§ 237.163 Subd. 2(b), as it may be amended from time to time, to manage rights-
of-way within its jurisdiction.
§ 93.02 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions included in M.S. § 237.162 and Minn. Rules 7810.0100, Subp.
1 through 25, as they may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by
reference and are incorporated into this chapter as if set out in full.
§ 93.03 PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this code, no person
may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way without first having obtained the
appropriate right-of-way permit from the city to do so.
      (1)   Excavation permit. An excavation permit is required to excavate
that part of the right-of-way described in such permit and to hinder free and
open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing
facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified
therein.
      (2)   Obstruction permit. An obstruction permit is required to hinder
free and open passage over the specified portion of right-of-way by placing
equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the extent and for the
duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not required if a person
already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same project.
   (B)   Permit extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-way
beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless such person makes a
supplementary application for another right-of-way permit before the expiration
of the initial permit, and a new permit or permit extension is granted.
   (C)   Delay penalty. In accordance with Minn. Rules 7819.1000, Subp. 3, as
it may be amended from time to time, and notwithstanding division (B) of this
section, the city shall establish and impose a delay penalty for unreasonable
delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching or restoration. The
delay penalty shall be established from time to time by City Council
resolution.
   (D)   Permit display. Permits issued under this chapter shall be
conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated
work site and shall be available for inspection by the city.
§ 93.04 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   Application for a permit is made to the city. Right-of-way permit
applications shall contain, and will be considered complete only upon
compliance with, the requirements of the following provisions:
   (A)   Submission of a completed permit application form, including all
required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the
proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed
facilities, and the following information:
      (1)   Each permittee’s name, Gopher One-Call registration certificate
number, address and email address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile
numbers;
      (2)   The name, address and email address, if applicable, and telephone
and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local representative or
designee shall be available at all times; and
      (3)   A certificate of insurance of self-insurance:
         (a)   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the
permittee by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state or a
form of self-insurance acceptable to the city;
         (b)   Verifying that the permittee is insured against claims for
personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising
out of the:
            1.   Use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the permittee, its
officers, agents, employees and permittees; and
            2.   Placement and use of facilities and equipment in the right-of-
way by the permittee, its officers, agents, employees and permittees,
including, but not limited to, protection against liability arising from
completed operations, damage of underground facilities and collapse of
property;
         (c)   Naming the city as an additional insured as to whom the
coverages required in this section are in force and applicable and for whom
defense will be provided as to all such coverages;
         (d)   Requiring that the city be notified 30 days in advance of
cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term;
         (e)   Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile
liability coverage, workers compensation and umbrella coverage established by
the city in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the public and to carry
out the purposes and policies of this chapter;
         (f)   The city may require a copy of the actual insurance policies;
and
         (g)   A copy of the person’s order granting a certificate of authority
from the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other applicable state or
federal agency, where the person is lawfully required to have such certificate
from said commission or other state or federal agency.
   (B)   Payment of money due the city for:
      (1)   Permit fees, estimated restoration costs and other management
costs;
      (2)   Prior obstructions or excavations;
      (3)   Any undisputed loss, damage or expense suffered by the city because
of applicant’s prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way or any
emergency actions taken by the city; and
      (4)   Franchise fees or other charges, if applicable.
§ 93.05 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Permit issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of
this chapter, the city shall issue a permit.
   (B)   Conditions. The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the
issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to
protect the health, safety and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-
of-way and its current use. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all
requirements of local, state and federal laws, including but not limited to
M.S. § 216D.01-09 (Gopher One Call Excavation Notice System) and Minn. Rules
Ch. 7560, as they may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   Trenchless excavation. As a condition of all applicable permits,
permittees employing trenchless excavation methods, including but not limited
to horizontal directional drilling, shall follow all requirements set forth in
M.S. Ch. 216D and Minn. Rules Ch. 7560, as they may be amended from time to
time, and shall require potholing or open cutting over existing underground
utilities before excavating as determined by the city.
§ 93.06 PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Excavation permit fee. The city shall establish an excavation permit
fee in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:
      (1)   The city management costs; and
      (2)   Degradation costs, if applicable.
   (B)   Obstruction permit fee. The city shall establish the obstruction
permit fee and shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the city management
costs.
   (C)   Payment of permit fees. No excavation permit or obstruction permit
shall be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit fees. The
city may allow applicant to pay such fees within 30 days of billing.
   (D)   Non-refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the city
has revoked for a breach as stated in §
93.14 are not refundable.
   (E)   Application to franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise,
management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to the
franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise.
§ 93.07 RIGHT-OF-WAY PATCHING AND RESTORATION.
   (A)   Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the
patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable.
   (B)   Patch and restoration. Permittee shall patch its own work. The city
may choose either to have the permittee restore the right-of-way or to restore
the right-of-way itself.
      (1)   City restoration. If the city restores the right-of-way, permittee
shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing. If, following such
restoration, the pavement settles due to permittee’s improper backfilling, the
permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, all costs
associated with correcting the defective work.
      (2)   Permittee restoration. If the permittee restores the right-of-way
itself, it shall at the time of application for an excavation permit post a
construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions of Minn. Rules
7819.3000, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (3)   Degradation fee in lieu of restoration. In lieu of right-of-way
restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation fee. However,
the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for patching and the degradation
fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these responsibilities.
   (C)   Standards. The permittee shall perform excavation, backfilling,
patching and restoration according to the standards and with the materials
specified by the city and shall comply with Minn. Rules 7819.1100, as it may be
amended from time to time.
   (D)   Duty to correct defects. The permittee shall correct defects in
patching or restoration performed by permittee or its agents. The permittee
upon notification from the city, shall correct all restoration work to the
extent necessary, using the method required by the city. Said work shall be
completed within five calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the city,
not including days during which work cannot be done because of circumstances
constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonable or
unreasonable.
   (E)   Failure to restore. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way
in the manner and to the condition required by the city, or fails to
satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the city, the
city at its option may do such work. In that event the permittee shall pay to
the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-way. If
permittee fails to pay as required, the city may exercise its rights under the
construction performance bond.
§ 93.08 SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Limitation on area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area
of the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work
outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided in this chapter.
Any permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the
permit must be obstructed or excavated must, before working in that greater
area:
      (1)   Make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees
required thereby; and
      (2)   Be granted a new permit or permit extension.
   (B)   Limitation on dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates
specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the permit
start date or, except as provided in this chapter, continue working after the
end date. If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it
must apply for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the
new permit or an extension of the old permit before working after the end date
of the previous permit. This supplementary application must be submitted before
the permit end date.
§ 93.09 DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and
conditions of this chapter or if the city determines that the denial is
necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to
protect the right-of-way and its current use.
§ 93.10 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other work
performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with Minn. Rules
7819.1100 and 7819.5000, as they may be amended from time to time, and other
applicable local requirements, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the
M.S. §§ 237.162 and 237.163, as they may be amended from time to time.
Installation of service laterals shall be performed in accordance with Minn.
Rules Ch. 7560, as it may be amended from time to time and these ordinances.
Service lateral installation is further subject to those requirements and
conditions set forth by the city in the applicable permits and/or agreements.
§ 93.11 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Notice of completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is
completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in accordance
Minn. Rules 7819.1300, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Site inspection. Permittee shall make the work-site available to the
city and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable
times during the execution of and upon completion of the work.
   (C)   Authority of Director.
      (1)   At the time of inspection, the Director may order the immediate
cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety
or well-being of the public.
      (2)   The Director may issue an order to the permittee for any work that
does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards,
conditions or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the
violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten days after
issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the director that
to the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented
within the required time, the Director may revoke the permit pursuant to §
93.22.
§ 93.12 WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.
   (A)   Emergency situations.
      (1)   Each registrant shall immediately notify the Director of any event
regarding its facilities that it considers to be an emergency. The owner of the
facilities may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the
emergency. Excavators’ notification to Gopher State One Call regarding an
emergency situation does not fulfill this requirement. Within two business days
after the occurrence of the emergency, the owner shall apply for the necessary
permits, pay the fees associated therewith, and fulfill the rest of the
requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this chapter for
the actions it took in response to the emergency.
      (2)   If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding facilities, the
city will attempt to contact the local representative of each facility owner
affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event, the city may
take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost
of which shall be borne by the person whose facilities occasioned the
emergency.
   (B)   Non-emergency situations. Except in an emergency, any person who,
without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a
right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit and, as a penalty, pay double
the normal fee for said permit, pay double all the other fees required by the
city code, deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct any damage to
the right-of-way, and comply with all of the requirements of this chapter.
§ 93.13 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.
   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends
sooner than the date given on the permit, permittee shall notify the city of
the accurate information as soon as this information is known.
§ 93.14 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Substantial breach. The city reserves its right, as provided in this
chapter, to revoke any right-of-way permit without a fee refund, if there is a
substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule
or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial breach by
permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
      (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-
of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit
upon the city or its citizens;
      (3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a
right-of-way permit;
      (4)   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner, unless a
permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to
reasons beyond the permittee’s control; or
      (5)   The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not
conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to §
93.11.
   (B)   Written notice of breach. If the city determines that the permittee
has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute,
ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit, the city shall make
a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The demand shall
state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit. A
substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city, at its discretion, to
place additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate and remedy the
breach.
   (C)   Response to notice of breach. Within 24 hours of receiving
notification of the breach, permittee shall provide the city with a plan,
acceptable to the city, which will cure the breach. Permittee’s failure to so
contact the city, or permittee’s failure to timely submit an acceptable plan,
or permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be
cause for immediate revocation of the permit. Further, permittee’s failure to
so contact the city, or permittee’s failure to submit an acceptable plan, or
permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall
automatically place the permittee on probation for one full year.
   (D)   Cause for probation. From time to time, the city may establish a list
of conditions of the permit, which if breached will automatically place the
permittee on probation for one full year, such as, but not limited to, working
out of the allotted time period or working on right-of-way grossly outside of
the permit authorization.
   (E)   Automatic revocation. If a permittee, while on probation, commits a
breach as outlined in this chapter, permittee’s permit will automatically be
revoked and permittee will not be allowed further permits for one full year,
except for emergency repairs.
   (F)   Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee
shall also reimburse the city for the city’s reasonable costs, including
restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorneys’ fees
incurred in connection with such revocation.
§ 93.15 MAPPING DATA.
   (A)   Information required. Each registrant and permittee shall provide
mapping information required by the city in accordance with Minn. Rules
7819.4000 and 7819.4100, as they may be amended from time to time. Within 90
days following completion of any work pursuant to a permit, the permittee shall
provide the Director accurate maps and drawings certifying the “as-built”
location of all equipment installed, owed and maintained by the permittee. Such
maps and drawings shall include the horizontal and vertical location of all
facilities and equipment and shall be provided consistent with the city’s
electronic mapping system, when practical or as a condition imposed by the
director Failure to provide maps and drawings pursuant to this subsection shall
be grounds for revoking the permit holder’s registration.
   (B)   Service laterals. All permits issued for the installation or repair of
service laterals, other than minor repairs as defined in Minn. Rules 7560.0150,
Subpart 2, as it may be amended from time to time, shall require the
permittee’s use of appropriate means of establishing the horizontal locations
of installed service laterals and the service lateral vertical locations in
those cases where the Director reasonably requires it. Permittees or their
subcontractors shall submit to the Director evidence satisfactory to the
Director of the installed service lateral locations. Compliance with this
division (B) and with applicable Gopher State One Call law and Minnesota Rules
governing service laterals installed after December 31, 2005 shall be a
condition of any city approval necessary for:
      (1)   Payments to contractors working on a public improvement project
including those under M.S. Ch. 429, as it may be amended from time to time; and
      (2)   City approval under development agreements or other subdivision or
site plan approval under M.S. Ch. 462, as it may be amended from time to time.
The city shall reasonably determine the appropriate method of providing such
information. Failure to provide prompt and accurate information on the service
laterals installed may result in the revocation of the permit issued for the
work or future permits to the offending permittee or its subcontractors.
§ 93.16 LOCATION FACILITIES.
   (A)   Placement, location and relocation of facilities must comply with the
Act, with other applicable law, and with Minn. Rules 7819.3100, 7819.5000 and
7819.5100, as they may be amended from time to time, to the extent the rules do
not limit authority otherwise available to cities.
   (B)   Corridors.
      (1)   The city may assign a specific area within the right-of-way, or any
particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of facilities
that is or, pursuant to current technology, the city expects will someday be
located within the right-of-way. All excavation, obstruction, or other permits
issued by the city involving the installation or replacement of facilities
shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue.
      (2)   Any registrant who has facilities in the right-of-way in a position
at variance with the corridors established by the city shall, no later than at
the time of the next reconstruction or excavation of the area where the
facilities are located, move the facilities to the assigned position within the
right-of-way, unless this requirement is waived by the city for good cause
shown, upon consideration of such factors as the remaining economic life of the
facilities, public safety, customer service needs and hardship to the
registrant.
   (C)   Nuisance. One year after the passage of this chapter, any facilities
found in a right-of-way that have not been registered shall be deemed to be a
nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in
equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance or taking
possession of the facilities and restoring the right-of-way to a useable
condition.
   (D)   Limitation of space. To protect health, safety and welfare, or when
necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use, the city shall have
the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional facilities
within the right-of-way. In making such decisions, the city shall strive to the
extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the right-
of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public interest,
the public’s needs for the particular utility service, the condition of the
right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the
protection of existing facilities in the right-of-way, and future city plans
for public improvements and development projects which have been determined to
be in the public interest.
§ 93.17 PRE-EXCAVATION FACILITIES LOCATION.
   In addition to complying with the requirements of M.S. § 216D.01-.09, as it
may be amended from time to time, (“One Call Excavation Notice System”) before
the start date of any right-of-way excavation, each registrant who has
facilities or equipment in the area to be excavated shall mark the horizontal
and vertical placement of all said facilities. Any registrant whose facilities
are less than 20 inches below a concrete or asphalt surface shall notify and
work closely with the excavation contractor to establish the exact location of
its facilities and the best procedure for excavation.
§ 93.18 DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES.
   When the city does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to
maintain, support or move a registrant’s facilities to protect it, the city
shall notify the local representative as early as is reasonably possible. The
costs associated therewith will be billed to the facility owner and must be
paid within 30 days from the date of billing. Each facility owner shall be
responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the right-of-way which
it or its facilities damage. Each facility owner shall be responsible for the
cost of repairing any damage to the facilities of another registrant caused
during the city’s response to an emergency occasioned by that registrant’s
facilities.
§ 93.19 RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.
   If the city vacates a right-of-way that contains facilities, the facility
owner’s rights in the vacated right-of-way are governed by Minn. Rules
7819.3200, as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 93.20 INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.
   By applying for and accepting a permit under this chapter, a permittee
agrees to defend and indemnify the city in accordance with the provisions of
Minn. Rules 7819.1250, as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 93.21 ABANDONED AND UNUSABLE FACILITIES.
   (A)   Discontinued operations. A registrant who has determined to
discontinue all or a portion of its operations in the city must provide
information satisfactory to the city that the registrant’s obligations for its
facilities in the right-of-way under this chapter have been lawfully assumed by
another registrant.
   (B)   Removal. Any person who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-way
shall remove them from that right-of-way if required in conjunction with other
right-of-way repair, excavation, or construction, unless this requirement is
waived by the city.
§ 93.22 APPEAL.
   A right-of-way user that has been denied registration; has been denied a
permit; has had a permit revoked; believes that the fees imposed are not in
conformity with M.S. § 237.163, Subd. 6, as it may be amended from time to
time; or disputes a determination of the city regarding §
93.11 may have the denial, revocation, fee imposition, or decision reviewed,
upon written request, by the City Council. The City Council shall act on a
timely written request at its next regularly scheduled meeting. A decision by
the City Council affirming the denial, revocation, or fee imposition will be in
writing and supported by written findings establishing the reasonableness of
the decision.
§ 93.23 RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS.
   A permittee’s rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the
city to adopt and enforce general ordinances as necessary to protect the
health, safety and welfare of the public.
CHAPTER 94: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
General Provisions
   
94.01   Definitions
   
94.02   Fire Department
   
94.03   Interpretations, repeals
   
94.04   Minnesota Uniform Fire Code adopted by reference
Fire Prevention
   
94.15   Fire Prevention Code adopted by reference
   
94.16   State Fire Marshal’s regulations adopted by reference
   
94.17   Fire lanes
   
94.18   Review of construction proposals
   
94.19   Special standards
Fire Operations
   
94.30   Interference with duties
   
94.31   Protection of fire hoses and equipment
   
94.32   Fire parking restrictions
   
94.33   Authorized use of fire equipment
   
94.34   Outside burning
   
94.35   Explosives and blasting agents
Open Burning
   
94.50   Definitions
   
94.51   Restrictions
   
94.52   Salvage operations
   
94.53   Open burning by permit
   
94.54   Liability
   
94.55   Recreational fires
   
94.56   Preparation of site
 
   
94.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM SYSTEM. Any alarm installation designed to be used for the prevention
or detection of burglary, robbery or fire on the premises which contains an
alarm installation. An automobile alarm device shall not be considered an ALARM
SYSTEM.
   ALARM USER. The person in control of any building, structure or facility
wherein an alarm system is maintained.
   FALSE ALARM. An alarm signal eliciting a response by public safety personnel
when a situation requiring a response does not, in fact, exist, and which false
alarm is caused by the activation of the alarm system through mechanical
failure, alarm malfunction, improper installation or the inadvertence of the
alarm system’s owner or lessees or of his or her employees or agents. FALSE
ALARMS do not include alarms caused by climatic conditions such as tornados,
thunderstorms, utility line mishaps, violent conditions of nature or any other
conditions which are clearly beyond the control of the alarm manufacturer,
installer or owner.
   FIRE CHIEF. The person designated to serve as the superior officer of the
Fire Department, regardless of the selection method.
   FIRE DEPARTMENT. The organization directly authorized by the city as
responsible for the prevention and abatement of fire, whether the organization
is voluntary or is a regularly employed department of the city. This
organization may or may not be composed of persons and equipment operated in,
or outside of, the city limits.
   PUBLIC SAFETY PERSONNEL. City employees or employees duly authorized to
maintain and enforce public safety.
(1994 Code, § 6-1.1)
§ 94.02 FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Established. A Fire Department is hereby established.
(1994 Code, § 6-1.2)
   (B)   Duties.
      (1)   The Fire Department shall be responsible for the protection of
people and property from fire dangers through and by the enforcement of all
applicable laws. The Fire Department shall conduct inspections, develop and
implement prevention education and abate fires. These duties are to be
considered as inclusive in nature and shall include all other duties given,
granted and imposed as the City Council deems desirable and necessary.
      (2)   Any existing charter of operation or any rights, privileges or
obligations of the Fire Department shall not be affected by this chapter, but
this section shall be deemed as continuing provisions.
(1994 Code, § 6-1.3)
   (C)   Appeals. Whenever a grievance is held against the Fire Chief or other
representative of the Fire Department because of a decision made by that
authority, the aggrieved person may appeal the decision of the authority to the
City Council within 30 days from the date of the decision. The City Council’s
decision on any such appeal is final and subject to contrary judgement of a
court of law having proper jurisdiction.
(1994 Code, § 6-1.4)
   (D)   Employment or membership. Employment or membership in the Fire
Department as a firefighter shall be determined pursuant to the provisions of
National Fire Protection Association Publication No. 1001-87; the publication
is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this city code as if fully
stated and written herein.
(1994 Code, § 6-1.8)
§ 94.03 INTERPRETATIONS, REPEALS.
   (A)   The provisions adopted and the codes and standards referred to and
adopted by reference in this subchapter shall not repeal or supercede any
chapter, section, provision, division, ordinance or regulation which regulates
the same subject matter, but the provisions of these codes and standards shall
all apply.
   (B)   In the event that there is a conflict between the provisions of this
subchapter and other codes and standards as adopted, the more restrictive
provisions shall apply.
(1994 Code, § 6-1.5)
§ 94.04 MINNESOTA UNIFORM FIRE CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   The provisions of the Minnesota Uniform Fire Code are adopted by
reference and as part of this section in their entirety. The Fire Chief shall
enforce the provisions of this section.
   (B)   In the adopted code, the term “jurisdiction” shall mean the “City
Council”.
   (C)   In § 15.201 of the adopted code, the limits on the prohibition of
storage of certain combustible liquids will mean, in this Code, that the
storage is limited to the Industrial Zoning District and then only upon Council
approval.
(1994 Code, § 6-1.7)
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 94.15 FIRE PREVENTION CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The provisions of the Fire Prevention Code recommended by the American
Insurance Association (latest edition), except for Art. 13 and 28.1, are
adopted by reference as part of this chapter in its entirety, except as
modified herein.
(1994 Code, § 6-2.1)
§ 94.16 STATE FIRE MARSHAL’S REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   All provisions of the rules and regulations of the state’s Fire Marshal
which apply and all relevant state statutes are adopted by reference as a part
of this chapter in its entirety, except as modified herein.
(1994 Code, § 6-2.2)
§ 94.17 FIRE LANES.
   (A)   The City Council may designate certain ways on public or private
property as fire lanes as it deems necessary to allow unhindered travel of fire
equipment and to assure unobstructed access to fire hydrants and buildings.
   (B)   The Fire Chief shall make recommendations to the Council as to the
location, need and requirements for such fire lanes and to report on their
conditions and maintenance requirements as he or she deems necessary.
   (C)   (1)   All designated fire lanes shall be marked with a regulatory sign
bearing the words “No Parking - Fire Lane - By order of the City Council”.
      (2)   Regardless of their placement on public or private property, these
signs will be erected and maintained by the city.
   (D)   It shall be a violation for any person to obstruct a designated fire
lane in any manner.
(1994 Code, § 6-2.3) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.18 REVIEW OF CONSTRUCTION PROPOSALS.
   The Fire Chief may require the submission of all proposed land developments
and building plans for reviewal as to their effect on the prevention and
abatement of fires. In addition to this right of review, the Park/Planning
Commission, the Building Inspector and the City Council may require that such
review be made and presented for their consideration in making a decision.
Review shall be timely so as to prevent undue delay of any application or
decision. But in any case which affects the safety of the city or its
residents, a delay shall not be considered as undue hardship on said applicant.
(1994 Code, § 6-2.4)
§ 94.19 SPECIAL STANDARDS.
   The following special standards for the prevention and abatement of fire
dangers shall apply to certain classifications of multiple dwellings.
   (A)   Application.
      (1)   These special standards shall apply only to Group D and H
occupancies as defined in the Uniform Building Code incorporated by reference
in Ch. 157 of this code of ordinances. Exception shall be made, for apartment
houses occupied and designed to be occupied by not more than two family units
living independently of each other.
      (2)   These special standards shall apply only to such buildings
hereafter constructed and not to structures existing at the time of adoption of
this chapter. However, when any such existing structure is reconstructed after
sustaining damages in excess of 50% of its fair market value, this structure
shall be defined as having been a lawful non-conforming use as pertains to this
chapter and shall be rebuilt to conform with these special standards.
   (B)   Alarm system required.
      (1)   An approved manual electric-supervised remote station fire alarm
system and automatic detection system shall be provided in every building so
required in division (A) above. This shall not apply if each resident room or
living area in one-story buildings has direct access to the outside of the
building or unless the complete and entire building is provided with an
automatic sprinkler system. In any building with a partial sprinkler system,
that portion of the building with the sprinkler system will be in conformance
in lieu of an automatic detection system.
      (2)   The mechanical central air conditioning and ventilation system
shall be connected to the alarm and detection system in such a way as to
automatically shut down the ventilation system upon activation of the alarm
system and detection system.
      (3)   When an alarm and detection system is installed, plans shall be
submitted in duplicate to the Fire Chief for approval before a building permit
is issued. Sprinkler systems shall be in accordance with the 1966 or latest
revised edition of N.F.P.A. No. 13, Standards for the Installation of Sprinkler
Systems. Alarm systems shall be in accordance with the 1967 or latest revised
edition of N.F.P.A. No. 72 A, Standards for the Installation, Maintenance and
Use of Local Protective Signaling Devices and Systems.
         (a)   User fees.
            1.   Once a safety alarm system reports more than two false alarms
to the city in a single calendar year and the alarm user has received timely
notice of each violation, the alarm user shall be charged a user fee as set
forth in the city fee schedule.
            2.   Any alarm user required by the city to pay a user fee as the
result of a false alarm may make a written appeal of the false alarm charge to
the Chief of Police within ten days of notice from the city of the false alarm
charge. Following review and determination by the Chief of Police, such
decision may be appealed to the City Council who will have the authority to
make a final determination as to whether the appellant is to be charged with a
fee for a false alarm.
            3.   User fees must be paid to the City Administrator/Clerk/
Treasurer within 30 days from the date of notice by the city to the alarm user.
Failure to pay the fee within 30 days’ notice will cause the alarm user to be
considered delinquent and subject to a penalty of a full 10% of the fee.
            4.   All delinquent charges for user fees shall be certified by the
City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer to the county’s Assessor who shall prepare
an assessment roll each year providing for assessment of the delinquent amounts
against the respective properties service, which assessment roll shall be
delivered to the City Council for adoption on or before October 10 of each
year.
         (b)   Alarm report. When an alarm user has incurred five false alarms
or more within one calendar year, the alarm user shall submit within ten days
after being charged with the fifth false alarm, written verification to the
Chief of Police that appropriate actions are being taken to discover and
eliminate the cause of the false alarms.
         (c)   Confidentiality of information. All information submitted in
compliance with this chapter shall be held in confidence and shall be deemed a
confidential record exempt from discovery to the extent permitted by law.
Subject to requirements of confidentiality, the Chief of Police may develop and
maintain statistics for the purpose of on-going alarm systems evaluation.
   (C)   Magnetic door holders required. Magnetic door holders shall be
installed on all fire doors located at area suspension fire walls in every
building so required under division (A) above. It is a violation of this
section to block any fire door or smoke door in stairwells or corridors, except
by the use of such magnetic door holders. The magnetic door holders shall be
connected to the alarm and detection system and/or sprinkler system in such a
way the doors will automatically close upon activation of the systems.
   (D)   Standpipes required.
      (1)   Standpipes shall be required on all new construction and shall be
installed in accordance with the 1968 or latest edition of N.F.P.A. No. 14,
Standards for the Installation of Standpipes and Hose Systems. All buildings
having three or more stories which are required to have standpipes installed
shall have them installed in accordance with N.F.P.A. No. 14, Class III, for
use by fire departments and those trained in handling heavy hose streams.
      (2)   The minimum supply line from the public water main system to any
standpipe system shall be at least four inches in diameter and at least one
Fire Department connection shall be provided for each standpipe system. This
connection shall be installed in an accessible location on the outside of the
building and it shall have two and one-half inch National Standard threads. All
plans shall be submitted to the Fire Chief for approval prior to installation.
   (E)   Elevators. In any building having over three stories where all of the
elevators have automatic operation, at least one elevator, necessary to provide
access to all landings, shall be arranged for use by firefighters as follows.
      (1)   A key-operated switch with light jewel shall be provided on the
wall surface adjacent to the elevator at street level and may be provided at
other landings subject to the discretion of the Fire Chief. The key-operated
switch shall remove the elevator from normal service and place it at the sole
service of the firefighters.
      (2)   The key-operated switch shall cancel all existing elevator car
calls, prevent the opening of the elevator doors at other landings and prevent
registration of other elevator car calls. It shall also cause the elevator to
travel to the key-operated landing without responding to other landing calls.
      (3)   When the car arrives at the firefighter’s landing, the doors shall
remain open until closed by operation from within the car. The jewel light
shall be illuminated when the car is returning in response to the operation of
the key-operated switch.
      (4)   A key-operated switch shall be provided within the car which can be
operated only by the same key which operates the landing switch. The key-
operated switch shall permit operation of the elevator to by-pass all landing
calls except those initiated from within the car.
(1994 Code, § 6-2.5)
FIRE OPERATIONS
§ 94.30 INTERFERENCE WITH DUTIES.
   It shall be unlawful for an unauthorized person to ride upon, race with,
trail or follow within 500 feet of any apparatus belonging to the Fire
Department or in any other manner obstruct or interfere with members of the
Fire Department when such apparatus or member is responding to an emergency
call.
(1994 Code, § 6-3.1) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.31 PROTECTION OF FIRE HOSES AND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle over a fire
hose, except when specifically ordered to do so by a member of the Fire
Department, and then only with due caution and care.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to perform an act which damages or
may damage any piece of Fire Department equipment regardless of whether that
equipment is stored or being used to abate a fire.
(1994 Code, § 6-3.2) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.32 FIRE PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to park any vehicle
or place any material or other obstruction within a distance of ten feet of any
fire hydrant or fire reservoir.
   (B)   No person shall enter any block or park any vehicle within 300 feet of
a place where a fire is in progress.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or otherwise
obstruct access to and from the doors of any fire station so as to impede,
intentionally or unintentionally, the ingress and egress of firefighters or
Fire Department vehicles or equipment.
(1994 Code, § 6-3.3) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.33 AUTHORIZED USE OF FIRE EQUIPMENT.
   No person shall use any Fire Department vehicle or equipment, except as may
be prescribed by the Fire Chief.
(1994 Code, § 6-3.4) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.34 OUTSIDE BURNING.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to ignite any material outside of a
building when in violation of the rules and regulations set forth herein,
except where a permit has been issued by the city’s Fire Chief.
   (B)   Fires which are clearly recreational in nature shall be exempt from
this requirement unless ruled non-exempt by subsequent action from higher
jurisdiction.
(1994 Code, § 6-3.5) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.35 EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS.
   (A)   General. This section shall apply to the manufacture, keeping,
storage, sale, transportation and use of explosives and blasting agents, and
shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   Transportation of explosives or blasting agents when under the
jurisdiction of and in compliance with the regulations of the Federal
Department of Transportation;
      (2)   Shipment, transportation and handling by the Armed Forces of the
United States and of the National Guard;
      (3)   Transportation and use in the normal and emergency operations of
federal agencies or state and municipal fire and police departments; provided
that, they are acting in their official capacities and in the proper
performances of their duties;
      (4)   Stocks of small arms ammunition, propellant-actuated power
cartridges, small arms ammunition primers in quantities of less than 1,000,000
units, smokeless propellant in quantities of less than 750 pounds;
      (5)   Explosive actuated power devices when in quantities of less than 50
pounds net weight of explosive;
      (6)   Fuse lighters and fuse igniters;
      (7)   Safety fuse not inclusive of cordeau detonant fuse and three-
thirty-seconds inch cannon fuses or matchlock fuses (slow match); and
      (8)   The sale of black powder or other commonly used smokeless
propellant in individual transactions involving quantities of five pounds or
less when used for muzzle-loaded sporting equipment or arms.
   (B)   Mandatory permits for acquisition and use.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person without a special permit to
acquire, possess, use, sell or handle any explosive or explosive device. Such
permit shall only be issued by action of the City Council. Any person desiring
a permit shall make written application to the Council on such forms as may be
prescribed.
      (2)   Before a permit is issued, the Council shall order the Police Chief
to inspect the premises upon which the applicant wishes to store, handle or use
the explosives. If the Police Chief is satisfied that a serious fire hazard
will not be created and that the applicant plans to store and use the
explosives as stated in this section, the Police Chief after conferring with
the Fire Chief shall return the application to the Council with
recommendations.
      (3)   The City Council shall deny the issuance of any such permit if any
of the following apply to the person:
         (a)   The person has been convicted within the past ten years of a
felony or gross misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or anyone who is
presently under indictment for any such crime;
         (b)   The person has, within the past ten years, been convicted of a
crime in which the use, possession or sale of narcotics or illicit drugs was an
element of the crime;
         (c)   The person has, within the past ten years, been treated for
addiction to narcotics, illicit drugs or alcohol, has been admitted to any
hospital or institution for such treatment or has been certified by a licensed
medical doctor as being addicted thereto;
         (d)   The person has, within the past ten years, been admitted to any
hospital or institution for the treatment of mental illness or deficiency, has
been certified by a licensed medical doctor as being mentally ill or deficient
or has been acquitted of any criminal charge by reason of insanity;
         (e)   The person has not reached the age of legal majority at the time
when such application is made;
         (f)   If any public safety hazard may exist; or
         (g)   If after a permit is issued, the Fire Chief and/or Police Chief
may revoke a permit for any public safety hazard found after a permit has been
issued.
   (C)   Permit application, revocation and transfer.
      (1)   The application for a permit shall be sworn to by the applicant and
shall contain, as a minimum, the following information:
         (a)   The name, address and date of birth of the applicant;
         (b)   The location where the applicant intends to use, store or handle
the explosives and the security measures to be provided;
         (c)   The intended uses for which the permit is applied for;
         (d)   Any other information as prescribed by the Council; and
         (e)   Must answer all questions raised in divisions (B)(3)(a), (B)(3)
(b), (B)(3)(c), (B)(3)(d) and (B)(3)(e) above.
      (2)   A permit may be suspended by the Chief of Police and revoked by the
Council for any violation of the provisions of this section or of other
pertinent and related provisions of federal, state or local law, or upon the
creation or existence of any condition which would, in the Council’s opinion,
create or intend to create a serious hazard.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, transfer or give away
any explosive or blasting agent to anyone who does not possess and exhibit to
the seller or giver a valid permit issued pursuant to this section.
   (D)   Seller’s records.
      (1)   Any person selling or giving away explosives covered by this
section shall at all times keep an accurate and updated record in a bound book
of all explosives handled by said person. Upon demand, this person must exhibit
such record to the Council or other authorized representative. The record must
give a detailed account of the following:
         (a)   The date of each transference and volume amount of the same;
         (b)   The name and address of each purchaser or transferee;
         (c)   The name of the manufacturer of the explosive(s) being
transferred;
         (d)   Type, identification and lot numbers of the explosives;
         (e)   An explosives owner’s or user’s permit number;
         (f)   An explanation of the intended place of storage and use by the
purchaser;
         (g)   The security measures provided at storage and use sites; and
         (h)   The security measures during transfer and transporting of the
explosives.
      (2)   In addition, on the first day of each month, the holder of the
permit shall make written report to the city of all transportation and
transferral of explosives and shall include copies of those pages of the
records which pertain to the previous month’s transactions.
   (E)   Storage and security requirements. Any person issued a permit under
this section shall maintain safety and security features of all storage
facilities in a manner prescribed by the rules and regulations of the state’s
Fire Marshal.
   (F)   Theft reporting. Any person who incurs a loss, theft or attempt of
theft shall immediately inform the Police or other properly designated
authority of the loss, the amount missing and the approximate time of the
occurrence.
(1994 Code, § 6-3.7) Penalty, see §
94.99
OPEN BURNING
§ 94.50 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVED WASTE BURNER. An incinerator or other burner constructed of fire-
resistant material having a capacity of not less than three bushels, a cover
which is closed when in use and maximum openings in the top or sides no greater
than one inch in diameter.
   BUILDING MATERIAL. Lumber, wood shakes and other wood products, but shall
not include composite shingles, tar paper, insulation, wall board, wiring or
other similar smoke producing materials.
   DISEASED SHADE TREE. Any tree infected by Dutch Elm disease or Oak Wilt
disease or any tree constituting a hazard to a disease control program
established by the Department of Agriculture pursuant to M.S. §§ 89.51 et seq.,
as it may be amended from time to time.
   DISPOSAL FACILITY. A facility or site permitted by the state’s Pollution
Control Agency for the intermediate or final disposal of solid waste.
   GARBAGE. Discarded material resulting from the handling, processing,
storage, preparation, serving and consumption of food.
   OPEN BURNING. The burning of any matter whereby the resultant combustion
products are emitted directly into the atmosphere without passing through an
adequate stack, duct or chimney.
   REFUSE COLLECTION SERVICE. A public or private operation engaged in solid
waste collection and transportation.
   RUBBISH. Non-putrescible solid waste such as paper, cardboard, yard
clippings and other natural matter not including garbage.
   WETLAND. Natural marsh where water stands near, at or above the surface
during a significant portion of most years.
(1994 Code, § 6-3.6)
§ 94.51 RESTRICTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, suffer, allow or permit open
burning.
(1994 Code, § 6-3.6) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.52 SALVAGE OPERATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit salvage operations by open
burning.
   (B)   No person shall possess, transport or process motor vehicles or scrap
metals which have been reduced by open burning or incineration in a device or
equipment which has not received an operating permit from this agency.
(1994 Code, § 6-3.6) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.53 OPEN BURNING BY PERMIT.
   (A)   Open burning may be conducted if an open burning permit is obtained
pursuant to this subchapter and the open burning is conducted in accordance
with the requirements of this section and the conditions of the permit.
   (B)   (1)   Application. Application for open burning permits may be made in
cases where fires are proposed to be set for the following purposes:
         (a)   The bona fide instruction and training of fire personnel and for
the testing of fire extinguishing equipment;
         (b)   The elimination of fire and health hazards which cannot be
abated by any other practicable means;
         (c)   Activities in accordance with accepted forest or game
management;
         (d)   Ground thawing for utility repair and construction;
         (e)   The disposal of trees, brush, grass and other vegetative matter
in the development of land and right-of-way maintenance;
         (f)   The disposal of diseased shade trees;
         (g)   The disposal of trees and brush in areas outside the
Metropolitan Area;
         (h)   Activities in accordance with accepted agricultural practices;
         (i)   The disposal of building material generated by construction; and
         (j)   The disposal of building material generated by the demolition of
non-commercial or non-institutional structures.
      (2)   Restrictions. A burning permit shall be issued on a prescribed form
to the applicant if the burning is for one of the purposes set forth in
division (B)(1) above and the applicant agrees that all burning shall be
conducted under the following circumstances.
         (a)   The burning shall be conducted on a specified date and time, and
the permit shall automatically expire at midnight of the day for which the
burning is permitted.
         (b)   The prevailing wind at the time of the burning shall be away
from nearby residences.
         (c)   The burning shall be conducted as far away as practical from any
highway or public road and controlled so that traffic hazard is not created.
         (d)   The burning may not be conducted during the duration of an air
pollution alert, warning or emergency.
         (e)   The recipient of the permit or an authorized representative
shall be present for the duration of any fire authorized by permit.
         (f)   Prior notice of the time and location of any fire authorized by
the permit shall be given to the local Department of Natural Resources officer,
the local Fire Marshal or the local Fire Chief and the Police Department.
         (g)   Open burning for ground thawing shall be conducted in accordance
with the following additional restrictions.
            1.   Fuels and starting materials shall be of a kind which do not
generate appreciable smoke.
            2.   Coke used for ground thawing within 500 feet of dwellings or
occupied buildings shall contain less than 1% sulfur.
            3.   Ambient air quality standards for sulfur dioxide and carbon
monoxide shall not be exceeded at occupied residences other than those located
on the property on which the burning is being conducted.
            4.   Propane gas thawing torches or other devices causing minimal
pollution shall be used when practicable.
         (h)   Open burning of material pursuant to divisions (B)(1)(e) through
(B)(1)(j) above shall be conducted in accordance with the following additional
restrictions.
            1.   The location of the burning shall not be within 600 feet of an
occupied residence other than those located on the property on which the
burning is conducted.
            2.   Oils, rubber and other similar smoke producing materials shall
not be burned or used as starting material.
            3.   Unless approved by the Director, the burning shall not be
conducted within one mile of any airport or landing strip.
         (i)   Open burning of materials pursuant to division (B)(1)(i) above
shall also only be conducted under the controlled burning methods approved by
the Director.
         (j)   The burning shall be conducted under such other reasonable
conditions as the permit issuing authority may impose.
      (3)   Permit denial. Any permit application submitted pursuant to this
subchapter shall be denied if a reasonable and practical alternative method of
disposal of the material is available and/or a nuisance condition would result
from the burning.
      (4)   Permit revocation. Any permit is subject to revocation at the
discretion of the state’s Pollution Control Agency, the city’s Fire Chief or
the city if any of the following occur:
         (a)   A reasonable and practical method of disposal of the material is
found;
         (b)   A fire hazard exists or develops during the course of the
burning; or
         (c)   Any of the conditions of the permit are violated.
(1994 Code, § 6-3.6)
§ 94.54 LIABILITY.
   Exemption to conduct open burning or the granting of an open burning permit
under any provision of this subchapter does not excuse a person from the
consequences, damages or injuries which may result therefrom.
(1994 Code, § 6-3.6)
§ 94.55 RECREATIONAL FIRES.
   (A)   RECREATIONAL FIRES are fires set for recreational, ceremonial, food
preparation or social purposes.
   (B)   The fire shall not be any larger than three feet by three feet in
size.
   (C)   The fire shall not be for the purpose of disposing of refuse or other
material.
(1994 Code, § 6-3.6) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.56 PREPARATION OF SITE.
   The site on which open burning occurs shall be returned to a state equal to
its surroundings.
(1994 Code, § 6-3.6) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, corporation or other entity who violates any portion of this
chapter or any portion of the codes and standards adopted by reference in this
chapter may be subject to the penalties set forth herein.
(1994 Code, § 6-1.6)
CHAPTER 95: TOBACCO
Section
   
95.01   Purpose and intent
   
95.02   Definitions
   
95.03   License
   
95.04   Fees
   
95.05   Basis for denial of license
   
95.06   Prohibitions
   
95.07   Self-service sales
   
95.08   Responsibility
   
95.09   Compliance checks and inspections
   
95.10   Other illegal acts
   
95.11   Exceptions and defenses
 
   
95.99   Penalty
§ 95.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The city recognizes that many persons under the age of 18 years purchase or
otherwise obtain, possess and use tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related
devices, electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery device and nicotine
delivery devices, and the sales, possession, and use are violations of both
state and federal laws. This chapter intends to regulate the sale, possession
and use of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, electronic
cigarettes, electronic delivery devices for the purpose of enforcing and
furthering existing laws. (M.S. § 144.391, as amended from time to time)
(Ord. 2019-05, passed 12-18-2019)
§ 95.02 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as otherwise provided or clearly implied by context, all terms shall
be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this chapter,
the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
   CIGARS. Any roll of tobacco that is wrapped in tobacco leaf or in any
substance containing tobacco, with or without a tip or mouthpiece, that is not
a cigarette as defined in M.S. § 297F.01, subd. 3 as amended from time to time.
   COMPLIANCE CHECKS. The system the city uses to investigate and ensure that
those authorized to sell tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices,
electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery devices and nicotine delivery
devices are following and complying with the requirements of this chapter.
Compliance checks shall involve the use of minors as authorized by this
chapter. Compliance checks shall also mean the use of minors who attempt to
purchase tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, electronic
cigarettes, electronic delivery devices or nicotine delivery devices for
educational, research and training purposes as authorized by state and federal
laws. Compliance checks may also be conducted by other units of government for
the purpose of enforcing appropriate federal, state or local laws and
regulations relating to tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices,
electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery device and nicotine delivery
devices.
   ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE AND ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE. Any product containing
or delivering nicotine, or any other substance intended for human consumption
that can be used by a person to simulate smoking in the delivery of nicotine or
any other substance through inhalation of vapor from the product. An electronic
delivery device includes any component part of a product, whether or not
marketed or sold separately. An electronic delivery device does not include any
product that has been approved or certified by the United States Food and Drug
Administration for sale as a tobacco-cessation product, as a tobacco-dependence
product, or for other medical purposes, and is marketed and sold for such an
approved purpose.
   HOOKAH. Shall mean a pipe with a long, flexible tube by which the smoke is
drawn through a jar of water and thus cooled for the use of tobacco or tobacco
related products.
   INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED. The practice of selling any tobacco or tobacco
product wrapped individually for sale. Individually wrapped tobacco and tobacco
products shall include but not be limited to single cigarette packs, single
bags or cans of loose tobacco in any form, and single cans or other packaging
of snuff or chewing tobacco. Cartons or other packaging containing more than a
single pack or other container as described in this definition shall not be
considered individually packaged.
   INDOOR AREA. All space between a floor and a ceiling that is bounded by
walls, doorways, or windows, whether open or closed, covering more than 50% of
the combined surface area of the vertical planes constituting the perimeter of
the area. A wall includes any retractable divider, garage door, or other
physical barrier, whether temporary or permanent.
   LOOSIES. The common term used to refer to a single or individually packaged
cigarette or any other tobacco product that has been removed from its packaging
and sold individually. LOOSIES does not include individual cigars with a retail
price, before any sales taxes, of more than $2.00 per cigar.
   MINOR. Any natural person who has not yet reached the age of 18 years.
   MOVEABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any form of business operated out of a truck,
van, automobile, kiosk, trailer or other type of vehicle or transportable
shelter and not a fixed address store front or other permanent type of
structure authorized for sales transactions.
   NICOTINE DELIVERY DEVICES. Any product containing or delivering nicotine
intended for human consumption, or any part of such a product, that is not
tobacco as defined in this section, not including any product that has been
approved or otherwise certified for legal sale by the United States Food and
Drug Administration for tobacco use cessation, harm reduction, or for other
medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved
purpose.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any enclosed, indoor area used by the general public,
including, but not limited to, restaurants; bars; any other food or liquor
establishment; retail and other commercial establishments; educational
facilities; hospitals; nursing homes; auditoriums; arenas; meeting rooms;
waiting rooms; and common areas of rental apartment buildings.
   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Any place of business where tobacco, tobacco products,
tobacco-related devices, electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery devices or
nicotine delivery devices are available for sale to the general public. The
phrase shall include but not be limited to grocery stores, convenience stores,
restaurants, and drug stores.
   SALE. Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter or other consideration.
   SAMPLING. The lighting of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices
or the activation of and inhaling of vapor from electronic cigarettes in a
retail establishment by a customer or potential customer for the purpose of
sampling the product or device before a purchase.
   SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING. Open displays of tobacco, tobacco products,
tobacco-related devices, electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery device or
nicotine delivery devices in any manner where any person shall have access to
the tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, electronic cigarettes,
electronic delivery device or nicotine delivery devices, without the assistance
or intervention of the licensee or the licensee's employee. The assistance or
intervention shall entail the actual physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco
product, tobacco-related device, or nicotine delivery device between the
customer and the licensee or employee. Self-service sales are interpreted as
being any sale where there is not an actual physical exchange of the product
between the clerk and the customer.
   SMOKING. Inhaling or exhaling smoke from any lighted or heated cigar,
cigarette, pipe, hookah, or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant
product or exhaling vapor from any electronic delivery device, such as vaping.
Smoking also includes carrying a lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, pipe,
hookah or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant product intended for
inhalation.
   SMOKING LOUNGE. A tobacco products shop which allows customers to be seated.
   TOBACCO or TOBACCO RELATED PRODUCTS. Tobacco and tobacco products includes
cigarettes and any product containing, made, or derived from tobacco that is
intended for human consumption, whether chewed, smoked, absorbed, dissolved,
inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, including by vaping,
or any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product; cigars; pipe
tobacco, cheroots; stogies; perique; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready
rubbed, and other  smoking tobacco; snuff; snuff flour; cavendish; plug and
twist tobacco; fine cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts; refuse scraps,
clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco; dipping tobaccos; and other kinds
and forms of tobacco. Tobacco excludes any tobacco product that has been
approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a
tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other
medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for such an approved
purpose.
   TOBACCO PRODUCTS SHOP. A retail establishment with an entrance door opening
directly to the outside that derives more than 90% of its gross revenue from
the sale of tobacco, tobacco related products, tobacco related devices and in
which the sale of other products is merely incidental. TOBACCO PRODUCTS SHOP
does not include a tobacco products department or section of any individual
business establishment with any type of food, liquor, or restaurant license.
   TOBACCO-RELATED DEVICES. Tobacco-related devices include any tobacco product
as well as a pipe, rolling papers, ashtray, or other device intentionally
designed or intended to be used in a manner which enables the chewing,
sniffing, smoking or vaping of tobacco or tobacco products.
   VAPOR LOUNGE. A vapor products shop which allows customers to be seated.
   VAPOR PRODUCTS SHOP. A retail establishment with an entrance door opening,
directly to the outside that derives more than 90% of its gross revenue from
the sale of electronic delivery devices, electronic cigarettes and related
products and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. VAPOR
PRODUCTS SHOP does not include a vapor products department or section of any
individual business establishment with any type of food, liquor, or restaurant
license.
   VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electric or electronic, or other type of
device which dispenses tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco-related devices
upon the insertion of money, tokens or other form of payment directly into the
machine by the person seeking to purchase the tobacco, tobacco product or
tobacco-related device.
(Ord. 2019-5, passed 12-18-2019)
§ 95.03 LICENSE.
   (A)   License required. No person shall sell or offer to sell any tobacco,
tobacco products, tobacco-related device, electronic cigarettes, electronic
delivery device or nicotine delivery device without first having obtained a
license to do so from the city. All licenses issued under this section shall be
valid only on the premises for which the license was issued and only for the
person to whom the license was issued. No transfer of any license to another
location or person shall be valid.
   (B)   Application. An application for a license to sell tobacco, tobacco
products, tobacco-related devices, electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery
device or nicotine delivery devices shall be made on a form provided by the
city. The application shall contain the full name of the applicant, the
applicant's residential and business addresses and telephone numbers, the name
of the business for which the license is sought, and any additional information
the city deems necessary. Upon receipt of a completed application, the
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall forward the application to the City Council
for action at its next regularly scheduled City Council meeting. If the
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer determines an application incomplete, he or she
shall return the application to the applicant with notice of the information
necessary to make the application complete.
   (C)   Action. The City Council may either approve or deny the license, or it
may delay action for a reasonable period of time as necessary to complete any
investigation of the application or the applicant it deems necessary. If the
City Council approves the license, the Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall
issue the license to the applicant. If the City Council denies the license,
notice of the denial shall be given to the applicant along with notice of the
applicant's right to appeal the City Council's decision.
   (D)   Term. All licenses issued under this section shall be valid until
December 31. Licenses will be renewed annually and valid January 1 to December
31.
   (E)   Revocation or suspension. Any license issued under this section may be
revoked or suspended as provided in §
95.99.
   (F)   Transfers. All licenses issued under this section shall be valid only
on the premises for which the license was issued and only for the person to
whom the license was issued. No transfer of any license to another location or
person shall be valid without the prior approval of the City Council.
   (G)   Moveable place of business. No license shall be issued to a moveable
place of business. Only fixed location businesses shall be eligible for
licensing under this section.
   (H)   Display. All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of
the general public on the licensed premise.
   (I)   Renewals. The renewal of a license issued under this section shall be
handled in the same manner as the original application. The request for a
renewal shall be made at least 30 days but not more than 60 days before the
expiration of the current license. The applicant must provide proof that an
employee training program on tobacco sales has been provided during the license
year by submitting records supporting that training at the time of their
license renewal each year.
   (J)   Issuance as privilege and not a right. The issuance of a license
issued under this section represents a privilege and not an absolute right of
the applicant and does not entitle the holder to an automatic renewal of the
license.
   (K)   Smoking. Except as allowed under M.S. § 144.414, smoking shall not be
permitted and no person shall smoke within the indoor area of any establishment
with a retail tobacco license. Smoking for the purposes of sampling tobacco and
tobacco related products generally is prohibited.
(Ord. 2019-5, passed 12-18-2019) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.04 FEES.
   No license shall be issued under this chapter until the appropriate license
fee is paid in full. The fee for a license under this chapter shall be
established in the city's Ordinance Establishing Fees and Charges, as amended
from time to time.
(Ord. 2019-5, passed 12-18-2019) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.05 BASIS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a license under this
chapter include but are not limited to the following:
      (1)   The applicant is under the age of 18 years.
      (2)   The applicant has been convicted within the past five years of any
violation of a federal, state, or local law, ordinance provision, or other
regulation relating to tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices,
electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery device or nicotine delivery devices.
      (3)   The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products,
tobacco-related devices, electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery device or
nicotine delivery devices revoked within the preceding 12 months of the date of
application.
      (4)   The applicant fails to provide any information required on the
application, or provides false or misleading information.
      (5)   The applicant is prohibited by federal, state, or other local law,
ordinance, or other regulation from holding a license.
   (B)   Except as may otherwise be provided by law, the existence of any
particular ground for denial, however, does not mean that the city must deny
the license.
   (C)   If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it shall be
revoked upon the discovery of the ineligibility of the applicant for the
license under this chapter.
(Ord. 2019-5, passed 12-18-2019) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.06 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Prohibited sales. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
person to sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related
device, electronic cigarette, electronic delivery device or nicotine delivery
device:
      (1)   To any person under the age of 18 years.
      (2)   By means of any type of vending machine.
      (3)   By means of self-service methods whereby the customer does not need
to a make a verbal or written request to an employee of the licensed premise in
order to receive the tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related device,
electronic cigarette, electronic delivery device or nicotine delivery device
and whereby there is not a physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product,
tobacco-related device, electronic cigarette, electronic delivery device,
nicotine delivery device between the licensee, or the licensee's employee, and
the customer.
      (4)   By means of loosies as defined in §
95.02.
      (5)   Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna, strychnos,
cocaine, marijuana, or other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic or controlled
substances except nicotine and other substances found naturally in tobacco or
added as part of an otherwise lawful manufacturing process. It is not the
intention of this provision to ban the sale of lawfully manufactured cigarettes
or other tobacco products.
      (6)   By any other means, to any other person, on in any other manner or
form prohibited by federal, state or other local law, ordinance provision, or
other regulation.
   (B)   Smoking and sampling prohibitions.
      (1)   Except for exceptions listed in M.S. § 144.4167, smoking generally
shall be prohibited and no person shall smoke in public places and places of
work, including outdoor and bar areas of restaurants. Other than provided for
in M.S. § 144.4167, subd. 4, tobacco sampling, including sampling of electronic
delivery devices and products used in electronic delivery devices, is
specifically prohibited in the city.
      (2)   To ensure that tobacco smoke or vapor electronic delivery devices
does not enter public places and places of work and that persons entering such
places are not exposed involuntarily to smoke or vapor, smoking and the use of
electronic delivery devices are prohibited within 25 feet of entrances, exits,
open windows and ventilation intakes of public places and places of work. This
prohibition does not apply to entrances and exits used solely in the event of
an emergency and appropriately signed for that purpose.
   (C)   Smoking lounges. Smoking lounges, hookah lounges and vapor lounges are
prohibited.
(Ord. 2019-5, passed 12-18-2019) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.07 SELF-SERVICE SALES.
   It shall be unlawful for a licensee under this chapter to allow the sale of
tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, electronic cigarettes,
electronic delivery device or nicotine delivery devices by any means whereby
the customer may have access to those items without having to request the item
from the licensee or the licensee's employee and whereby there is not a
physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related device, or
nicotine delivery device between the licensee or his or her clerk and the
customer. All tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, electronic
cigarettes,electronic delivery device and nicotine delivery devices shall
either be stored behind a counter or other area not freely accessible to
customers, or in a case or other storage unit not left open and accessible to
the general public. Any retailer selling tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-
related devices, electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery device or nicotine
delivery devices at the time this chapter is adopted shall comply with this
section within 90 days following the effective date of this chapter. A license
holder who operates an establishment or fully enclosed portion of an
establishment that sells at least 90 percent of its products in tobacco, or
tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, electronic delivery devices or
electronic cigarettes, is exempt from the self-service merchandising provision
if the license holder prohibits anyone under 18 years of age from entering the
establishment or fully enclosed portion of an establishment and the license
holder conspicuously displays a notice prohibiting persons under 18 years of
age from entering the establishment.
(Ord. 2019-5, passed 12-18-2019) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.08 RESPONSIBILITY.
   All licensees under this chapter shall be responsible for the actions of
their employees in regard to the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-
related devices, electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery device or nicotine
delivery devices on the licensed premises, and the sale of an item by an
employee shall be considered a sale by the license holder. Nothing in this
section shall be construed as prohibiting the city from also subjecting the
clerk to whatever penalties are appropriate under this chapter, state or
federal law, or other applicable law or regulation.
(Ord. 2019-5, passed 12-18-2019) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.09 COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS.
   All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by the city police or
other authorized city official during regular business hours. From time to
time, but at least once per year, the city shall conduct compliance checks by
engaging, with the written consent of the appropriate parents or guardians,
minors over the age of 15 years but less than 18 years, to enter the licensed
premise to attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related
devices, electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery device or nicotine delivery
devices. Minors used for the purpose of compliance checks shall be supervised
by city designated law enforcement officers or other designated city personnel.
Minors used for compliance checks shall not be guilty of unlawful possession of
tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, electronic cigarettes,
electronic delivery device or nicotine delivery devices when obtaining those
items as a part of the compliance check. No minor used in compliance checks
shall attempt to use a false identification misrepresenting the minor's age,
and all minors lawfully engaged in a compliance check shall answer all
questions about the minor's age asked by the licensee or his or her employee
and shall produce any identification, if any exists, for which he or she is
asked. Nothing in this section shall prohibit compliance checks authorized by
state or federal laws for educational, research, or training purposes, or
required for the enforcement of a particular state or federal law.
(Ord. 2019-5, passed 12-18-2019) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.10 OTHER ILLEGAL ACTS.
   Unless otherwise provided, the following acts shall be a violation of this
chapter:
   (A)   Illegal sales. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person
to sell or otherwise provide any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related
device, electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery device or nicotine delivery
device to any minor.
   (B)   Illegal possession. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
minor to have in his or her possession any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-
related device, electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery device or nicotine
delivery device. This division (B) shall not apply to minors lawfully involved
in a compliance check.
   (C)   Illegal use. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to
smoke, chew, sniff or otherwise use any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-
related device, electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery device or nicotine
delivery device.
   (D)   Illegal procurement. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
minor to purchase or attempt to purchase or otherwise obtain any tobacco,
tobacco product, tobacco-related device, electronic cigarettes, electronic
delivery device or nicotine delivery device, and it shall be a violation of
this chapter for any person to purchase or otherwise obtain those items on
behalf of a minor. It shall further be a violation for any person to coerce or
attempt to coerce a minor to illegally purchase or otherwise obtain or use any
tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related device, or nicotine delivery device.
This division (D) shall not apply to minors lawfully involved in a compliance
check.
   (E)   Use of false identification. It shall be a violation of this chapter
for any minor to attempt to disguise his or her true age by the use of a false
form of identification, whether the identification is that of another person or
one on which the age of the person has been modified or tampered with to
represent an age older than the actual age of the person.
(Ord. 2019-5, passed 12-18-2019) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.11 EXCEPTIONS AND DEFENSES.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the providing of tobacco, tobacco
products, tobacco-related devices, electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery
device or nicotine delivery devices to a minor as part of a lawfully recognized
religious, spiritual, or cultural ceremony. It shall be an affirmative defense
to the violation of this chapter for a person to have reasonably relied on
proof of age as described by state law.
(Ord. 2019-5, passed 12-18-2019) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Misdemeanor prosecution. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the
city from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any alleged violation of
this chapter.
   (B)   Violations.
      (1)   Notice. A person violating this chapter may be issued, either
personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the alleged violation and
that informs the alleged violator of his or her right to a hearing on the
matter. The citation shall provide notice that a hearing must be requested
within ten business days of receipt and that hearing rights shall be terminated
if a hearing is not promptly requested. The citation shall provide information
on how and where a hearing may be requested, including a contact address and
phone number.
      (2)   Hearings.
         (a)   Upon issuance of a citation, a person accused of violating this
chapter may request in writing a hearing on the matter. Hearing requests must
be made within ten business days of the issuance of the citation and delivered
to the Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer or other designated city officer. Failure
to request a hearing within ten business days of the issuance of the citation
will terminate the person's right to a hearing.
         (b)   The Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer or other designated city
officer shall set the time and place for the hearing. Written notice of the
hearing time and place shall be mailed or delivered to the accused violator at
least ten business days prior to the hearing.
      (3)   Hearing officer. The city official designated by the City Council
shall serve as the hearing officer. The hearing officer must be an impartial
employee of the city or an impartial person retained by the city to conduct the
hearing.
      (4)   Decision.
         (a)   A decision shall be issued by the hearing officer within ten
business days. If the hearing officer determines that a violation of this
chapter did occur, that decision, along with the hearing officer's reasons for
finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed under division (B) of this
section, shall be recorded in writing, a copy of which shall be provided to the
city and the accused violator by in person delivery or mail as soon as
practicable. Likewise, if the hearing officer finds that no violation occurred
or finds grounds for not imposing any penalty, those findings shall be recorded
and a copy provided to the city and the acquitted accused violator by in person
delivery or mail as soon as practicable.
         (b)   Costs. If the citation is upheld by the hearing officer, the
city's actual expenses in holding the hearing up to a maximum of $ 1,000.00
shall be paid by the person requesting the hearing.
         (c)   The decision of the hearing officer is final.
      (5)   Appeals. Appeals of any decision made by the hearing officer shall
be filed in the district court for the city in which the alleged violation
occurred within ten business days.
      (6)   Continued violation. Each violation, and every day in which a
violation occurs or continues, shall constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   Administrative penalties.
      (1)   Licensees. Any licensee found to have violated this chapter, or
whose employee shall have violated this chapter, shall be charged an
administrative fine of $75 for a first violation of this chapter; $200 for a
second offense at the same licensed premises within a 24-month period; and $250
for a third or subsequent offense at the same location within a 24-month
period. In addition, after the third offense, the license shall be suspended
for not less than seven consecutive days. If the licensee is also the holder of
a cannabis retail registration issued by the city pursuant to
Chapter 114, any grounds for suspension or revocation of the retail
registration under §
114.06.
      (2)   Other individuals. Other individuals, other than minors regulated
by division (C)(3) of this section, found to be in violation of this chapter
shall be charged an administrative fine of $50.
      (3)   Minors. Minors found in unlawful possession of or who unlawfully
purchase or attempt to purchase, tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related
devices, electronic cigarettes, electronic delivery device or nicotine delivery
devices, shall be subject to an administrative fine, or may be subject to
tobacco-related education classes, diversion programs, community services, or
another penalty that the city believes will be appropriate and effective. The
administrative fine or other penalty shall be established by City Council
ordinance upon the City Council's consultation with interested parties of the
courts, educators, parents and children to determine an appropriate penalty for
minors in the city. This administrative fine or other penalty may also be
established from time to time by the Ordinance Establishing Fees and Charges,
as it may be amended from time to time.
      (4)   Statutory penalties. If the administrative penalties authorized to
be imposed by M.S. § 461.12, as it may be amended from time to time, differ
from those established in this section, then the statutory penalties shall
prevail.
(Ord. 2019-5, passed 12-18-2019; Ord. 2025-03, passed 9-3-2025)
CHAPTER 114: CANNABIS RETAIL BUSINESSES
Section
114.01 Purpose and authority
114.02 Definitions
114.03 Registration of cannabis retail businesses
114.04 Limitation on certain retail registrations
114.05 Requirements for cannabis retail businesses
114.06 Suspension of registration
 
114.99 Penalty
§ 114.01 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to implement the provisions of M.S.
Chapter 342, which authorizes the city to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare by regulating cannabis businesses within the legal boundaries of
the City of St. Bonifacius. The Council finds and concludes that the proposed
provisions are appropriate and lawful, will promote the public interest, and
will protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
   (B)   The city has the authority to adopt this chapter pursuant to M.S. §
342.13 regarding the adoption of reasonable restrictions on the time, place,
and manner of the operation of a cannabis business and M.S. § 342.22, regarding
the local registration and enforcement requirements of state-licensed cannabis
retail businesses and lower-potency hemp edible retail businesses.
(Ord. 2025-03, passed 9-3-2025)
§ 114.02 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following words and terms have the meanings
stated. The definitions contained in M.S. § 342.01 govern any other terms used
in this chapter but are not defined in this section.
   CANNABIS RETAIL BUSINESS. The following businesses that make retail sales to
customers or patients and hold or will hold the proper state license under M.S.
Chapter 342: cannabis microbusiness, cannabis mezzobusiness, cannabis retailer,
medical cannabis combination business, and lower-potency hemp edible retailer.
   DAY CARE NURSERY. A building or structure where care, protection, and
supervision of children are provided for a fee as licensed by the state and in
accordance with Title XV, Chapter 157 of the city code.
   OFFICE OF CANNABIS MANAGEMENT or OCM. The Minnesota Office of Cannabis
Management.
   RETAIL REGISTRATION. An approved registration issued by the city to a state-
licensed cannabis retail business.
   SCHOOL. A public, charter, or private school for pupils in kindergarten
through grade 12.
   STATE LICENSE. An approved license issued to a cannabis retail business by
the Office of Cannabis Management.
(Ord. 2025-03, passed 9-3-2025)
§ 114.03 REGISTRATION OF CANNABIS RETAIL BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Registration required. No individual or entity may operate a cannabis
retail business within the city without first registering with the city as
provided in this section.
   (B)   Initial registration process.
      (1)   Application form. An applicant for a retail registration must fill
out an application form as provided by the city. All questions asked or
information required by the form must be answered fully and completely by the
applicant. The applicant must attach to the application form a copy of its
valid state license or written notice from OCM of preliminary license approval.
      (2)   Registration fee. The registration fee includes the fee for the
initial registration and the first annual renewal of the registration. The
amount of the registration fee will be fixed and determined by the Council and
may be amended from time to time in compliance with the limits established by
law. An applicant for a retail registration must include this registration fee
along with its application form. All fees are non-refundable.
      (3)   Zoning verification. No retail registration will be approved until
the city has determined that the proposed cannabis retail business complies
with the city's zoning regulations. Within 30 days of receiving a copy of a
state license application or preliminary license approval from OCM, the city
will certify on a form provided by OCM whether a proposed cannabis retail
business complies with local zoning ordinances and, if applicable, whether the
proposed business complies with the State Fire Code and Building Code.
      (4)   Processing of application. Once an application is deemed complete,
the City Clerk will inform the applicant of completion, process the
registration fee, and forward the application to the Council or their designee
for approval or denial. Applications will be considered in the order in which
they are received.
   (C)   Approval of application.
      (1)   An application for a retail registration will not be approved if
the registration would exceed
the maximum number of retail registrations available in the city under §
114.04.
      (2)   An application for a retail registration will not be approved or
renewed if the business is
unable to meet the requirements of this section.
      (3)   An application for a retail registration or renewal that meets the
following will be approved:
         (a)   The applicant must have a valid license or preliminary license
approval issued by OCM that allows retail sales;
         (b)   The applicant must have paid the registration fee or renewal fee
required by this section;
         (c)   The location for the cannabis retail business must comply with
applicable zoning ordinances; and
         (d)   All property taxes and assessments for the location where the
retail establishment will be located must be current.
   (D)   Annual compliance checks. The city will conduct a minimum of one
unannounced compliance
check per calendar year for each registered cannabis retail business in the
city to assess if the business meets age verification requirements as required
M.S. § 342.22. Age verification compliance checks will involve persons at least
17 years of age but under the age of 21 who, with the prior written consent of
a parent or guardian if the person is under the age of 18, attempt to purchase
adult-use cannabis flower, adult-use cannabis products, lower-potency hemp
edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products under the direct supervision of a
law enforcement officer. The city will report any failures under this section
to OCM.
   (E)   Location change. If a registered cannabis retail business seeks to
move to a new location still within the legal boundaries of the city, the
business must notify the city of the proposed location change at least 30 days
prior to the date the business intends to commence retail sales at the new
location and submit all information deemed necessary by the city to assess
whether the new location meets the criteria of this chapter.
   (F)   Renewal of registration. The city will annually renew a retail
registration at the same time as OCM renews the cannabis retail business's
state license.
      (1)   Renewal application. A registered cannabis retail business must
apply to the city for renewal of its retail registration on a form established
by city and compliant with OCM guidance. The renewal application form will
require, at a minimum, the information and documents required under this
section for an initial registration.
      (2)   Renewal fees. The second and subsequent annual renewals will be
subject to a renewal fee in an amount fixed and determined by the Council,
which may be amended from time to time in compliance with the limits
established by law. The renewal fee must be submitted with the renewal
application. All fees are nonrefundable.
   (G)   Nontransferable. A retail registration issued under this chapter may
not be transferred to any
other cannabis retail business.
(Ord. 2025-03, passed 9-3-2025)
§ 114.04 LIMITATION ON CERTAIN RETAIL REGISTRATIONS.
   The city will issue up to two retail registrations at any time to cannabis
retailers, cannabis mezzobusinesses with a retail operations endorsement, or
cannabis microbusinesses with a retail operations endorsement. The retail
registrations shall be issued on a first-come, first-served basis. There is no
limit on the number of retail registrations that may be issued for medical
cannabis combination businesses or lower-potency hemp edible retailers.
(Ord. 2025-03, passed 9-3-2025)
§ 114.05 REQUIREMENTS FOR CANNABIS RETAIL BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Minimum buffer requirements.
      (1)   Schools. No retail registration will be granted for any premises
within 600 feet of a school. This minimum buffer requirement does not apply to
a premises that houses a registered cannabis retail business whose registration
predates the arrival of a school structure within 600 feet of the premises.
      (2)   Day care nursery. No retail registration will be granted for any
premises within 500 feet of a day care nursery. This minimum buffer requirement
does not apply to a premises that houses a registered cannabis retail business
whose registration predates the arrival of a day care nursery structure within
500 feet of the premises.
      (3)   Attraction within a public park. No retail registration will be
granted for any premises within 500 feet of an attraction within a public park
that is regularly used by minors, including playgrounds or athletic fields.
This minimum buffer requirement does not apply to a premises that houses a
registered cannabis retail business whose registration predates the arrival of
the attraction within the public park that is within 500 feet of the premises.
      (4)   Measurement. The measurement of distance in this section will be
determined by a straight line from the closest lot line of the premises upon
which the cannabis retail business is to be located to the lot line of the
school, day care nursery, or attraction within a public park.
      (5)   Exception. The minimum buffer requirements contained in this
section do not apply to lower-potency hemp edible retailers.
      (6)   Exception. The minimum buffer requirements contained in this
section do not apply to Main Street from State Highway 7 north to Kennedy
Memorial Drive.
   (B)   Hours of operation. Registered cannabis retail businesses with a
license or endorsement authorizing the retail sale of cannabis flower or
cannabis products may only sell at retail cannabis, cannabis flower, cannabis
products, lower-potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products between
the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
   (C)   Samples. A cannabis retail business may not distribute free samples of
any cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency hemp edibles, or hemp-
derived consumer products to customers, unless the business's state license
permits on-site consumption and the samples are consumed within the licensed
premises.
   (D)   Compliance with laws. Cannabis retail businesses must comply with all
applicable regulations and restrictions provided by M.S. Chapter 342 and rules
promulgated by OCM.
(Ord. 2025-03, passed 9-3-2025)
§ 114.06 SUSPENSION OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Suspension. The city may suspend a cannabis retail business's
registration for up to 30 days upon a determination that:
      (1)   The business is not operating in compliance with state law or city
ordinance; or
      (2)   The operation of the business poses an immediate threat to the
health or safety of the public.
   (B)   Notification; OCM investigation. When the city determines that a
suspension is warranted, the city will promptly send a written notice to the
registered cannabis retail business and to OCM. The notice will inform the
business and OCM of the pending suspension of the license, the length of the
proposed suspension period, and the grounds for the suspension.
   (C)   Effective date of suspension. A suspension issued by the city under
this section will not become effective until OCM has determined whether to
suspend the license of the registered cannabis retail business. The city's
suspension period will run concurrently with any suspension of the state
license by OCM. A suspension issued by the city under this section will be
effective on the date stated in the notice.
   (D)   Reinstatement. The city may reinstate a suspended registration if all
violations have been cured
and must reinstate the registration if OCM orders reinstatement.
   (E)   No sales. A cannabis retail business may not make sales to customers
while its registration is
suspended.
(Ord. 2025-03, passed 9-3-2025)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Civil penalties. The city may impose a civil penalty of up to $2,000
for each instance where a cannabis retail business makes any sale to a customer
or patient without a valid registration or permit from the city or a valid
state license.
   (B)   Criminal penalties. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter or
failure to comply with any
of its requirements constitutes a misdemeanor and is punishable as defined by
law. Violations of the chapter can occur regardless of whether a registration
or permit is required for a regulated activity listed in this section.
(Ord. 2025-03, passed 9-3-2025)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
      
111.   ALCOHOL
      
112.   MOVING BUILDINGS
      
113.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
110.01   Authority to issue licenses and permits
   
110.02   Licensing required
   
110.03   Term of license or permit
   
110.04   License and permit fees
   
110.05   Revocation or suspension of license or permit
   
110.06   Reinstatement after suspension or revocation
   
110.07   Application of general conditions to other chapters
   
110.08   Adoption of state statutes by reference
Special Conditions to Sell and Trade
   
110.20   Eating and drinking establishments
   
110.21   Establishments, trades and devices requiring license
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 AUTHORITY TO ISSUE LICENSES AND PERMITS.
   The provisions of state statutes with reference to the definition of terms,
applications, granting of licenses or permits, conditions, hours of work and
operation and all other matters pertaining to the authority to issue or to
refrain from issuing any license or permit are hereby adopted and made a part
of this section as if fully set out herein, except as modified herein.
(1994 Code, § 8-1.1)
§ 110.02 LICENSING REQUIRED.
   No person or firm shall deal in, dispose of or engage in trade in any
business or in regard to any commodity or service which is listed hereinafter
in this title without first having applied for and received a license or
permit, having paid the stated fee for said license or permit and having said
license or permit displayed as required by this title or other law.
(1994 Code, § 8-1.2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.03 TERM OF LICENSE OR PERMIT.
   The term of the license or permit shall be as stated on the permit or
license, but in no case shall the term be longer than one year.
(1994 Code, § 8-1.3)
§ 110.04 LICENSE AND PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Each application for a license or permit shall be accompanied by a
receipt from the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer for payment in full of the
required fee. The amount of the fee for each particular use shall be indicated
in the annual fee schedule. Upon rejection of any application, the City
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall refund the amount paid.
   (B)   If a portion of the license year has expired when the application is
made, the amount of the fee shall be prorated for the remainder of such year.
In computing such fee, any unexpired remainder or fraction of a month shall be
considered as one entire month.
   (C)   Any part of the fee paid for any license or permit issued shall not be
refunded for revocation, suspension or cancellation regardless of whether such
action is initiated by the licensee, the city or any other authorized person or
agency.
(1994 Code, § 8-1.4)
§ 110.05 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT.
   (A)   (1)   A license granted under the provisions of this city code may be
suspended or revoked by the City Council after written notice to the licensee
or permit holder and a hearing is held at an open meeting. The City Council
may, if allowed by this city code or by applicable statute or regulation,
suspend any license or permit pending a hearing.
      (2)   At the hearing, the City Council shall determine the proper course
of action whether it is revocation, suspension or reinstatement of the license
or permit.
      (3)   The City Council may, in its reasonable discretion, in lieu of
conducting a hearing in relation to an alleged violation of a condition of an
intoxicating or 3.2% malt liquor license, designate that the hearing be
conducted by an appropriate independent hearing examiner. The hearing examiner
need not be an administrative law judge and does not need to be assigned by the
state’s Office of Administrative Hearings.
      (4)   Any hearing, whether conducted by the City Council or by an
independent hearing examiner appointed by the City Council, shall be conducted
pursuant to the provisions of M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.69, as they may be amended
from time to time.
   (B)   The license of any person who holds a federal retail liquor dealer’s
special tax stamp without a license to sell intoxicating liquors at such place
of business shall be revoked without notice or hearing.
   (C)   A license or permit granted under this title may be suspended for any
of the following reasons.
      (1)   In the event that a licensee is convicted of a violation of this
title or of any state or federal law relating to the commodity or service so
licensed under this code, this person’s license shall be suspended for a period
of up to ten days upon the first conviction and for a period of up to 30 days
for a second conviction in any five-year period.
      (2)   In the event that those holding licenses conduct themselves, allow
others to conduct themselves or allow the operation of their businesses to
continue in a manner which is unlawful, unsightly or detrimental to the general
health, safety or welfare of the public, such licensees may be suspended until
such conduct or operation has been abated for a period of up to ten days for
the first offense and a period of up to 30 days for the second offense.
      (3)   A license or permit may be suspended for violation of any of the
reasons related to the purpose of that license or permit listed herein.
   (D)   Instead of granting a third suspension for a license or permit, the
City Council may revoke the license or permit for any of the foregoing reasons
or for any violation of a nature so serious that the Council feels it necessary
to employ its power of revocation rather than the lesser power of suspension.
(1994 Code, § 8-1.5) (Ord. 110, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 110.06 REINSTATEMENT AFTER SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   Any licensee or permit holder who wishes to have a revoked license or
permit reinstated shall appear before the City Council to affirm verbally and
in writing that reinstatement of license or permit is desired and that any and
all of the reasons for the revocation have been abated and will not be allowed
repeat.
   (B)   However, in no case shall any license or permit be reinstated for the
sale of beer or intoxicating liquors to a person who is ineligible or to be
sold on premises which are ineligible, as defined herein.
   (C)   Reinstatement of any license or permit after temporary suspension
shall become automatic at the end of the period designated herein. But in each
case, the holder of said license or permit shall advise the Council in writing
of his or her intention to abate such actions which caused the suspension.
   (D)   Reinstatement of any license or permit after suspension shall be at
the discretion of the City Council and subject to all pertinent and related
laws, codes and statutes.
(1994 Code, § 8-1.6)
§ 110.07 APPLICATION OF GENERAL CONDITIONS TO OTHER CHAPTERS.
   The conditions listed herein and defined as general conditions shall be
applicable to every part, chapter and section of this code the same as though
they appeared in and were written for each and every separate part.
(1994 Code, § 8-1.7)
§ 110.08 ADOPTION OF STATE STATUTES BY REFERENCE.
   Any Minnesota Statutes now existing or hereinafter adopted with reference to
the licensing or operation of enterprises requiring licensing is hereby adopted
by reference and made a part of this code the same as if such statute appeared
in and was written into each and every separate part, except where modified by
this code.
(1994 Code, § 8-1.8)
SPECIAL CONDITIONS TO SELL AND TRADE
§ 110.20 EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   Standards adopted by reference. The standards and provisions of the
following are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this section as if
fully stated and written herein:
      (1)   The National Sanitation Foundation Standards of Commercial Powered
Food Preparation Equipment;
      (2)   Food Service Refrigerator and Food Service Storage Freezers;
      (3)   Automatic Ice-Making Equipment and Appurtenances; and
      (4)   Commercial Spray-Type Dishwashing Machines.
   (B)   Licenses required. Any eating or drinking establishment shall be
required to obtain and properly display all licenses or permits required by the
provisions of this code or by any rule, regulation, requirement or procedure
established by an agency of the state having proper jurisdictional authority
over the issuance of such licenses or permits.
(1994 Code, § 7-4)
§ 110.21 ESTABLISHMENTS, TRADES AND DEVICES REQUIRING LICENSE.
   (A)   Establishments, trades and devices requiring license. Persons or firms
shall not operate any establishment, trade, occupation or device, or solicit,
peddle, canvass or engage in the practice of transient merchandising, which
requires a license under this section without first having obtained such a
license. Establishments, trades or devices requiring such license are as set by
City Council.
   (B)   License fees and restrictions. Any license issued under this section
shall require an annual fee as set by City Council and shall be subject to any
restrictions stated hereinafter. All establishments, trades and devices shall
be operated in and subject to the provisions of Ch. 150 and 157 of this code of
ordinances.
   (C)   Display of license. Any license issued under this section shall be
posted in a conspicuous place in accordance with all governing laws and shall
be exhibited to any person upon request. In the case of approved trades not
operating out of any particular permanent or stationary place of business, the
license holder shall carry said license on his or her person and shall exhibit
it to any person upon request.
   (D)   Land use requirements. License holders shall, as a condition to
issuance and maintenance of validity of any license issued under this section,
operate their establishment, trade or device in accordance with the provisions
of Ch. 157 of this code of ordinances. Failure to comply shall be cause for
immediate suspension, and may be cause for revocation, of the person’s license.
(1994 Code, § 8-3) (Ord. 40, passed 12-10-1998; Ord. 48, passed 9-23-1999)
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOL
Section
General Provisions
   
111.01   Nudity on premises
   
111.02   Consumption on public sidewalks, rights-of-way and streets
3.2% Malt Liquor
   
111.15   License required
   
111.16   Definitions
   
111.17   Issuance of on-sale licenses restricted
   
111.18   State statutes adopted by reference
   
111.19   Application for license
   
111.20   Transferability
   
111.21   Ineligibility for license
   
111.22   Other conditions of license and sale
   
111.23   Restrictions on purchase and consumption
   
111.24   License fee
   
111.25   Display of license
   
111.26   Additional license conditions
Liquor and Other Intoxicating Beverages
   
111.40   License required
   
111.41   Definitions
   
111.42   Issuance of on-sale licenses restricted
   
111.43   State statutes adopted by reference
   
111.44   Application for license
   
111.45   Transferability
   
111.46   Ineligibility for license
   
111.47   Other conditions of license and sale
   
111.48   Restrictions on purchase and consumption
   
111.49   License fee
   
111.50   Display of license
   
111.51   Additional license conditions
   
111.52   On-sale license for Community Room
   
111.53   Wine licenses
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.01 NUDITY ON PREMISES.
   The following acts of conduct on licensed premises are deemed contrary to
public welfare and morals and, therefore, no on-sale intoxicating liquor or
3.2% malt beverages shall be held at any premises where the following conduct
or acts are permitted:
   (A)   The employment of any hostess, barmaid, waitress, waiter, bartender,
independent contractor or any such other person, in the sale or service of
intoxicating liquor and/or 3.2% malt beverages while such person is in a state
of “nudity”, as defined by M.S. § 617.292, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from
time to time; and
   (B)   The permitting of any person to perform, whether by dancing,
displaying lingerie or any other activities or entertainment while in the state
of “nudity”, as defined by M.S. § 617.292, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from
time to time.
(Ord. 26, passed 7-24-1997) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.02 CONSUMPTION ON PUBLIC SIDEWALKS, RIGHTS-OF–WAY AND STREETS.
   No person may consume intoxicating or 3.2% malt alcoholic beverages
(including, but not limited to, beer and wine) on any sidewalk, right-of-way or
street located within the city (regardless of whether the sidewalk, right-of-
way or street is owned by the city, the county or the state) unless the city
has issued a permit which specifically allows such consumption. Such permits
may be issued for specific festivals, block parties and the like and, in the
discretion of the City Council, may be issued for a sidewalk café.
(Ord. 109, passed 10-7-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
3.2 % MALT LIQUOR
§ 111.15 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   A license shall be required to sell or offer for sale beer, ale or any other
similar beverage classified by the state as a 3.2% malt liquor. Licenses shall
be of either the retail on-sale type or of the retail off-sale type as
described herein and as shown on the face of the license.
(1994 Code, § 8-2.6)
§ 111.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PREMISES. 
      (1)   The interior structure of the primary building on any property
located at the address ascribed on the license, together with an enclosed
outdoor patio. The PREMISES may not include any sidewalks or parking areas. The
PREMISES shall be specifically described in the application for the license.
The applicant must have ownership or a leasehold interest in the PREMISES. An
enclosed outdoor patio may be at a separate address (and on a separate parcel)
from the parcel on which the primary building is located; provided:
         (a)   The parcel on which the enclosed outdoor patio is located is
contiguous to the parcel on which the primary building is located;
         (b)   The enclosed outdoor patio is physically connected to the
primary building; and
         (c)   The applicant indicates actual ownership or a leasehold interest
in the parcel in which the enclosed patio is located.
      (2)   During an emergency declared by the city or the State of Minnesota
pursuant to M.S. Chapter 12 or other applicable law, during which restrictions
are imposed on the operation of a facility holding an on-sale license are
imposed, the city may, in its discretion, allow the licensed PREMISES to be
expanded to include an adjacent exterior parking lot or sidewalk. The city may
impose particular restrictions as to the duration of the expansion of the
PREMISES into a parking area or a sidewalk.
   RETAIL OFF-SALE LICENSES. Those licenses that shall permit the sale of 3.2%
malt liquor, in the original package, for consumption off the premises only.
   RETAIL ON-SALE LICENSES. Those licenses that shall permit the sale of 3.2%
malt liquor for consumption on the premises only.
(1994 Code, § 8-2.6) (Ord. 110, passed 10-21-2009; Ord. 110A, passed 4-18-2012;
Ord. 2020-01, passed 6-3-2020)
§ 111.17 ISSUANCE OF ON-SALE LICENSES RESTRICTED.
   A retail on-sale license shall be granted only to bona fide clubs, beer
stores, bars, restaurants, taverns, saloons, hotels, motels and other similar
establishments. A special one-day or short-term license may be granted to bona
fide clubs, churches or civic or fraternal organizations.
(1994 Code, § 8-2.6)
§ 111.18 STATE STATUTES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   The provisions of all applicable Minnesota Statutes and in particular
the provisions of M.S. Ch. 340A et seq., as it may be amended from time to
time, with reference to the definition of terms, applications for licenses,
conditions of license, restrictions on consumption, provisions on sales,
conditions of bonds on licenses, hours of sale and all other matters pertaining
to the retail sale, distribution and consumption of 3.2% malt liquors are
hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this section as if fully set out
herein, except as modified herein.
   (B)   According to M.S. § 158.10, as it may be amended from time to time,
licenses shall not be granted or renewed for any operation on any premises on
which taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the city or of the state
are due. In the event that an action, questioning the amount or validity of
taxes, has been taken pursuant to the provisions of M.S. Ch. 278, as it may be
amended from time to time, the Council may, on application by the licensee,
waive strict compliance with this provision. However, a waiver shall not be
granted for taxes or any portion thereof which remain unpaid for a period
exceeding one year after becoming due.
(1994 Code, § 8-2.6)
§ 111.19 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   In addition to any and all information required by other sections of
this subchapter, an application for a license to sell 3.2% malt liquor shall
contain the following information:
      (1)   The name of the applicant;
      (2)   The applicant’s age;
      (3)   Representations as to the applicant’s character with such
references as may be required by the issuing body;
      (4)   The applicant’s citizenship;
      (5)   Whether the application is for retail on-sale or for retail off-
sale;
      (6)   The business in which the proposed license will operate and its
location;
      (7)   Whether the applicant is owner and operator of that business and if
not, who is the owner and who will be operating that business;
      (8)   How long the applicant has been in that business at that place; and
      (9)   Any other information which the City Council feels is necessary in
its determination of granting or not granting a license.
   (B)   It shall be a violation of this subchapter to make any false statement
in connection with any application for license. The City Council shall
investigate all facts set forth in the application and shall grant opportunity
for any person to be heard who is for or against granting such license to the
applicant.
   (C)   After such investigation and consideration, the Council shall grant or
refuse the applicant at its discretion.
(1994 Code, § 8-2.6)
§ 111.20 TRANSFERABILITY.
   Each license granted and issued under this subchapter shall be issued to the
applicant only. The license shall not be transferable to another holder and
each license issued shall be issued only for use in and shall only be valid for
the premises described in the application. A license shall not be transferred
to another place of business without the specific approval of the Council, and
then only after a notation is made in the minutes of the meeting and also on
the face of the license.
(1994 Code, § 8-2.6)
§ 111.21 INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE.
   A license shall not be granted to any person who is ineligible by reason of
one or more of the following or to any person who intends to operate an
establishment, under this license, in a location which is ineligible by reason
of one or more of the following.
   (A)   The applicant must be of a majority age.
   (B)   The applicant must not have been convicted of a felony or of violating
the National Prohibition Act, being 27 U.S.C. §§ 1 et seq. or any law of the
federal, state or local governments relating to the manufacture, sale or
transportation of intoxicating liquor or drugs.
   (C)   The applicant must not be a manufacturer of beer or other 3.2% malt
liquor or be interested in the control of any business engaged in such
manufacture.
   (D)   The applicant must be of good moral character.
   (E)   The applicant must be a resident of the state.
   (F)   A license shall not be granted if intended to be used for sale on any
premises where a license has been revoked for cause until one year has lapsed
after such revocation.
   (G)   A license shall not be granted if intended to be used for sale on any
premises where a licensee has been convicted of a violation of this subchapter
or of the state beer or liquor law until one year has lapsed after such
violation.
   (H)   An on-sale license shall not be granted for a business or club which
has not been in operation for at least six months prior to the issuance without
the unanimous consent of the City Council.
   (I)   The applicant and the premises must meet the minimum requirements of
the state according to M.S. §§ 340A.403 and 340A.411, as they may be amended
from time to time, relating to the licensing of persons and premises for the
intended purpose.
   (J)   A license shall not be granted or renewed for operation on any
premises on which taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the city or
of the state are due, delinquent or unpaid. In the event an action, questioning
the amount or validity of taxes, is taken pursuant to the provisions of M.S.
Ch. 278, as it may be amended from time to time, the Council may, on
application by the licensee, waive strict compliance with this provision.
However, a waiver may not be granted for taxes, or for any portion thereof,
which remain unpaid for a period exceeding one year after becoming due.
(1994 Code, § 8-2.6)
§ 111.22 OTHER CONDITIONS OF LICENSE AND SALE.
   Every license issued under this subchapter is issued subject to the
following conditions, all other provisions of this subchapter and all
applicable provisions and conditions of this code of ordinances and of related
state statutes.
   (A)   Beverages whose sale is required to be licensed under this section
shall not be sold or served to any intoxicated person or to any person of
minority age.
   (B)   Persons of minority age shall not be allowed or employed to sell or
serve 3.2% malt liquor as defined herein or be employed on the premises in any
other manner.
   (C)   Every licensee, whether present at or absent from the premises, shall
be responsible for the conduct of the place of business and shall maintain
conditions of sobriety and order.
   (D)   Establishments licensed under this subchapter shall not conduct
business or make sales between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. from Monday
through Saturday inclusive and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.
Sunday. State law off hours are 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday.
   (E)   Establishments licensed under this subchapter shall not conduct
business sales on Sunday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon unless
in possession of a valid Sunday permit or license as directed in M.S. §
340A.504, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (F)   Licensees shall not permit customers on the premises until such
establishment is legally open in the morning and not longer than 15 minutes
after the legal time for closing as defined above.
   (G)   The provisions of divisions (E) and (F) above shall not apply to a
private club licensee when operating as a private club at the premises
described in the license application for that purpose. However, private clubs
shall not sell beer to any person not a member or a guest of a member in
attendance.
(1994 Code, § 8-2.6) (Ord. 70, passed 6-18-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.23 RESTRICTIONS ON PURCHASE AND CONSUMPTION.
   (A)   Minors shall not misrepresent their age for the purpose of obtaining
3.2% malt liquors.
   (B)   No person shall induce a minor to purchase, procure or consume 3.2%
malt liquors.
   (C)   Minors shall not have 3.2% malt liquor in their possession with the
intent to consume said beverage at a place other than the household of the
minor’s parents or guardian.
   (D)   Persons other than the parent or guardian of a minor shall not procure
beer for any minor.
   (E)   No person shall consume or display intoxicating liquor on the premises
of a licensee who is not also licensed to sell intoxicating liquor.
   (F)   3.2% malt liquor or beer shall not be consumed on a public street or
highway or any motor vehicle.
   (G)   No person shall consume any 3.2% malt liquor or beer on any public
land or property in the city, except by special permit granted by the Council.
(1994 Code, § 8-2.6) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.24 LICENSE FEE.
   Any license issued under this subchapter shall require annual fees as set by
the City Council.
(1994 Code, § 8-2.6)
§ 111.25 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Any license issued under this subchapter shall be posted in a conspicuous
place in accordance with all governing laws and shall be exhibited to any
person upon request.
(1994 Code, § 8-2.6) (Ord. 110B, passed 10-3-2012)
§ 111.26 ADDITIONAL LICENSE CONDITIONS.
   Any license issued under this subchapter is subject to the following
additional conditions.
   (A)   The City Council may suspend or revoke any license issued pursuant to
this subchapter for a violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter or
for the violation of any other law, statute or ordinance regarding the
manufacture, sale, distribution or possession for sale or distribution of
alcoholic beverages. Except as hereinafter provided, no such action shall be
taken without ten days’ written notice to the licensee and the opportunity for
the licensee to have a hearing. The city may suspend the license for up to 60
days for any violation; and, in its discretion (or in the discretion of a
hearing examiner appointed, by the City Council), revoke any retail license or
permit or impose a civil fee not to exceed $2,000 for each violation.
   (B)   If a license issued pursuant to this subchapter is revoked, no portion
of the license fee may be refunded.
   (C)   The city or the state’s Commissioner of Public Safety may impose
penalties provided in this subchapter on a retail licensee who knowingly:
      (1)   Sells alcoholic beverages to another retail licensee for the
purpose of resale;
      (2)   Purchases alcoholic beverages from another retail licensee for the
purpose of resale;
      (3)   Conducts or permits the conduct of gambling on a licensed premises
in violation of the law;
      (4)   Fails to remove or dispose of alcoholic beverages when ordered to
do so under M.S. § 340A.508, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time;
and
      (5)   Sells any alcoholic beverage to a minor.
   (D)   Lapse of required dram shop insurance or withdrawal of required proof
of financial responsibility shall result in immediate suspension of any license
issued pursuant to this subchapter. The suspension may be issued by the City
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer and does not require the approval of the City
Council. Notice of cancellation, lapse of a current dram shop insurance policy
or withdrawal of proof of financial responsibility shall also constitute notice
to the licensee of the impending suspension of the license. The holder of a
license who has received notice of lapse of required dram shop insurance or
withdrawal of proof of financial responsibility or of suspension or revocation
of a license may request a hearing. If such a request is made in writing to the
City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer, a hearing shall be granted within 30 days
or such longer period as may be requested. Any suspension under this division
(D) relating to dram shop insurance or proof of financial responsibility shall
continue until the city determines that evidence of dram shop insurance or
required proof of financial responsibility requirements of state law have been
met.
   (E)   Every licensee has responsibility for the conduct of the place of
business and the conditions of sobriety and order therein. The act of any
employee on the licensed premises is deemed the act of the licensee as well,
and the licensee shall be liable for all penalties provided by the city code
and the law equally with the employee.
   (F)   Every licensee shall allow any peace officer or health officer to
conduct compliance checks and to otherwise enter into and inspect the licensed
premises during business hours and after business hours during the time when
any person remains on the licensed premises.
   (G)   Except as provided herein, no 3.2% malt liquor sold by the licensee
may be consumed outside the building of the licensed premises. If the licensed
premises has a fenced in smoking patio approved by the city, 3.2% malt liquor
served from inside the building on the licensed premises may be consumed on
such smoking patio. A licensee may apply for a special endorsement to a license
allowing consumption and service of 3.2% malt liquor on a sidewalk or outdoor
open patio. No 3.2% malt liquor may be consumed on such sidewalk or outdoor
open patio without a special endorsement to the license issued by the city.
Notwithstanding the above, no licensee may dispense and serve 3.2% malt liquor
from any area on a smoking patio or outdoor patio (as opposed to having wait
staff serve patrons in such areas with 3.2% malt liquor dispensed from within
the building on the licensed premises) without a special dispensing endorsement
to the license issued by the city based on the following criteria:
      (1)   Any outdoor bar or serving area staffed by employees of the
licensee at which only individual containers of pre-packaged beer or malt based
beverages which constitute 3.2% malt liquor are served may be permitted;
provided, adequate cooling of such beverages is provided; and
      (2)   Beer constituting 3.2% malt-liquor may be sold and served from a
keg provided the beer is dispensed by employees of the licensee and adequate
cooling of the beer is provided.
(Ord. 110, passed 10-21-2009; Ord. 110B, passed 10-3-2012) Penalty, see §
10.99
LIQUOR AND OTHER INTOXICATING BEVERAGES
§ 111.40 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   A license shall be required to sell, dispose of or offer to sell
intoxicating liquors as classified by the state. Licenses shall be of either
the retail on-sale type or of the retail off-sale type as described herein and
as shown on the face of the license.
(1994 Code, § 8-2.7)
§ 111.41 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PREMISES. The meaning assigned to it in §
111.16 of this chapter.
   RETAIL OFF-SALE LICENSES. Those licenses that permit the sale of
intoxicating liquor, in the original package and with an intact tax stamp
affixed thereto, for consumption off the premises only.
   RETAIL ON-SALE LICENSES. Those licenses that permit the sale of intoxicating
liquor for consumption on the premises only.
   SPECIAL ON-SALE LICENSE. Those licenses that permit the sale of intoxicating
liquor in conjunction with the sale of food between the hours of 12:00 noon on
Sundays and 1:00 a.m. on Mondays and which may be issued only to hotels,
restaurants and/or clubs which have the facilities for serving at least 30
guests at one time and which presently hold a retail on-sale license. As a
condition precedent to issuing such a license, the prospective licensee must
provide evidence to the city that it holds a food license issued by the county.
   WINE LICENSE. An on-sale wine license authorized pursuant to M.S. §
340A.404, Subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time.
(1994 Code, § 8-2.7) (Ord. 4, passed 1-12-1995; Ord. 105A, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 111.42 ISSUANCE OF ON-SALE LICENSES RESTRICTED.
   A retail on-sale liquor license shall only be granted to bona fide clubs,
bars, restaurants, taverns, saloons, hotels, motels and other similar
establishments.
(1994 Code, § 8-2.7)
§ 111.43 STATE STATUTES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The provisions of all applicable Minnesota Statutes and in particular the
provisions of M.S. Ch. 340A et seq., as it may be amended from time to time,
with reference to the definition of terms, applications for licenses,
conditions of license, restrictions on consumption, provisions on sales,
conditions of bonds on licenses, hours of sale and all other matters pertaining
to the retail sale, distribution and consumption of 3.2% malt liquors are
hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this subchapter as if fully set
out herein, except as modified herein.
(1994 Code, § 8-2.7) (Ord. 105A, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 111.44 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   In addition to any and all other information required by other sections of
this subchapter, an application shall contain the following information:
   (A)   All of the information required by §
111.19 of this chapter shall be included in the application;
   (B)   The application shall be in the form prescribed by the Liquor Control
Commission and the city;
   (C)   The application shall be accompanied by evidence of financial
responsibility/liability insurance as required by M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be
amended from time to time. Notwithstanding any other provision of Minnesota
Statutes or this city code, the city may, by administrative action, suspend any
license issued pursuant to this subchapter if the liability insurance or proof
of financial responsibility required is terminated. Such suspension shall
remain in effect until the statutory requirements for liability insurance and/
or financial responsibility are satisfied; and
   (D)   The application shall be accompanied by a signed statement that the
applicant shall reimburse the city for any costs incurred during the
investigation of facts set forth in said application. It shall be a violation
of this code to make any false statement in connection with any application for
license. The City Council shall investigate all facts set forth in the
application and shall grant opportunity for any person to be heard for or
against granting such license to the applicant. After such investigation, the
Council, at its discretion, shall grant or refuse the applicant.
(1994 Code, § 8-2.7) (Ord. 105A, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 111.45 TRANSFERABILITY.
   Each license granted and issued under this subchapter shall be issued to the
applicant only. The license shall not be transferrable to another holder and
each license issued shall be issued only for use in and shall only be valid for
the premises described in the application. A license shall not be transferred
to another place of business without the specific approval of the Council, and
then only after a notation is made in the minutes of the meeting and also on
the face of the license.
(1994 Code, § 8-2.7)
§ 111.46 INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE.
   No person shall be issued a license under this section who is ineligible for
any of the following reasons:
   (A)   The applicant must not have been found ineligible for such a license
by state law or regulations of the Liquor Control Commission; and/or
   (B)   The applicant must be eligible under the conditions listed in §
111.22(A) through (G) of this chapter inclusive, except as modified as follows:
      (1)   Section
111.22(E) of this chapter shall be interpreted as follows for this subchapter:
“The applicant must not be a manufacturer of intoxicating liquor or be
interested in the control of any business engaged in such manufacture”; and
      (2)   Section
111.22(G) of this chapter shall be deleted in its entirety.
(1994 Code, § 8-2.7)
§ 111.47 OTHER CONDITIONS OF LICENSE AND SALE.
   (A)   Every license issued under this subchapter is issued subject to the
following conditions, all other provisions of this chapter and all applicable
provisions and conditions of this code and of related state statutes.
   (B)   All of the conditions listed in §
111.22 of this chapter, except as modified herein:
      (1)   Wherever the terms “beer” or “3.2% malt liquor” appear or are
referred to by intent of inclusion, it shall be the intent of this section to
substitute the term “intoxicating liquor”.
      (2)   Section
111.22(C) of this chapter shall be deleted in its entirety.
(1994 Code, § 8-2.7)
§ 111.48 RESTRICTIONS ON THE PURCHASE AND CONSUMPTION.
   (A)   Minors shall not misrepresent their age for the purpose of obtaining
3.2% malt liquors.
   (B)   No person shall induce a minor to purchase, procure or consume 3.2%
malt liquors.
   (C)   Intoxicating liquor shall not be consumed on a public street or
highway or in any motor vehicle.
   (D)   No person shall consume any intoxicating liquor on any public land or
property in the city, except by special permit granted by the Council.
(1994 Code, § 8-2.7) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.49 LICENSE FEE.
   Any license issued under this subchapter shall require annual fees as set by
the City Council.
(1994 Code, § 8-2.7) (Ord. 4, passed 1-12-1995)
§ 111.50 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Any license issued under this subchapter shall be posted in a conspicuous
place in accordance with all governing laws and shall be exhibited to any
person upon request.
(1994 Code, § 8-2.7)
§ 111.51 ADDITIONAL LICENSE CONDITIONS.
   Any license issued under this subchapter is subject to the following
additional conditions.
   (A)   The City Council may suspend or revoke any license issued pursuant to
this subchapter for a violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter or
for the violation of any other law, statute or ordinance regarding the
manufacture, sale, distribution or possession for sale or distribution of
alcoholic beverages. Except as hereinafter provided, no such action shall be
taken without ten days’ written notice to the licensee. The city may suspend
the license for up to 60 days for any violation; and, in its discretion (or in
the discretion of a hearing examiner appointed by the City Council), revoke any
retail license or permit or impose a civil fee not to exceed $2,000 for each
violation.
   (B)   If a license issued pursuant to this subchapter is revoked, no portion
of the license fee may be refunded.
   (C)   The city or the state’s Commissioner of Public Safety may impose
penalties provided in this subchapter on a retail licensee who knowingly:
      (1)   Sells alcoholic beverages to another retail licensee for the
purpose of resale;
      (2)   Purchases alcoholic beverages from another retail licensee for the
purpose of resale;
      (3)   Conducts or permits the conduct of gambling on a licensed premises
in violation of the law;
      (4)   Fails to remove or dispose of alcoholic beverages when ordered to
do so under M.S. § 340A.508, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time;
and/or
      (5)   Sells any alcoholic beverage to a minor.
   (D)   Lapse of required dram shop insurance or withdrawal of required proof
of financial responsibility shall result in immediate of any license issued
pursuant to this subchapter. The suspension may be issued by the City
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer and does not require the approval of the City
Council. Notice of cancellation, lapse of a current dram shop insurance policy
or withdrawal of proof of financial responsibility shall also constitute notice
to the licensee of the impending suspension of the license. The holder of a
license who has received notice of lapse of required dram shop insurance or
withdrawal of proof of financial responsibility or of suspension or revocation
of a license may request a hearing. If such request is made in writing to the
City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer, a hearing shall be granted within 30 days
or such longer period as may be requested. Any suspension under this division
(D) relating to dram shop insurance or proof of financial responsibility shall
continue until the city determines that evidence of dram shop insurance or
required proof of financial responsibility requirements of state law have been
met.
   (E)   Every licensee has responsibility for the conduct of the place of
business and the conditions of sobriety and order therein. The act of any
employee on the licensed premises is deemed the act of the licensee as well,
and the licensee shall be liable for all penalties provided by city code and
the law equally with the employee.
   (F)   Every licensee shall allow any peace officer or health officer to
conduct compliance checks and to otherwise enter into and inspect the licensed
premises during business hours and after business hours during the time when
any person remains on the licensed premises.
   (G)   Except as provided herein, no alcoholic beverages (intoxicating
liquor) sold by the licensee may be consumed outside the building of the
licensed premises, if the licensed premises has a fenced in smoking patio
approved by the city, alcoholic beverages (intoxicating liquor) served from
inside the building on the licensed premises may be consumed on such smoking
patio. A licensee may apply for a special endorsement to a license allowing
consumption and service of alcoholic beverages (intoxicating liquor) on a
sidewalk or outdoor open patio. No alcoholic beverages (intoxicating liquor)
may be consumed on such sidewalk or outdoor open patio without a special
endorsement to the license issued by the city. Notwithstanding the above, no
licensee may dispense and serve alcoholic beverages (intoxicating liquor) from
any area on a smoking patio or outdoor patio (as opposed to having wait staff
serve patrons in such areas with alcoholic beverages (intoxicating liquor)
dispensed from within the building on the licensed premises) without a special
dispensing endorsement to the license issued by the city based on the following
criteria.
      (1)   Any outdoor bar or serving area at which mixed drinks are prepared
must be staffed by employees of the licensee and have hot and cold running
water at such outdoor bar or serving area and drainage into the sanitary sewer
and must meet all requirements of the state’s Department of Health.
      (2)   Any outdoor bar or serving area staffed by employees of the
licensee at which only individual containers of pre-packaged beer or malt-based
beverages are served may be permitted provided adequate cooling of such
beverages is provided.
      (3)   Beer may be sold and served from a keg provided the beer is
dispensed by employees of the licensee and adequate cooling of the beer is
provided.
(Ord. 110, passed 10-21-2009; Ord. 110B, passed 10-3-2012) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.52 ON-SALE LICENSE FOR COMMUNITY ROOM.
   A license shall be required to sell or offer to sell intoxicating liquors,
as classified by the state, at the St. Bonifacius Community Room.
   (A)   A licensee holding a catering permit issued by the state pursuant to
M.S. § 340A.404, Subd. 12, as it may be amended from time to time, may make
such sales provided, at least ten days before the event, such licensee provides
evidence to the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer of:
      (1)   Issuance of a validly executed on-sale liquor license which is in
good standing issued by a municipality within the state;
      (2)   Issuance of a caterer’s permit for the current year by the state;
and
      (3)   Evidence to the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer at least ten
days prior to the event that the licensee’s proof of financial responsibility
or dram shop insurance covers sales by the licensee of on-sale intoxicating
liquor at the St. Bonifacius Community Room.
   (B)   The holder of an on-sale intoxicating liquor license issued by the
city may sell intoxicating liquor at the St. Bonifacius Community Room in
conformance with M.S. § 340A.404, Sub. 4, as it may be amended from time to
time; provided that, such licensee’s license is in good standing, and:
      (1)   The licensee or the applicant for the event at the St. Bonifacius
Community Room provides the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer with at least
ten days’ written notice of the proposed sale by the licensee; and
      (2)   The licensee provides evidence to the City Administrator/Clerk/
Treasurer at least ten days prior to the event that the licensee’s proof of
financial responsibility or dram shop insurance covers sales by the licensee of
on-sale intoxicating liquor at the St. Bonifacius Community Room.
   (C)   Such licensee must be engaged to sell or offer to sell intoxicating
liquor at an event held by a person or organization permitted to use the St.
Bonifacius Community Room and may, under this division (C), dispense
intoxicating liquor only to persons attending such event.
(Ord. 110C, passed 10-1-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.53 WINE LICENSES.
   Subject to the terms and conditions set forth herein and the requirements of
the statute, the city may issue an on-sale wine license. The on-sale wine
license must be issued to a facility with seating for at least 25 guests at one
time. The on-sale wine license permits the sale of wine with up to 14% alcohol
by volume for consumption with the sale of food. If the licensee’s gross
receipts are least 60% attributable to the sale of food, the licensee, without
a separate intoxicating liquor license, may sell intoxicating malt liquors at
on-sale. (Per the state, sell wine seven days a week and beer seven days a
week. The city can restrict sell of beer on Sundays due to city license.)
(Ord. 105A, passed 2-20-2008)
CHAPTER 112: MOVING BUILDINGS
Section
   
112.01   Application
   
112.02   Definitions
   
112.03   Moving permit required and application
   
112.04   Requirements of building mover
   
112.05   Owner’s permit required and application
   
112.06   Liability to city
   
112.07   Fees and deposits
   
112.08   Review or appeal by the Council
   
112.09   Moving hours and days
   
112.10   Designated moving route
   
112.12   Building permits and certificates of occupancy
   
112.13   Building mover endorsement
   
112.14   Denial of a permit
§ 112.01 APPLICATION.
   This chapter shall only apply to buildings required to be moved by movers
licensed by the state and for buildings exceeding 12 feet in width, 20 feet in
length or 16 feet in loaded height.
(Ord. 114, passed 5-4-2011)
§ 112.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LOADED HEIGHT. Height of the building to be moved when loaded on the vehicle
or trailer being used to transport as measured to include any additional height
due to vehicle or trailer.
   STREET or STREETS. All streets and highways in the city which are not state
trunk highways, county state-aid highways or county roads.
(Ord. 114, passed 5-4-2011)
§ 112.03 MOVING PERMIT REQUIRED AND APPLICATION.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to move a building exceeding 12 feet in
width, 20 feet in length or 16 feet in loaded height on any street within the
city without a moving permit from the city.
   (B)   The application for a moving permit shall state the approximate size
and weight of the structure or building proposed to be moved, together with the
places from and to which it is proposed to move, and proposed route to be
followed, proposed dates and times of moving and parking and the name and
address of the proposed mover.
   (C)   The application for a moving permit shall state any municipal utility,
street and public property repairs or alterations that will be required by
reason of such movement.
   (D)   The moving permit shall state date or dates of moving, hours, routing
movement and parking.
   (E)   Fees to be charged shall be separate for each of the following:
      (1)   A moving permit fee to cover use of streets and route approval; and
      (2)   A fee equal to the municipal utility and public alterations
occasioned by such movement which shall be paid in advance.
(Ord. 114, passed 5-4-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.04 REQUIREMENTS OF BUILDING MOVER.
   The building mover shall:
   (A)   Move the building over those streets only which are designated for
such use in the permit;
   (B)   Notify the Building Official in writing of any desired change in the
date or times of moving the building from that indicated in the application,
conduct moving operations only on the date and at the times designated in the
application or approved in writing by the Building Official, and notify the
Chief of Police at least 24 hours prior to commencing movement of the building;
   (C)   Notify the Building Official in writing of damage caused to property
belonging to the city or any public utility within 24 hours after the damage or
injury has occurred;
   (D)   Notify the residents owning property along the moving route the dates
of the moving in writing at least seven days before the proposed moving date;
   (E)   Cause red lights to be displayed during the night time on each side of
the building while situated on a public street in such manner as to warn the
public of an obstruction, and at all times erect and maintain barricades across
such streets as shall be necessary and in such manner as to protect the public
from damage or injury by reason of the presence, movement or removal of the
building. Warning lights with open flames shall not be used;
   (F)   Not park the building on any city street at any time during the moving
process;
   (G)   Comply with the provisions of the city code and all other laws; and
   (H)   Pay the expense of any traffic officer ordered by the city to
accompany the movement of the building to protect the public from injury.
(Ord. 114, passed 5-4-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.05 OWNER’S PERMIT REQUIRED AND APPLICATION.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any owner of land within the city to or from which
a building is to be moved to permit such movement without an owner’s permit
   (B)   A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an
application for such permit with the city’s Building Official in writing, upon
forms provided by the Building Official. The application shall include the
address and legal description of the land on which the building is situated and
to which it is proposed to be moved, the route including identification of
streets or roads over which it is to be moved, the distance, the proposed date
of movement, the status of any outstanding taxes and such other information as
the city reasonably requests. The application shall not be accepted for filing
unless accompanied by the following:
      (1)   Evidence that all real estate taxes and special assessments against
the building and land from which it is to be removed if located within the
city, and to which it is to be moved if located within the city, are paid in
full;
      (2)   A written statement, bill of sale or other written evidence that
the applicant is entitled to move the building;
      (3)   Written evidence of arrangements with all public utility companies
whose wires, lamps or poles are required to be removed, for the removal thereof
by the applicant; and
      (4)   If the building to be removed is within the city, a cash deposit in
the sum in an amount as set forth in the annual fee schedule as an indemnity to
ensure completion of the following work:
         (a)   Capping the well, if any;
         (b)   Abandoning sewerage system as required by the city;
         (c)   Filling all excavations to grade, removing all rubbish, and
leaving the premises in a safe and sanitary condition;
         (d)   If the building is to be moved to a location within the city, a
cash deposit or letter of credit, the amount of which shall be 75% of the
estimated cost, as determined by the city, to bring the building so moved into
conformance with applicable Building Code requirements;
         (e)   Payment of the applicable permit fee;
         (f)   If the building is to be located within the city after its
movement, a survey by a licensed surveyor of the land to which the building is
to be moved, including the location of the building in relation to the
boundaries of the land; and
         (g)   If the building is to be located within the city after its
movement, photographs of:
            1.   Two or more views of the building to be moved;
            2.   The lot on which the building is to be located; and
            3.   The lands, and structures thereon, adjacent to the lot on
which the building is to be located.
   (C)   (1)   Upon receipt of the application accompanied by the fee, deposit,
statement and information required, the Building Official shall review the
application and make such investigation as he or she shall deem appropriate.
      (2)   The Building Official shall also obtain the recommendation of the
Chief of Police and City Engineer with respect to the streets and roads on
which the building may be moved to assure the greatest degree of safety to
persons and property and to minimize congestion on public streets.
      (3)   Upon completion of his or her review and investigation, the
Building Official shall:
         (a)   Deny the permit for moving a building to a location other than
within the city, stating in writing one or more of the grounds stated in §
112.11 of this chapter; or
         (b)   Authorize issuance of a permit with any necessary conditions.
   (D)   The landowner shall:
      (1)   Remove all rubbish and materials and fill all excavations to
existing grades at the original building site, if within the city, so that the
premises are left in a safe and sanitary condition. All foundation structures
shall be removed to a depth of 18 inches below the finished grade of the earth;
      (2)   Cause any sewer lines to be plugged with a concrete stopper and the
water to be shut off if the original building is within the city. The holder of
the permit shall notify gas, electric and other utilities to remove their
services;
      (3)   If the building is relocated in the city, complete within 90 days
after removal, all remodeling, additions or repairs as indicated in the
application, in any document filed in support thereof, or in any building
permit issued in connection therewith; and
      (4)   Take all reasonable precautions to secure the building and to
reduce danger to any member of the public until the building is set on its
foundation and any remodeling, additions or repairs described in the
application have been completed, including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Locking all doors and windows;
         (b)   Providing sufficient support or bracing so as to stabilize the
building to prevent it or any part thereof from sliding, slipping, falling or
moving; and
         (c)   Erecting and maintaining a security fence or wall the base of
which shall be no higher than four inches and the top of which shall be at
least four feet above the surface of the ground and which shall enclose the
entire building as well as the excavation for the foundation.
(Ord. 114, passed 5-4-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.06 LIABILITY TO CITY.
   (A)   The holder or holders of a permit under this chapter shall be liable
jointly and severally for any expenses, damages or costs paid or incurred by
the city as a result of the issuance of a permit or the taking or failure to
take any action by the holder or holders of the permit or the city hereunder.
   (B)   The city may take or cause to be taken any of the following actions
and may retain so much of the cash deposit necessary to reimburse itself for
any costs or expenses incurred as a result thereof.
      (1)   If the city, in its sole discretion, determines that the premises
from which or to which the building is to be moved, if within the city, or the
movement of the building through or within the city is unsafe or constitutes
any other unsafe condition, the city, in its sole discretion, may, but shall
not be required to, take or cause such action to be taken to eliminate such
unsafe condition or conditions as it shall deem appropriate.
      (2)   If the premises from which the building has been removed are within
the city and such premises are left in an unsafe or unsanitary condition or the
provisions of this chapter with respect to such premises have not been complied
with, the city may, but shall not be required to, in its sole discretion take
or cause such action to be taken to remedy such unsafe or unsanitary condition
and to place the premises in such condition as to be in compliance with this
chapter.
(Ord. 114, passed 5-4-2011)
§ 112.07 FEES AND DEPOSITS.
   (A)   Upon denial of a permit, there shall be returned to the applicant all
deposits, bonds and insurance policies or certificates therefor. The fee filed
with the application for the permit shall not be returned.
   (B)   (1)   Upon completion of the moving of a building pursuant to a
permit, the amount which the applicant has deposited in conjunction with the
filing of the application shall be returned to him or her, less all amounts
which any holder of a permit shall or may become liable to the city and which
the city may retain under any provision of this chapter.
      (2)   The permit fee paid upon filing of the application shall not be
returned.
(Ord. 114, passed 5-4-2011)
§ 112.08 REVIEW OR APPEAL BY THE COUNCIL.
   (A)   (1)   The Council may upon petition of a resident of the city or upon
its own motion, elect to review any decision of the Building Official
authorizing or denying issuance of a permit; or the denial of a permit may be
appealed by the person who has made application therefor.
      (2)   Election to review must be taken by the Council by resolution duly
adopted, or an appeal must be made by the applicant by filing notice thereof
with the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer within 20 days from the date of
denial of or authorization for issuance of a permit.
   (B)   (1)   A hearing on the election to review or appeal shall be heard by
the Council no later than 30 days after the election to review has been made or
notice of appeal has been filed. Review shall be made upon all of the files,
documents and records of the proceedings in the matter and the Council may
consider such additional evidence as it shall deem appropriate.
      (2)   The Council may affirm, reverse or modify the action of the
Building Official or the Board in accordance with the provisions hereof and may
make its action subject to such conditions as may be appropriate.
(Ord. 114, passed 5-4-2011)
§ 112.09 MOVING HOURS AND DAYS.
   No person shall move any building on any public street or highway within the
city at any time other than during the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m
commencing on Thursday at 10:00 p.m. and ending on Sunday at 4:00 a.m.
(Ord. 114, passed 5-4-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.10 DESIGNATED MOVING ROUTE.
   The designated moving route of buildings through the city will be, as
described from west to east, entering the city on Highway 7 to Highland Road,
Highland Road to Kennedy Memorial Drive, Kennedy Memorial Drive to Bell Street
and Bell Street to Highway 7.
(Ord. 114, passed 5-4-2011)
§ 112.11 CONDITIONAL PERMITS.
   Any permit granted under the terms of this chapter, whether by the Building
Official or the Council, may have attached thereto written conditions which
shall be strictly adhered to by the permittee.
(Ord. 114, passed 5-4-2011)
§ 112.12 BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Whenever an application is made to move a building which would not,
after moving, comply with all then-current building codes or if changes are
required or contemplated, contemporaneously with such application, a separate
building permit shall also be applied for.
   (B)   No moved building, whether or not a separate building permit is
required under division (A) above, shall be occupied before the city issues a
certificate of occupancy therefor.
(Ord. 114, passed 5-4-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.13 BUILDING MOVER ENDORSEMENT.
   No permit to move a building shall be granted to the owner thereof unless it
is endorsed by a building mover licensed by the state, acknowledging that they
know the contents of this chapter and agree to be bound hereby and by all
conditions placed upon such permit relating to hours, routing, movement,
parking and speed limit.
(Ord. 114, passed 5-4-2011)
§ 112.14 DENIAL OF A PERMIT.
   Any permit under this chapter shall be denied upon a finding of any one of
the following:
   (A)   Applicant has not complied with any requirement of this chapter;
   (B)   Persons or property in the city would be endangered by moving the
building because of shape, size, route or for any other reason;
   (C)   The building is in such state of deterioration or disrepair or is
otherwise so structurally unsafe that it would constitute a danger to persons
or property in the city;
   (D)   The building is structurally unsafe or unfit for the purpose for which
moved, if the location to which the building is to be moved is in the city;
   (E)   The equipment for moving the building is unsafe and persons and
property would be endangered by its use; or
   (F)   The building or its use would not be in compliance with zoning,
building codes or other provisions of the city code, if the location to which
the building is to be moved is in the city.
(Ord. 114, passed 5-4-2011)
CHAPTER 113: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   Exceptions to definitions
   
113.03   Licensing; exemptions
   
113.04   License ineligibility
   
113.05   License suspension and revocation
   
113.06   License transferability
   
113.07   Registration
   
113.08   Prohibited activities
   
113.09   Exclusion by placard
   
113.10   Effectiveness
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms
shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this
chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLER. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-
business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place movement, for
the purpose of offering for sale, displaying or exposing for sale, selling or
attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares,
products, merchandise or other personal property that the person is carrying or
otherwise transporting. The term PEDDLER shall mean the same as the term
HAWKER.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation,
partnership or association. As applied to groups, organizations, corporations,
partnerships and associations, the term shall include each member, officer,
partner, associate, agent or employee.
   REGULAR BUSINESS DAY. Any day during which the city hall is normally open
for the purpose of conducting public business. Holidays defined by state law
shall not be counted as regular business days.
   SOLICITOR. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-
business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place movement, for
the purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares,
products, merchandise, other personal property or services of which he or she
may be carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog
or by other means, and for which delivery or performance shall occur at a later
time. The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person from the
scope of this provision if the actual purpose of the person's activity is to
obtain or attempt to obtain orders as discussed above. The term shall mean the
same as the term CANVASSER.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. A person who temporarily sets up business out of a
vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, other portable shelter, or empty store front
for the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling or attempting to
sell, and delivering, goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal
property and who does not remain or intend to remain in any one location for
more than 14 consecutive days.
§ 113.02 EXCEPTIONS TO DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of the requirements of this chapter, the terms
PEDDLER, SOLICITOR, and TRANSIENT MERCHANT shall not apply to any person
selling or attempting to sell at wholesale any goods, wares, products,
merchandise or other personal property to a retailer of the items being sold by
the wholesaler. The terms also shall not apply to any person who makes initial
contacts with other people for the purpose of establishing or trying to
establish a regular customer delivery route for the delivery of perishable food
and dairy products such as baked goods and milk, nor shall they apply to any
person making deliveries of perishable food and dairy products to the customers
on his or her established regular delivery route.
   (B)   In addition, persons conducting the type of sales commonly known as
garage sales, rummage sales, or estate sales, as well as those persons
participating in an organized multi-person bazaar or flea market, shall be
exempt from the definitions of PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, and TRANSIENT MERCHANTS,
as shall be anyone conducting an auction as a properly licensed auctioneer, or
any officer of the court conducting a court-ordered sale. Exemption from the
definitions for the scope of this chapter shall not excuse any person from
complying with any other applicable statutory provision or local ordinance.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to prohibit or restrict
door-to-door advocacy. Persons engaging in door-to-door advocacy shall not be
required to register as solicitors under §
113.07. The term DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCACY includes door-to-door canvassing and
pamphleteering as vehicles for the dissemination of religious, political and
other ideas.
§ 113.03 LICENSING; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   County license required. No person shall conduct business as a
peddler, solicitor or transient merchant within the city limits without first
having obtained the appropriate license from the county as required by M.S. Ch.
329 as it may be amended from time to time, if the county issues a license for
the
activity.
   (B)   City license required. Pursuant to M.S. § 437.02, as it may be amended
from time to time, except as otherwise provided for by this chapter, no person
shall conduct business as either a peddler or a transient merchant without
first having obtained a license from the city. Solicitors need not be licensed,
but are still required to register pursuant to §
113.07.
   (C)   Application. Application for a city license to conduct business as a
peddler or transient merchant shall be made at least 14 regular business days
before the applicant desires to begin conducting business operations in the
city. Application for a license shall be made on a form approved by the City
Council and available from the office of the City Clerk. All applications shall
be signed by the applicant. All applications shall include the following
information:
      (1)   Applicant's full legal name.
      (2)   All other names under which the applicant conducts business or to
which applicant officially answers.
      (3)   A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye color,
height, weight, distinguishing marks and features, and the like).
      (4)   Full address of applicant's permanent residence.
      (5)   Telephone number of applicant's permanent residence.
      (6)   Full legal name of any and all business operations owned, managed
or operated by applicant, or for which the applicant is an employee or agent.
      (7)   Full address of applicant's regular place of business (if any).
      (8)   Any and all business related telephone numbers of the applicant,
including cellular phones and facsimile (fax) machines.
      (9)   The type of business for which the applicant is applying for a
license.
      (10)   Whether the applicant is applying for an annual or daily license.
      (11)   The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct business,
and if the applicant is applying for a daily license, the number of days he or
she will be conducting business in the city, with a maximum 14 consecutive
days.
      (12)   Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the applicant
can be reached while conducting business within the city, including the
location where a transient merchant intends to set up business.
      (13)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
within the last five years of any felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor for
violation of any state or federal statute or any local ordinance, other than
traffic offenses.
      (14)   A list of the three most recent locations where the applicant has
conducted business as a peddler or transient merchant.
      (15)   Proof of any required county license.
      (16)   Written permission of the property owner or the property owner's
agent for any property to be used by a transient merchant.
      (17)   A general description of the items to be sold or services to be
provided.
      (18)   All additional information deemed necessary by the City Council.
      (19)   The applicant's driver's license number or other acceptable form
of identification.
      (20)   The license plate number, registration information and vehicle
identification number (VIN) for any vehicle to be used in conjunction with the
licensed business, and a physical description of the vehicle.
   (D)   Fee. All applications for a license under this chapter shall be
accompanied by the fee established in the ordinance establishing fees and
charges, adopted pursuant to §
130.11, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (E)   Procedure. Upon receipt of the completed application and payment of
the license fee, the City Clerk, within two regular business days, must
determine if the application is complete. An application is determined to be
complete only if all required information is provided. If the City Clerk
determines that the application is incomplete, the City Clerk must inform the
applicant of the required necessary information that is missing. If the
application is complete, the City Clerk must order any investigation, including
background checks, necessary to verify the information provided with the
application. Within ten regular business days of receiving a complete
application the City Clerk must issue the license unless there exist grounds
for denying the license under §
113.04, in which case the Clerk must deny the license application. If the City
Clerk denies the license application, the applicant must be notified in writing
of the decision, the reason for denial, and of the applicant's right to appeal
the denial by requesting, within 20 days of receiving notice of rejection, a
public hearing before the City Council. The City Council shall hear the appeal
within 20 days of the date of the request for a public hearing. The decision of
the City Council following the public hearing can be appealed by petitioning
the Minnesota Court of Appeals for a writ of certiorari.
   (F)   Duration. An annual license granted under this chapter shall be valid
for one calendar year from the date of issue. All other licenses granted to
peddlers and transient merchants under this chapter shall be valid only during
the time period indicated on the license.
   (G)   License exemptions.
      (1)   No license shall be required for any person to sell or attempt to
sell, or to take or attempt to take orders for, any product grown, produced,
cultivated, or raised on any farm.
      (2)   No license shall be required of any person going from house-to-
house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or other type of
place-to-place movement when the activity is for the purpose of exercising that
person's State or Federal Constitutional rights such as the freedom of speech,
press, religion and the like, except that this exemption may be lost if the
person's exercise of Constitutional rights is merely incidental to a commercial
activity.
(Penalty, see §
10.99)
§ 113.04 LICENSE INELIGIBILITY.
   The following shall be grounds for denying a license under this chapter:
   (A)   The failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of having
obtained any required county license.
   (B)   The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the
information requested by the city as a part of the application, or the failure
to sign the application, or the failure to pay the required fee at the time of
application.
   (C)   The conviction of the applicant within the past five years from the
date of application for any violation of any federal or state statute or
regulation, or of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects on the person's
ability to conduct the business for which the license is being sought in an
honest and legal manner. Those violations shall include but not be limited to
burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, and
any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person.
   (D)   The revocation within the past five years of any license issued to the
applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or
transient merchant.
   (E)   The applicant is found to have a bad business reputation. Evidence of
a bad business reputation shall include, but not be limited to, the existence
of more than three complaints against the applicant with the Better Business
Bureau, the Office of the Minnesota Attorney General, or other state attorney
general’s office, or other similar business or consumer rights office or
agency, within the preceding 12 months, or three complaints filed against the
applicant within the preceding five years.
§ 113.05 LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Generally. Any license issued under this section may be suspended or
revoked at the discretion of the City Council for violation of any of the
following:
      (1)   Subsequent knowledge by the city of fraud, misrepresentation or
incorrect statements provided by the applicant on the application form.
      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made during the course
of the licensed
activity.
      (3)   Subsequent conviction of any offense for which granting of a
license could have been denied under §
113.04.
      (4)   Engaging in prohibited activity as provided under §
113.08.
      (5)   Violation of any other provision of this chapter.
   (B)   Multiple persons under one license. The suspension or revocation of
any license issued for the purpose of authorizing multiple persons to conduct
business as peddlers or transient merchants on behalf of the licensee shall
serve as a suspension or revocation of each authorized person's authority to
conduct business as a peddler or transient merchant on behalf of the licensee
whose license is suspended or revoked.
   (C)   Notice. Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued under this
chapter, the city shall provide the license holder with written notice of the
alleged violations and inform the licensee of his or her right to a hearing on
the alleged violation. Notice shall be delivered in person or by mail to the
permanent residential address listed on the license application, or if no
residential address is listed, to the business address provided on the license
application.
   (D)   Public hearing. Upon receiving the notice provided in division (C) of
this section, the licensee shall have the right to request a public hearing. If
no request for a hearing is received by the City Clerk within ten regular
business days following the service of the notice, the city may proceed with
the suspension or revocation. For the purpose of mailed notices, service shall
be considered complete as of the date the notice is placed in the mail. If a
public hearing is requested within the stated time frame, a hearing shall be
scheduled within 20 days from the date of the request. Within three regular
business days of the hearing, the City Council shall notify the licensee of its
decision.
   (E)   Emergency. If, in the discretion of the City Council, imminent harm to
the health or safety of the public may occur because of the actions of a
peddler or transient merchant licensed under this chapter, the City Council may
immediately suspend the person's license and provide notice of the right to
hold a subsequent public hearing as prescribed in division (C) of this section.
   (F)   Appeals. Any person whose license is suspended or revoked under this
section shall have the right to appeal that decision in court.
(Penalty, see §
10.99)
§ 113.06 LICENSE TRANSFERABILITY.
   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred to any person
other than the person to whom the license was issued.
(Penalty, see §
10.99)
§ 113.07 REGISTRATION.
   All solicitors, and any person exempt from the licensing requirements of
this chapter under §
113.03, shall be required to register with the city. Persons engaging in door-
to-door advocacy shall not be required to register. The term DOOR-TO-DOOR
ADVOCACY includes door-to-door canvassing and pamphleteering as vehicles for
the dissemination of religious, political and other ideas. Registration shall
be made on the same form required for a license application, but no fee shall
be required. Immediately upon completion of the registration form, the City
Clerk shall issue to the registrant a Certificate of Registration as proof of
the registration. Certificates of Registration shall be non-transferable.
(Penalty, see §
10.99)
§ 113.08 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall conduct business in any of
the following manners:
   (A)   Calling attention to his or her business or items to be sold by means
of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out, or by any other
noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed structure.
   (B)   Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on
any street, alley, sidewalk or other public right-of-way.
   (C)   Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the health,
safety and welfare of any individual or the general public.
   (D)   Conducting business before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.
   (E)   Failing to provide proof of license or registration, and
identification, when requested; or using the license or registration of another
person.
   (F)   Making any false or misleading statements about the product or service
being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement. No peddler, solicitor
or transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the city solely
based on the city having issued a license or certificate of registration to
that person.
   (G)   Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave, or to
otherwise conducting business in a manner a reasonable person would find
obscene, threatening, intimidating or abusive.
(Penalty, see §
10.99)
§ 113.09 EXCLUSION BY PLACARD.
   No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant, unless invited to do so by the
property owner or tenant, shall enter the property of another for the purpose
of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant when the
property is marked with a sign or placard at least four inches long and four
inches wide with print of at least 48 point in size stating, “No Peddlers,
Solicitors or Transient Merchants, or Peddlers, Solicitors, and Transient
Merchants Prohibited” or other comparable statement. No person other than the
property owner or tenant shall remove, deface or otherwise tamper with any sign
or placard under this section.
(Penalty, see §
10.99)
§ 113.10 EFFECTIVENESS.
   The provisions of §§
113.01,
113.02,
113.08 and
113.09 shall automatically apply upon adoption of this chapter. §§
113.03,
113.04,
113.05,
113.06 and
113.07 shall not be effective until the adoption of a City Council resolution
or ordinance authorizing the licensing of persons covered by those sections.
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES AND MISDEMEANORS
      
131.   CURFEW
      
132.   FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
      
133.   DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES AND MISDEMEANORS
Section
General Provisions
   
130.01   Minnesota Criminal Code adopted by reference
   
130.02   Unlawful acts defined as misdemeanors
   
130.03   Citations
Prohibited Acts
   
130.15   Loitering; minors
   
130.16   Obstructing, threatening an officer
   
130.17   False names
   
130.18   False alarms
   
130.19   Entering upon land
 
   
130.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.01 MINNESOTA CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   The provisions of the Minnesota Criminal Code and all other applicable
and related statutes are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
chapter as if fully set forth herein, except as modified herein. Any person who
violates any portion, section or restriction set forth in said state code shall
be in violation of this chapter and subject to penalties set forth herein if
convicted.
(1994 Code, § 9-4.1)
   (B)   The provisions of M.S. Ch. 609 specified below, as they may be amended
from time to time, are adopted by reference and made a part of this code;
except that, the violation of each shall be a misdemeanor:
      (1)   609.17, “Attempts”;
      (2)   609.175, “Conspiracy”;
      (3)   609.21, “Criminal Vehicular Operation”;
      (4)   609.24, “Simple Robbery”;
      (5)   609.27, “Coercion”;
      (6)   609.275, “Attempt to Coerce”;
      (7)   609.321, “Prostitution; Definitions”;
      (8)   609.322, “Solicitation, Inducement and Promotion of Prostitution”;
      (9)   609.324, “Other Prohibited Acts”;
      (10)   609.325, “Defenses”;
      (11)   609.326, “Evidence”;
      (12)   609.33, “Disorderly House”;
      (13)   609.377, “Malicious Punishment of a Child”;
      (14)   609.378, “Neglect of a Child”;
      (15)   609.379, “Permitted Actions”;
      (16)   609.415, “Crimes Affecting Public Officer or Employee;
Definitions”, with the addition of the following category to Subd. 1(1): “(g) a
member of a municipal board or commission, whether appointed or elected”;
      (17)   609.42, “Bribery”;
      (18)   609.43, “Misconduct of Public Officer or Employee”;
      (19)   609.455, “Permitting False Claims against Government”;
      (20)   609.465, “Presenting False Claims to Public Officer or Body”;
      (21)   609.47, “Interference with Property in Official Custody”;
      (22)   609.485, “Escape From Custody”;
      (23)   609.487, “Fleeing a Police Officer in a Motor Vehicle”;
      (24)   609.495, “Aiding an Offender to Avoid Arrest”;
      (25)   609.498, “Tampering with a Witness”;
      (26)   609.52, “Theft”;
      (27)   609.521, “Possession of Shoplifting Gear”;
      (28)   609.53, “Receiving Stolen Property”;
      (29)   609.556, “Damage or Trespass to Property; Definitions”;
      (30)   609.561, “Arson in the First Degree”;
      (31)   609.562, “Arson in the Second Degree”;
      (32)   609.563, “Arson in the Third Degree”;
      (33)   609.564, “Excluded Fires”;
      (34)   609.576, “Negligent Fires”;
      (35)   609.581, “Burglary; Definitions”;
      (36)   609.582, “Burglary”;
      (37)   609.585, “Double Jeopardy”;
      (38)   609.59, “Possession of Burglary Tools”;
      (39)   609.595, “Damage to Property”;
      (40)   609.625, “Aggravated Forgery”;
      (41)   609.63, “Forgery”;
      (42)   609.635, “Obtaining Signature by False Pretense”;
      (43)   609.713, “Terroristic Threats”;
      (44)   609.75, “Gambling; Definitions”;
      (45)   609.755, “Acts of or Relating to Gambling”;
      (46)   609.76, “Other Acts Relating to Gambling”;
      (47)   609.761, “Operations Permitted”;
      (48)   609.821, “Financial Transaction Card Fraud”;
      (49)   609.825, “Bribery of Participant or Official in Contest”;
      (50)   609.86, “Commercial Bribery”;
      (51)   609.87, “Computer Crime; Definitions”;
      (52)   609.88, “Computer Damage”; and
      (53)   609.89, “Computer Theft.”
(1994 Code, § 9-8.1)
   (C)   The violations of other state, federal and county laws, rules or
regulations not contained in the Minnesota Criminal Code, and violations of the
city code of ordinances, any of which are legally enforceable, shall be deemed
in violation of the city code of ordinances and subject to the penalties set
forth herein.
(Ord. 95, passed 8-15-2007) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 UNLAWFUL ACTS DEFINED AS MISDEMEANORS.
   Any unlawful act referenced in §
130.01(A) and (C) of this chapter shall be adjudged a misdemeanor and the
person committing such act shall be subject to penalties set forth herein, if
convicted.
(1994 Code, § 9-4.3)
§ 130.03 CITATIONS.
   (A)   Authorized officers. Except as otherwise provided by statute, only a
peace officer and part-time peace officer may:
      (1)   Ask a person receiving a citation to give a written promise to
appear in court; or
      (2)   Take a person into custody as permitted by M.S. § 629.34, as it may
be amended from time to time.
(1994 Code, § 9-7.1)
   (B)   Authorized city employees. The following city employees may issue
citations in lieu of arrest or continue detention for violations of the city
code:
      (1)   Peace officers and part-time peace officers;
      (2)   Reserve officers;
      (3)   Zoning Administrator;
      (4)   Building Inspector;
      (5)   Fire Chief; and
      (6)   Community service officers.
(1994 Code, § 9-7.2)
Cross-reference:
   Traffic code general penalty, see §
70.99
PROHIBITED ACTS
§ 130.15 LOITERING; MINORS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 16 years of age
to ride in or park in an automobile or vehicle of any kind or to loiter, idle,
wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys,
parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places and public buildings,
places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of any day and 5:00 a.m. of the following day.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the parents, guardian or other adult person
having the care and custody of a person under the age of 16 years of age to
knowingly permit such minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon
the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public
grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement and
entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places during the hours set
forth above.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for the proprietor, operator or any other
employee of any commercial establishment to knowingly permit any person under
the age of 16 years of age to loiter, idle, wander or in any way remain in or
about said establishment during the prohibited hours set forth above.
   (D)   However, the provisions of this section do not apply to a minor
accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person haying the
care and custody of the minor, or where the minor is upon an emergency errand
or legitimate business directed by his or her parent, guardian or other adult
person having the care and custody of the minor.
   (E)   Each violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a
separate offense.
(1994 Code, § 9-4.4) Penalty, see §
130.99
Cross-reference:
   Curfew, see
Ch. 131
§ 130.16 OBSTRUCTING, THREATENING AN OFFICER.
   (A)   No person shall, in any case or under any circumstances not otherwise
provided for, willfully resist, delay or obstruct a city officer or police
officer in discharging or attempting to discharge a duty of said officer’s
office.
(1994 Code, § 9-4.5)
   (B)   No person shall directly or indirectly address any threat or
intimidation to a city officer, police officer or an appraiser or assessor, or
to any other person authorized by law to hear or determine any controversy or
matter, with intent to induce said person, contrary to this person’s duty, to
do, make, omit or delay any act, decision or determination.
(1994 Code, § 9-4.7)
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.17 FALSE NAMES.
   No person shall, in any case or under any circumstances not otherwise
provided for, willfully communicate either orally or in writing or by any other
method to a city officer or police officer in discharging or attempting to
discharged duty of said officer’s office, any false or incorrect name or
identity or upon lawful demand and reasonable grounds of a city officer, refuse
to correctly identify one’s self.
(1994 Code, § 9-4.6) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.18 FALSE ALARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to give or make, or cause to be given or
made, an alarm of fire or police service without probable cause, or to neglect
or refuse to obey any reasonable order of the Fire Chief or Police Chief or
other officer at or in charge of any emergency scene, or to interfere with
either department in the discharge of its duties.
(1994 Code, § 9-4.8) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.19 ENTERING UPON LAND.
   (A)   Consent. It is unlawful for any person to enter upon the land of
another without claim of right or the written consent of the owner or of one
who has the right to give consent, except in an emergency situation.
   (B)   Refusal to leave. It is unlawful for any person in violation of
division (A) above to refuse to leave land upon the order of a police officer
or, if the person is lawfully on the land, to refuse to exhibit the written
consent required by division (A) above.
(1994 Code, § 9-4.9) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   A violation of any provision of §
130.01(C) of this chapter is a misdemeanor, punishable in accordance with state
law.
(1994 Code, § 9-8.2)
CHAPTER 131: CURFEW
Section
   
131.01   County regulations adopted
§ 131.01 COUNTY REGULATIONS ADOPTED.
   The county’s curfew provisions are hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as if set out in full.
Cross-reference:
   Loitering; minors, see §
130.15
CHAPTER 132: FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
Section
Firearms
   
132.01   Definition
   
132.02   Restriction of use
   
132.03   Firing ranges
Weapons
   
132.15   Definitions
   
132.16   Violation; confiscation
   
132.17   Knives; possession in schools
   
132.18   Carrying weapons prohibited
   
132.19   Permit system
   
132.20   Stopping persons; searching for weapons
 
   
132.99   Penalty
FIREARMS
§ 132.01 DEFINITION.
   FIREARM means a machine which fires a projectile by means of an explosive
substance or by means of the sudden release of gas. This definition shall
specifically include, but not be limited to, rifles, shotguns, pistols, air
guns and similar devices, but shall specifically exclude legal bows which fire
arrows by the release of tension in the bow.
(1994 Code, § 9-1.1)
§ 132.02 RESTRICTION OF USE.
   The shooting or carrying of any type of firearms which are not encased or
dismantled so as to be rendered inoperable shall be restricted to the following
circumstances within the city limits:
   (A)   A landowner discharging a firearm when done in the lawful defense of
person, property or family or in the necessary and lawful enforcement of the
law;
   (B)   By a law enforcement officer in the line of duty; or
   (C)   By a person discharging firearms on a licensed rifle, trap, skeet or
target range within the city limits.
(1994 Code, § 9-1.2) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.03 FIRING RANGES.
   (A)   An application shall be made with the city by any person intending to
operate a firing range, for the purpose of allowing the discharge of any
firearm, within the city limits. This application shall be made before the
firing range may be operated and the firing range shall not operate until
permission has been granted by the city.
   (B)   The Council may set limitations and restrictions on such operation as
it deems necessary for the protection of the users, the general public and
property. A bond and insurance may be required to be placed on file by the
operator and/or licensee to hold said operator solely responsible for any and
all incidents or results thereof regardless of the negligence or lack thereof
on the part of the operator in the operation of such firing range.
   (C)   Firing ranges shall be operated so as to result in maximum safety for
users and for the general public, and the owners and operators shall comply
with all regulations and restrictions then existing or thereafter placed upon
such operation.
(1994 Code, § 9-1.3)
WEAPONS
§ 132.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONCEALED MANNER. Having the object on the person in such a manner so that
it is not completely visible to any other person. Having a knife in a sheath
shall be considered as having the knife CONCEALED, irrespective of the position
of the sheath on the person.
   NUNCHUCKS. Any device constructed of two solid cylindrical objects joined
together on one end by a chain, rope, thong or other such material.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, partnership, trust, estate, club,
association or corporation. As applied to partnerships or associations, the
word includes the partners or members thereof. As applied to corporations, it
includes the officers, agents or employees thereof who are responsible for the
act referred to.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any building or establishment, place or public street or
highway, where the business, social or governmental activity ordinarily
conducted is generally held open to the public. This definition specifically
includes, but is not limited to, such locations as governmental buildings,
meeting halls, centers for art and culture, places of amusement, liquor or beer
establishments and restaurants. It shall also include any private residence
which is the site of unlawful activity. PUBLIC PLACE shall not include any of
the following:
      (1)   A dwelling place or a residence when a person is present with the
permission of a lawful possessor thereof or one’s own place of business;
      (2)   Business premises at which the buying, selling, repair or trade in
weapons is regularly conducted;
      (3)   Places at which an event or activity is conducted involving the
exhibition, display or carrying of a weapon, done in a manner not intended or
calculated to result in or lead to the unlawful use of the weapon including,
but not limited to, educational or training programs, weapons or collectors’
shows or exhibitions or religious, artistic, educational or cultural events;
      (4)   Parades or other public events when the use or display of weapons
is specifically authorized by the city for such events; or
      (5)   Places at which the weapon is used in a lawful manner for hunting,
fishing, recreation or agricultural purposes.
   SECURED CONTAINER. A closed and fastened case, box or secured tied package
having no mechanical features designed for immediate weapons removal or use and
containing no other non-related objects. A sheath or scabbard alone shall not
constitute a SECURED CONTAINER.
   SHURIKEN. Any metal device which has the shape of a multiple-pointed star,
each point being sharpened and primarily designed to be thrown.
   UNLAWFUL USE. With respect to a weapon, to brandish, assault with, threaten
with or otherwise employ in a manner calculated and likely to cause death,
great bodily harm or substantial bodily harm or the reasonable and immediate
fear thereof.
   WEAPON. Any device designed as a weapon and capable of producing death,
great bodily harm or substantial bodily harm; or any other device or
instrumentality which, in the manner it is used or intended to be used, is
calculated or likely to produce death, great bodily harm or substantial bodily
harm, or the reasonable and immediate fear thereof. WEAPON includes, but is not
limited to, any bayonet, blackjack, chain club, Chinese stars, dagger, dirk,
folding knife with a blade in excess of four inches, fixed blade knife carried
in a concealed manner or within reach of any person in a motor vehicle, gravity
knife, machete, nunchucks, pipe club, push-button knife, sand club, slingshot,
stiletto, switchblade or yawara stick.
   YAWARA STICK. Any cylindrical shaped object which has spheres on both ends
and measures less than ten inches in length.
(1994 Code, § 9-2.1)
§ 132.16 VIOLATION; CONFISCATION.
   In addition to penalties prescribed for violation of this subchapter or
Minnesota Statutes, the weapon of any person convicted of violating any of the
provisions of this subchapter shall be confiscated if such weapon was in the
immediate possession of the person at the time of the violation or used in such
violation.
(1994 Code, § 9-2.2)
§ 132.17 KNIVES; POSSESSION IN SCHOOLS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to be in possession of, carry, transport
or control any knife in any school building, in any school parking area or on
public streets adjacent thereto, except where such knives are used in or as a
part of any instruction activity carried on in the school, used in the
preparation or consumption of food in any lunchroom, cafeteria, snack bar or
other places where food is customarily prepared or served or when used as a
tool by a person authorized to perform construction or repair of maintenance
services on school property.
(1994 Code, § 9-2.3) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.18 CARRYING WEAPONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the limits of the city to
carry a weapon on his or her person in a public place or transport in any
vehicle in a public place any weapon, except in the following situations:
      (1)   Any weapon may be transported, in a secured container by a person
not in a vehicle, directly to or from any place or activity referred to under
the public place definition of §
132.15 of this chapter or to or from the person’s vehicle and the places,
gatherings and activities set forth herein; and
      (2)   Any weapon may be transported in a motor vehicle in a secured
container or in the locked trunk of such vehicle.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to the
transport of weapons by persons who are regularly engaged in the lawful
manufacture, distribution or sale at retail or wholesale of weapons or the
agents of any of them while engaged in such business. Nor shall these
provisions apply: to the carrying or transport of weapons by licensed police
officers, law enforcement officers or military personnel while in the course of
their duties; to any officer of a state adult correctional facility when on
guard duty or otherwise engaged in an assigned duty; to an owner or agent while
he or she is present at a business place operated by him or her, except a
business which is the site of unlawful activity; or to persons holding a permit
to carry a weapon while acting within the scope of such permits. Permits to
carry a weapon may be obtained through the procedures and forms established by
M.S. § 624.7131, as it may be amended from time to time, for pistols.
(1994 Code, § 9-2.4) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.19 PERMIT SYSTEM.
   Application. Any person may apply for a permit to carry or purchase a weapon
by contacting the County Sheriff’s Department following the state statutes.
(1994 Code, § 9-2.5)
§ 132.20 STOPPING PERSONS; SEARCHING FOR WEAPONS.
   A police officer may stop any person abroad in a public place whom the
officer reasonably suspects is committing, has committed or is about to commit
a felony or any crime or offense involving the use of a weapon of any kind, and
the officer may demand from the person that person’s name, address and an
explanation of the person’s actions. When a police officer has stopped a person
for questioning pursuant to this section and reasonably suspects that this
person or anyone else is in danger of life or limb, the officer may search such
person for a dangerous weapon. If a police officer finds such a weapon or any
other thing, the possession of which may constitute a crime or offense, the
officer may impound it until the completing of the questioning, at which time
the officer shall either return it, if lawfully possessed, or arrest such
person.
(1994 Code, § 9-2.6)
§ 132.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
132.15 through
132.20 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $700 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed
90 days, or both.
(1994 Code, § 9-2.7)
      (2)   A person who makes a false statement in order to obtain a permit
knowing or having reason to know the statement, per §
132.19 of this chapter, is false is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1994 Code, § 9-2.5)
CHAPTER 133: DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
Section
   
133.01   Definitions
   
133.02   State statutes incorporated
   
133.03   Prohibited acts
   
133.04   Excepted lawful businesses and professions
   
133.05   Unlawful procuring, purchase, delivery or possession
   
133.06   Confiscation and disposal of controlled substances
   
133.07   Use of original containers and labels required
   
133.08   Drug paraphernalia; possession; permits
   
133.09   Glue and other toxic substances; sale and use
 
   
133.99   Penalty
§ 133.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Any substance listed in the five schedules of
controlled substances in M.S. § 152.02, as it may be amended from time to time.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. All equipment, products and materials of any kind which
are used, intended for use or designed for in manufacturing, injecting,
ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled
substance in violation of M.S. Ch. 152, as it may be amended from time to time.
   POSSESSION. Having a controlled substance on one’s person or having
constructive possession as the owner of a motor vehicle in which a controlled
substance is found or as the driver of such a vehicle if the owner is not
present.
(1994 Code, § 9-3.1)
§ 133.02 STATE STATUTES INCORPORATED.
   The five schedules of controlled substances listed in M.S. § 152.02, as it
may be amended from time to time, are hereby incorporated in and made a part of
this section as if set out completely herein.
(1994 Code, § 9-3.2)
§ 133.03 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, possess, constructively
possess, sell, give away, barter, exchange, dispense, distribute or otherwise
transfer any controlled substance, except on a lawful prescription by a person
licensed by law to prescribe and administer controlled substances.
(1994 Code, § 9-3.3) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.04 EXCEPTED LAWFUL BUSINESSES AND PROFESSIONS.
   (A)   Section 133.03 of this chapter shall not apply to the following in the
ordinary course of their trade, their business or their profession; provided,
this exception shall not be a defense in doing of the acts prohibited in §
133.05 of this chapter:
      (1)   Practitioners or persons licensed by law to prescribe and
administer controlled substances;
      (2)   Pharmacists duly registered and licensed with the state’s Board of
Pharmacy;
      (3)   Manufacturers;
      (4)   Pharmacists as manufacturers;
      (5)   Wholesalers;
      (6)   Warehouse persons;
      (7)   Persons engaged in transporting such controlled substances as agent
or employee of a practitioner, pharmacist, manufacturer, warehouse person,
wholesaler or common carrier;
      (8)   Public officers or public employees in the performance of official
duties requiring possession or control of such controlled substances or persons
aiding such officers or employees in the performance of such duties;
      (9)   Any person engaged in agriculture, farming, the raising of
livestock or similar trades who uses the controlled substance to improve the
quality or quantity of such crops or stock;
      (10)   Persons who procure, possess or use such controlled substances for
the purpose of lawful research, teaching or testing and not for sale; and/or
      (11)   Lawfully licensed and registered hospitals or bona fide
institutions wherein sick or injured persons are cared for and treated, or by
bona fide hospitals for the treatment of animals.
   (B)   It is provided further that this section shall not relieve any person
of other lawful duties.
(1994 Code, § 9-3.4)
§ 133.05 UNLAWFUL PROCURING, PURCHASE, DELIVERY OR POSSESSION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to procure, purchase, deliver, possess
or attempt to procure, purchase, deliver or possess a controlled substance in
any of the following manners:
   (A)   By fraud, deceit, misrepresentation or subterfuge;
   (B)   By forgery or alteration of a prescription;
   (C)   By the concealment of a material fact;
   (D)   By the use of a false name or the giving of a false address;
   (E)   By making a false statement in any prescription, order, report or
record relative to a controlled substance;
   (F)   By falsely assuming the title of, or falsely representing any person
to be, a manufacturer, wholesaler, warehouse person, pharmacist, practitioner
or other person described in §
133.04 of this chapter; and/or
   (G)   By making, issuing or uttering any false or forged prescription.
(1994 Code, § 9-3.5) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.06 CONFISCATION AND DISPOSAL OF CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.
   Any controlled substance found in the possession of any person later
convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be confiscated and shall be
forfeited to the Chief of Police who shall make proper and timely disposition
thereof by destroying the substance.
(1994 Code, § 9-3.6)
§ 133.07 USE OF ORIGINAL CONTAINERS AND LABELS REQUIRED.
   All patients having possession of any controlled substance by lawful
prescription of a practitioner shall keep such controlled substance in the
original container in which it was delivered until used in accordance with such
prescription and shall not remove the pharmacist’s original label identifying
the prescription from such original container.
(1994 Code, § 9-3.7)
§ 133.08 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; POSSESSION; PERMITS.
   (A)   General. This term includes, but is not limited to, the following
materials:
      (1)   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose which are used, intended for use or designed for
use in cutting controlled substances;
      (2)   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for
use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining,
marijuana;
      (3)   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for
use and designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into
the human body; and
      (4)   Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil
into the human body, which shall include, but is not limited to, the following:
         (a)   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal
bowls;
         (b)   Water pipes;
         (c)   Carburetion tubes and devices;
         (d)   Smoking and carburetion masks;
         (e)   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such
as a marijuana cigarette, which has become too small or too short to be held in
the hand;
         (f)   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
         (g)   Chamber pipes;
         (h)   Carburetor pipes;
         (i)   Electric pipes;
         (j)   Air-driven pipes;
         (k)   Chillums;
         (l)   Bongs; and
         (m)   Ice pipes or chillers.
   (B)   Possession prohibited. Possession, actual or constructive, of drug
paraphernalia with the intent to inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce
a controlled substance into a human body is hereby prohibited.
   (C)   Permit for possession. Any person may seek a permit for the possession
of specified items as drug paraphernalia. Such permits shall be issued by the
Chief of Police on the following grounds:
      (1)   Historic, scientific or cultural significance;
      (2)   Medical or veterinarian purposes not contained within division (D)
below or within the exception of §
133.04 of this chapter; or
      (3)   Other legal purposes not specified herein.
   (D)   Certain persons exempt. The provisions of this section shall not apply
to the following in the ordinary course of their trade, business, profession or
condition:
      (1)   Dealers in surgical instruments;
      (2)   Apothecaries;
      (3)   Physicians;
      (4)   Dentists;
      (5)   Veterinarians;
      (6)   Nurses;
      (7)   Attendants and interns of hospitals, sanatoria or any other
institution in which persons or animals are treated for disability or disease;
      (8)   Public officers or employees whose official duties require
possession or control of drug paraphernalia, or persons aiding such officers or
employees in the performance of such duties;
      (9)   Persons who use drug paraphernalia for farming, livestock or other
agricultural purposes; or
      (10)   Diabetics and other persons using drug paraphernalia under the
guidance and supervision of a licensed physician or dentist.
(1994 Code, § 9-3.8) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.09 GLUE AND OTHER TOXIC SUBSTANCES; SALE AND USE.
   The inhaling, breathing or drinking of certain substances hereinafter
defined is prohibited and the purchase, sale and possession thereof are
regulated as follows.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to inhale, breathe or drink, or
become intoxicated by reasons of inhaling, breathing or drinking, any substance
commonly known as glue, adhesive, cement, mucilage, dope, solvents, lacquer,
drugs, fingernail polish and lacquer, nail polish remover, thinners of the
above named substances or any substance containing toluol, hexane,
trichloroethylene, acetone, toluene, ethyl acetate, methyl ethel ketone,
trichorbathane, isopropanol, methyl isobutyl ketone, methyl cellosolve acetate,
cyclohexanone or any other substance which contains ketones, adlehydes, organic
acetates, ether, chlorinated hydrocarbons or any other similar ingredient which
releases toxic vapors with the intent of inducing symptoms of intoxication,
elation, excitement, confusion, dizziness, paralysis, irrational behavior or
with the intent of changing, distorting or disturbing in any manner balance,
coordination or any other audio, visual or mental processes.
   (B)   The provisions of division (A) above shall not apply to any person who
inhales or breathes the toxic substance pursuant to the direction of any
doctor, physician, surgeon, dentist, podiatrist or other person authorized by
law to so direct.
   (C)   Retail establishments selling glue or admixtures containing the
substances defined in division (A) above shall not sell such preparations from
a self-service display.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to, for the purpose of violating
or aiding another to violate any provision of this chapter, intentionally
possess, buy, sell transfer possession or receive the possession of any glue or
any preparation containing the substances defined in division (A) above.
(1994 Code, § 9-3.9) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$700 or by imprisonment for up to 90 days, or both, except as provided by M.S.
§ 152.027, Subd. 4, as it may be amended from time to time, for a small amount
of marijuana.
(1994 Code, § 9-3.11)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   RENTAL PROPERTIES
      
152.   PUBLIC PROPERTY AND WAYS
      
153.   WETLAND CONSERVATION
      
154.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
      
155.   SIGNS
      
156.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
157.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
Building Code
   
150.01   Codes adopted by reference
   
150.02   Application, administration and enforcement
   
150.03   Permits and fees
   
150.04   Violations and penalties
BUILDING CODE
§ 150.01 CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Minnesota State Building Code, as adopted by the Commissioner of Labor
and Industry pursuant to M.S. §§ 326B.101 to 326B.194, as they may be amended
from time to time, including all of the amendments, rules and regulations
established, adopted and published from time to time by the state’s
Commissioner of Labor and Industry, through the Building Codes and Standards
Unit, is hereby adopted by reference with the exception of the optional
chapters, unless specifically adopted in this subchapter. The Minnesota State
Building Code is hereby incorporated in this subchapter as if fully set out
herein.
(Ord. 93, passed 8-1-2007)
§ 150.02 APPLICATION, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   (1)   The application, administration and enforcement of the Building
Code shall be in accordance with Minn. Rules Ch. 1300.
      (2)   The Building Code shall be enforced within the extraterritorial
limits permitted by M.S. § 326B.121, as it may be amended from time to time,
when so established by ordinance.
   (B)   The Code shall be enforced by a state-certified Building Official
designated by the city to administer the code pursuant to M.S. § 326B.133,
Subd. 1 and 2, as they may be amended from time to time, including plumbing
plan review.
   (C)   (1)   Prior to installation of a system of plumbing other than for a
single-family dwelling, with independent plumbing service, complete plumbing
plans and specifications, together with any additional information that the
Building Official may require, shall be submitted in triplicate and approved by
the Building Official.
      (2)   No construction shall proceed, except in accordance with the
approved plans. Any alteration of extension of any existing plumbing system
shall be subject to these same requirements.
(Ord. 93, passed 8-1-2007; Ord. 102, passed 11-21-2007)
§ 150.03 PERMITS AND FEES.
   The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as authorized in
M.S. § 325B.121, as it may be amended from time to time. Permit fees shall be
assessed for work governed by this Code in accordance with the annual fee
schedule adopted by the municipality. In addition, a surcharge fee shall be
collected on all permits issued for work governed by this Code in accordance
with M.S. § 326B.148, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 93, passed 8-1-2007)
§ 150.04 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   A violation of the Code is a misdemeanor, as per M.S. § 326B.082, as it may
be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 93, passed 8-1-2007)
CHAPTER 151: RENTAL PROPERTIES
Section
Registration and Licensing
   
151.01   Purpose
   
151.02   Preamble
   
151.03   Scope
   
151.04   Definitions
   
151.05   Rental license; issuance
   
151.06   Authority
   
151.07   Inspection
   
151.08   Disorderly behavior at premises
   
151.09   Revoking, suspending, denying or not renewing license; effect
   
151.10   Posted to prevent occupancy
   
151.11   No retaliation
   
151.12   No warranty by city
Maintenance and Conditions
   
151.25   Purpose and scope
   
151.26   Construction and definitions
   
151.27   Rental licenses
   
151.28   Requirements
   
151.29   Responsibilities
   
151.30   Enforcement
   
151.31   Appeal
 
   
151.99   Penalty
REGISTRATION AND LICENSING
§ 151.01 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this subchapter to assure that rental housing in the
city is decent, safe and sanitary and is so operated and maintained as not to
become a nuisance to the neighborhood or to become an influence that fosters
blight and deterioration or creates a disincentive to reinvestment in the
community. The operation of rental dwelling units is a business enterprise that
entails certain responsibilities. Operators are responsible to take such
reasonable steps as are necessary to assure that the citizens of the city who
occupy such units may pursue the quiet enjoyment of the normal activities of
life in surroundings that are safe, secure and sanitary and free from crimes
and criminal activity, nuisances or annoyances.
(Ord. 82B, passed 2-16-2011)
§ 151.02 PREAMBLE.
   The city believes that providing for public health, safety and welfare to
its citizens mandates the existence of a rental dwelling unit license and
maintenance program that corrects substandard conditions and maintains a
standard for rental dwelling units.
(Ord. 82B, passed 2-16-2011)
§ 151.03 SCOPE.
   This subchapter applies to all dwelling units that are leased in whole or in
part as rental dwelling units or are available as rental housing. It includes
accessory structures such as garages and storage buildings and appurtenances
such as sidewalks and retaining walls which are on the premises. This section
does not apply to the state’s Department of Health licensed rest homes,
convalescent care facilities, nursing homes, hotels or motels licensed by the
city.
(Ord. 82B, passed 2-16-2011)
§ 151.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APARTMENT BUILDING. Any building or portion thereof that contains three or
more dwelling units, sleeping rooms, or a combination thereof, but not
including condominiums or townhomes.
   CITY. The City of St. Bonifacius.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of St. Bonifacius.
   CODE OFFICIAL. The Code Official for the city or his or her duly authorized
representative(s).
   CONDOMINIUM. A single dwelling unit in a multi-dwelling unit building that
is separately owned and may be combined with an undivided interest in the
common areas and facilities of the premises. Each individual owner may sell or
encumber his, her or its own dwelling unit.
   DENIAL. As used in this code of ordinances, the refusal to grant a license
to a new or renewing applicant by the city.
   DWELLING UNIT. Any building or portion thereof that contains living
facilities including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation
for not more than one family in a single habitable unit. Each room or group of
rooms with:
      (1)   An entrance door to the exterior of the building; or
      (2)   An entrance door to a common corridor or hallway is a separate
dwelling unit.
   EFFICIENCY DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling unit containing only one habitable
room, plus bathroom facilities.
   LEASE. An oral or written agreement between a rental dwelling unit owner and
a tenant for temporary use of a rental dwelling unit, usually in exchange for
payment of rent.
   LICENSE. The formal approval of an activity specified on the certificate of
license issued by the city.
   LICENSE APPLICATION. The form provided by the city, which must be completed
by the owner, by which an owner requests a license.
   LICENSEE. An owner of a rental dwelling unit who has been issued a license
by the city for the rental dwelling unit.
   OWNER. A person or entity that has an ownership interest in a rental
dwelling unit.
   PREMISES. The real estate upon which any rental dwelling unit subject to
this subchapter is located.
   RENT. The consideration paid by a tenant to the owner of a rental dwelling
unit for temporary and exclusive use of the rental dwelling unit by the tenant.
The consideration is not limited to cash.
   RENTAL DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling unit or sleeping room occupied and leased
by a tenant or made available for occupancy by a prospective tenant.
   REVOKE. To take back a license issued by the city.
   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A building or portion thereof containing one
dwelling unit. For purposes of this section, a single-family dwelling unit
includes a freestanding single-family residence, a single dwelling in a
cooperative, an individual condominium or townhouse, a single dwelling unit in
a non-residential structure or a dwelling unit offered for rent in a duplex in
which the owner occupies the other dwelling unit.
   SLEEPING ROOM. Any room or rooms used or intended to be used by a tenant for
sleeping purposes with or without meals and not licensed by the state’s
Department of Health.
   SUSPEND. To make a license temporarily inoperative.
   TENANT. Any adult person granted temporary use of a rental dwelling unit
pursuant to a lease with the owner of the rental dwelling unit.
   TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling constructed in a group of dwellings
attached to each other and where each dwelling unit extends from the foundation
to the roof and is separated from other dwelling units by property lines.
   TWO-FAMILY DWELLING. A building or portion thereof containing two dwelling
units.
(Ord. 82B, passed 2-16-2011)
§ 151.05 RENTAL LICENSE; ISSUANCE.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Required. No person shall operate, let or cause to be let a rental
dwelling unit which has not been properly licensed by the city in the manner
required by this subchapter. A license must be obtained for each rental
dwelling unit. If two or more rental dwelling units are located within a single
building, each rental dwelling unit must have a separate license. Upon receipt
of the properly executed application for a rental license, the Code Official
shall, after request by the owner on such form as the Code Official requires,
cause an inspection to be made of the rental dwelling unit(s) to determine
whether it is in compliance with this subchapter, other city ordinances and the
laws of the state. Every rental dwelling unit shall be re-inspected after a
renewal license application is filed to determine if it conforms to all
applicable codes and ordinances.
      (2)   License application filed. A license application shall be submitted
to the Code Official on a form furnished by the city and must contain the
following information:
         (a)   Name, address and telephone number of the owner of the rental
dwelling unit(s). This is the address that all future correspondence from the
city will be sent to. The owner shall indicate if the owner is a corporation,
partnership or sole proprietorship;
         (b)   Name, address and telephone number of any owner’s agent
responsible for the management of the rental dwelling unit(s);
         (c)   Legal address of the rental dwelling unit(s); and
         (d)   Number and type of dwelling unit(s) (one bedroom, two bedrooms
and the like).
      (3)   Changes in ownership and amended licenses. A license is not
assignable. Any changes occurring in the ownership of a rental dwelling unit(s)
require a new license. The new owner must obtain a new license within 30 days
of acquiring the premises. The fee paid for the new license shall be the fee
required for an initial license. If any changes occur in any information
required on the license application, the owner must submit an amended license
application to the city within 30 days of the change. If any rental dwelling
units are added to a current license, the additional rental dwelling units must
be licensed by amendment of the current license and must be accompanied by the
fee required for the additional rental dwelling units.
      (4)   Bi-annual licensing. All rental dwelling units shall be licensed
before being let, in whole or in part. Licenses will expire bi-annually at
midnight on June 1 of even-numbered years. The license for each rental dwelling
unit must be renewed bi-annually on or before June 1 of even-numbered years.
Rental dwelling units must be registered as a sleeping room, a single-family
dwelling, a two-family dwelling or an apartment building. Any unlicensed rental
dwelling units are subject to penalties as provided in §
151.99 of this chapter. The fully completed license application must be
submitted to the city with the required fee no later than April 15 of the even-
numbered year. The owner or applicant must complete such forms as the Code
Official requires and arrange for the inspection by the Code Official on or
before May 1 of the even-numbered year.
      (5)   License fee. The license fee required by this subchapter is as set
forth in the annual fee schedule per rental dwelling unit. Such fee must
accompany the license application. The license fee is doubled when a license
application is received more than 30 days after it was due. Exception: rental
dwelling units owned or under the control of the city must be licensed, but are
exempt from paying license fees.
      (6)   Record retention. The license application and all other documents
pertinent to a rental dwelling unit shall be kept on file in the office of the
Code Official. A copy shall be furnished to the owner or other authorized
person upon request.
   (B)   Issuance of license. The city shall issue a license if, following
inspection by the Code Official, the rental dwelling unit(s) and the license
application are found to be in compliance with the provisions of this section,
subject to §
151.08 of this chapter and any required license fees are paid. A license will
be issued for each rental dwelling unit. If two or more rental dwelling units
are located within a single building, each rental dwelling unit must have a
separate license. Rental licenses are not required to be posted, however, the
property owner or agent for the owner must be able to present the license if
asked to do so.
(Ord. 82B, passed 2-16-2011) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.06 AUTHORITY.
   The Code Official shall be responsible for enforcement and administration of
this subchapter. Authority to take any action authorized under this section may
be delegated to the Code Official’s authorized designee.
(Ord. 82B, passed 2-16-2011)
§ 151.07 INSPECTION.
   The Code Official may, in addition to inspections in conjunction with a
license application, set up a schedule of periodic inspections to ensure
compliance with this subchapter. The Code Official shall provide reasonable
notice to the owner or the owner’s agent as to the date and time of the
inspection. Each occupant of a rental dwelling unit shall give the owner or the
owner’s agent access to any part of such rental dwelling unit at reasonable
times for the purpose of effecting inspection, maintenance, repairs or
alterations as are necessary to comply with the provisions of this subchapter.
If any owner, owner’s agent or tenant of a rental dwelling unit fails or
refuses to permit entry to the rental dwelling unit under his, her or its
control for an inspection pursuant to this subchapter, the Code Official may
seek a court order authorizing such inspection.
(Ord. 82B, passed 2-16-2011)
§ 151.08 DISORDERLY BEHAVIOR AT PREMISES.
   (A)   Responsibility. It shall be the licensee’s responsibility to assure
that the tenant, the tenant’s family members and the guests of any tenant or
tenant’s family member not engage in disorderly behavior in the rental dwelling
unit or on the premises. For the purposes of this section, the rental dwelling
unit shall include common areas in the building where the rental dwelling unit
is located.
   (B)   Disorderly behavior.
      (1)   For the purposes of this section, DISORDERLY BEHAVIOR may include,
but is not limited to, the following:
         (a)   Drug related illegal activity in the rental dwelling unit or on
the premises. DRUG-RELATED ILLEGAL ACTIVITY means the illegal possession,
manufacture, sale, distribution, purchase, use or possession with intent to
manufacture, sell or distribute a controlled substance (as defined in the
Controlled Substance Act (21 U.S.C. § 802)) or possession of drug paraphernalia
(M.S. § 152.092, as it may be amended from time to time). A tenant shall be
deemed to be in possession of a controlled substance if any amount is located
in the tenant’s rental dwelling unit or on the premises even if the tenant
claims not to know the controlled substance was present unless the tenant
provides a sworn statement by a person, other than another tenant or tenant’s
family member, that the controlled substance was theirs and the tenant had no
knowledge of the controlled substance;
         (b)   Acts of violence or threats of violence including, but not
limited to, discharge of firearms, prostitution, intimidation or any other act
that otherwise jeopardizes the health, safety or welfare of the licensee, or
his or her agents or tenants, including any assault or act of arson listed in
M.S. Ch. 609, as it may be amended from time to time;
         (c)   Violation of M.S. § 609.72 (Disorderly Conduct), as it may be
amended from time to time;
         (d)   Violation of M.S. §§ 609.74 and 609.745 (Public Nuisance), as
they may be amended from time to time;
         (e)   Violation of M.S. §§ 609.66, Subd.1a, 609.67 or 624.713
(Unlawful use or possession of a firearm or weapon), as they may be amended
from time to time;
         (f)   Violation of M.S. § 609.50 (Obstructing Legal Process), as it
may be amended from time to time;
         (g)   Violation of §§
132.01 through
132.03 of this code of ordinances (Firearms);
         (h)   Violation of §§
92.01 through
92.03 of this code of ordinances (Nuisances); and/or
         (i)   Violation of M.S. § 609.53 (Receiving Stolen Property), as it
may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   Exceptions:
         (a)   Calls will not be counted for purposes of determining whether a
license will be denied, suspended, non-renewed or revoked where the victim and
suspect are “family or household members” as defined in the Domestic Abuse Act,
M.S. § 518B.01, Subd. 2(b), as it may be amended from time to time, and where
there is a report of “domestic abuse” as defined in the Domestic Abuse Act,
M.S. § 518B.01, Subd. 2(a), as it may be amended from time to time; and
         (b)   Calls will not be counted for purposes of determining whether a
license will be denied, suspended, non-renewed or revoked where the call is a
result of a tenant, a member of a tenant’s household or guest taking action to
seek emergency assistance that is protected by M.S. § 504B.205, as it may be
amended from time to time, residential tenant’s right to seek police and
emergency assistance.
   (C)   First instance. Upon determination by the Code Official that a rental
dwelling unit or the premises was the location of disorderly behavior, the
police and/or the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall notify by first
class mail the licensee and tenant of the violation and direct the licensee to
take steps to prevent further violations.
   (D)   Second instance. If a second instance of disorderly behavior occurs at
a rental dwelling unit or on the premises within three months of the time a
notice was sent for previous disorderly behavior at the same rental dwelling
unit, the police and/or the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall notify by
first class mail the licensee and the tenant of the violation and direct the
licensee to submit, within ten days of the date of the notice, a written report
of all actions taken by the licensee since the first violation notice and
actions the licensee intends to take to prevent further disorderly behavior.
   (E)   Third instance. If a third instance of disorderly behavior occurs at a
rental dwelling unit or on the premises within three months after the first of
two previous notices of disorderly behavior at the same rental dwelling unit,
the rental dwelling unit license may be revoked, suspended or not renewed by
the City Council.
   (F)   Types. For purposes of this section, second and third instances of
disorderly behavior shall be those which:
      (1)   Occur at the same rental dwelling unit;
      (2)   Involve tenants at the same rental dwelling unit;
      (3)   Involve guests or invitees at the same rental dwelling unit;
      (4)   Involve guests or invitees of the same tenant; or
      (5)   Involve the same tenant.
   (G)   Postponing license action. No adverse license action shall be imposed
where the instance of disorderly behavior occurred during pending eviction
proceedings (unlawful detainer) or within 30 days of notice given by the
licensee to a tenant to vacate the rental dwelling unit. However, adverse
license action may proceed when the licensee fails to diligently pursue the
eviction process. Further, an action to deny, revoke, suspend or not renew a
license based upon violations of this section may be postponed or discontinued
at any time if the licensee has taken appropriate measures which will prevent
further instances of disorderly behavior which may include commencing and
prosecuting an eviction process.
   (H)   Enforcement. Enforcement actions provided in this section shall not be
exclusive, and the City Council may take any action with respect to a licensee,
a tenant or the licensed rental dwelling unit(s) as is authorized by this
subchapter or state law.
(Ord. 82B, passed 2-16-2011)
§ 151.09 REVOKING, SUSPENDING, DENYING OR NOT RENEWING LICENSE; EFFECT.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   License action. The City Council may revoke, suspend, deny or
decline to renew any license issued under this subchapter. In buildings
containing more than one rental dwelling unit, the revocation, suspension,
denial or declination may apply to one or more rental dwelling units at the
discretion of the City Council. The basis for such revocation, suspension,
denial or non-renewal includes any of the following circumstances:
         (a)   The license was procured by misrepresentation of material facts
with regard to the rental dwelling unit or the ownership of the rental dwelling
unit;
         (b)   The owner, applicant or one acting in his or her behalf made
oral or written misstatements accompanying the license application;
         (c)   The owner, applicant or one acting in his, her or its behalf has
failed to comply with any condition set forth in any other permits granted by
the city for the premises or a rental dwelling unit on the premises;
         (d)   The activities of the owner/applicant create or have created a
danger to the public health, safety or welfare for the premises or a rental
dwelling unit on the premises;
         (e)   The rental dwelling unit contains conditions that might injure
or endanger the safety, health or welfare of any member of the public;
         (f)   Failure to pay any application, penalty or reinstatement fee
required by this section and City Council resolution;
         (g)   Following the third instance of disorderly behavior specified in
§
151.08 of this chapter that is not subject to the exception set forth in §
151.08(B)(2) of this chapter or the circumstances set forth in §
151.08(G) of this chapter;
         (h)   Violation of any regulation or provision of the subchapter
applicable to the activity to which the license has been granted or any
regulation or law of the state so applicable;
         (i)   Failure to continuously comply with any condition required of
the applicant for the approval or maintenance of the license; and/or
         (j)   Any violation of this section.
      (2)   Notification. The Code Official shall notify the owner or the
owner’s agent in writing of the basis for the revocation, suspension, denial or
non-renewal and the date upon which the City Council shall review the request
to revoke, suspend or deny the license or if the basis for a non-renewal of the
license is for a reason other than the physical condition of the rental
dwelling unit or the premises. The notice required by this section shall be
served upon the owner or the owner’s agent at least 20 days before the City
Council hearing. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the notice is sent to
the owner or the owner’s agent by first class mail at the address provided in
the license application. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or the
owner’s agent to notify the tenant in writing of the hearing date, time and
place.
      (3)   Hearing. The owner or the owner’s agent and the Code Official shall
be given an opportunity to be heard. The owner may be represented by counsel.
Both sides may be permitted to examine the other side’s witness(es). The City
Council shall hear all relevant evidence and arguments and shall review all
testimony, documents and other evidence submitted. The City Council shall
record the hearing and keep a record of documentary evidence submitted. No
notice or hearing is required for non-renewal of a license where the rental
dwelling unit(s) or the premises have not passed the inspection by the Code
Official.
      (4)   Decision. The City Council shall make findings based on the
evidence and shall make a decision on the recommendation to revoke, suspend,
deny or non-renew (solely for issues not related to physical condition of the
rental dwelling unit or the premises) a license based on the findings. The City
Council shall issue a written decision regarding the recommendation of the Code
Official within 30 days following the date of the hearing and shall notify the
appellant of the decision by first class mail with a duplicate copy to the Code
Official. The decision shall specify the rental dwelling unit or the premises
to which it applies. Thereafter, and until a license is reissued or reinstated,
no rental dwelling unit that has had its rental license revoked, suspended,
denied or non-renewed may be re-let or occupied. Revocation, suspension, denial
or non-renewal of a license shall not excuse the owner from compliance with all
terms of this section for as long as any rental dwelling units in the building
are occupied.
      (5)   License process after revocation, suspension, denial or renewal
declination. After the City Council revokes, suspends, denies or declines to
renew a license, no license will be issued for the affected rental dwelling
unit(s) until the Code Official determines that the applicant/licensee has
remedied the conditions identified by the City Council as the basis for its
action. A license application to obtain a license for a rental dwelling unit
after the City Council has revoked, suspended, denied or declined to renew a
license for the same rental dwelling unit(s) must be accompanied by all fees
required by this subchapter.
   (B)   Effect of revocation, suspension, denial or non-renewal. If a license
is revoked, suspended, denied or not renewed by the City Council, it shall be
unlawful for the owner or the owner’s agent to thereafter permit the occupancy
of the then vacant, or thereafter vacated, rental dwelling unit(s) until such
time as a valid rental license is obtained for the rental dwelling unit(s).
Issuance of a new license after revocation, suspension, denial or non-renewal
shall be made in the manner provided for in §
151.05(A) of this chapter.
(Ord. 82B, passed 2-16-2011) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.10 POSTED TO PREVENT OCCUPANCY.
   Whenever any rental dwelling unit has been denied an initial license or had
its license revoked, suspended, denied or not renewed, it shall be posted by
the Code Official to prevent further occupancy. No person, other than the Code
Official, shall remove or alter any posting. The Code Official will post the
date the rental dwelling unit shall be vacated and no person shall reside in,
occupy or cause to be occupied that rental dwelling unit until the Code
Official permits it.
(Ord. 82B, passed 2-16-2011) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.11 NO RETALIATION.
   Per M.S. § 504B.205, Subd. 2, as it may be amended from time to time,
emergency calls permitted:
   (A)   A landlord may not:
      (1)   Bar or limit a residential tenant’s right to call for police or
emergency assistance in response to domestic abuse or any other conduct; or
      (2)   Impose a penalty on a residential tenant for calling for police or
emergency assistance in response to domestic abuse or any other conduct.
   (B)   A residential tenant may not waive and a landlord may not require the
residential tenant to waive the residential tenant’s right to call for police
or emergency assistance.
(Ord. 82B, passed 2-16-2011)
§ 151.12 NO WARRANTY BY CITY.
   By enacting and undertaking to enforce this subchapter, the city, the city
employees and the City Council and its agents do not warrant or guarantee the
safety, fitness or suitability of any dwelling in the city. Owners and
occupants should take whatever steps they deem appropriate to protect their
interests, health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 82B, passed 2-16-2011)
MAINTENANCE AND CONDITIONS
§ 151.25 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to provide minimum
standards to safeguard life or limb, health and public welfare by regulating
and controlling the use and occupancy, maintenance and repair of all buildings
and structures within the city used as rental housing. The purpose of this
subchapter is not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular
class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or
benefitted by the terms of this subchapter.
   (B)   Scope. The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all buildings
or portions thereof leased for human living or sleeping purposes, including
those in existence at the time of adoption of this subchapter. If any provision
of this subchapter conflicts with the Building Code, Fire Code, Plumbing Code,
Mechanical Code or any other state code or law, such code or law shall control.
   (C)   Application to existing buildings. Additions, alterations or repairs
shall be done in compliance with the Building Code, Fire Code, Plumbing Code
and Mechanical Code. Applicable permits shall apply as required by such codes.
(Ord. 83C, passed 2-16-2011)
§ 151.26 CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS.
   Words in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular. Words
used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the feminine the
masculine. Any term not defined below shall have its ordinary accepted meaning
within the context it is used. For the purpose of this subchapter, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING CODE. The Minnesota State Building Code.
   CODE OFFICIAL. The city’s Building Official, as appointed by the City
Council, and any designee of such Code Official.
   ELECTRICAL CODE. The Minnesota State Electrical Code.
   EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other
pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible
materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating,
trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination method approved
by the Code Official.
   FIRE CODE. The Minnesota State Fire Code.
   HEALTH OFFICER. Any elected or appointed health officer of the state, the
county or the city.
   INFESTATION. The presence of insects, rodents or other pests in numbers
large enough to be harmful, threatening or obnoxious to human life.
   LEASE, LEASED and LET. In each instance any of these words is used, the
giving of the use of a building or structure, or portion thereof, by an owner
or manager to a tenant in return for rent.
   MANAGER. A person or entity who has charge, care or control of a rental
dwelling.
   MECHANICAL CODE. The Minnesota State Mechanical Code.
   NUISANCE. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence;
      (2)   Any unsafe condition that is attractive to minors including, but
not limited to, unprotected well openings or excavations, abandoned
refrigerators and structurally unsound fences;
      (3)   Overcrowding of a rental dwelling unit with human occupants or
personal property;
      (4)   Insufficient ventilation or illumination of a rental dwelling unit;
      (5)   Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities serving a
rental dwelling unit; or
      (6)   Any unsafe condition, as determined by the Code Official or Health
Officer.
   OWNER. A person or entity that owns or has any ownership interest in a
rental dwelling within the city.
   PLUMBING CODE. The Minnesota State Plumbing Code.
   PREMISES. Collectively, a rental dwelling and the parcel of land on which it
is located.
   REFUSE. All putrescible and non-putrescible waste solids including garbage
and rubbish.
   RENT. The consideration provided by a tenant (or on behalf of a tenant) for
the temporary possession of a rental dwelling unit, whether paid in money,
property or services.
   RENTAL DWELLING. Any building or portion thereof that contains living
facilities including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation
for not more than one family in a single habitable unit. Each room or group of
rooms with:
      (1)   An entrance door to the exterior of the building; or
      (2)   An entrance door to a common corridor or hallway is a separate
rental dwelling unit.
   RENTAL DWELLING UNIT. A room or group of rooms within a rental dwelling that
has bathroom, kitchen and sleeping facilities for one household of related or
unrelated tenants.
   RENTAL LICENSE. A license issued by the city pursuant to §§
151.01 through
151.12 of this chapter.
   SAFE. Being reasonably free from dangers and hazards that may cause human
injury or illness.
   SUBSTANDARD DWELLING UNIT. Any rental dwelling unit that is not safe due to
inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, physical damage, unsanitary condition,
abandonment or any other reason.
   TENANT. A human occupant of a rental dwelling unit, whether one or more.
   UNSAFE. Not safe.
   VARIANCE. The difference between that which is required or specified and
that which is permitted.
(Ord. 83C, passed 2-16-2011)
§ 151.27 RENTAL LICENSES.
   No owner or manager shall allow the occupancy of a rental dwelling unit by a
tenant prior to the issuance of a rental license by the city for the rental
dwelling unit. Further, no owner or manager shall allow the occupancy of a
rental dwelling unit by a tenant after the expiration of the rental license for
the rental dwelling unit unless the rental license has been properly renewed.
(Ord. 83C, passed 2-16-2011)
§ 151.28 REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Substandard dwelling unit. No substandard dwelling units are allowed.
   (B)   Condition. No owner or manager shall allow infestation if
extermination is not the tenant’s responsibility by law.
   (C)   Improper occupancy. No rental dwelling shall be used in a manner
inconsistent with its design or construction.
   (D)   Smoke detectors. No smoke detector installed in a rental dwelling unit
shall be allowed to remain disabled or non-functional. The tenant of a rental
dwelling unit shall notify the owner or manager within 24 hours of discovering
that a detector is disabled or not functioning. The owner or manager shall take
immediate action to render the smoke detector operational or replace it.
   (E)   Carbon monoxide alarms. Each rental dwelling unit shall have an
approved and operational carbon monoxide alarm installed with ten feet of each
room used for sleeping purposes as required by M.S. §§ 299F.50 and 299F.51, as
they may be amended from time to time, unless an exception listed in M.S. §
299F.51, Subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time, applies.
   (F)   Refuse. Each rental dwelling shall have an adequate number of refuse
containers to hold the amount of refuse produced by the occupants of the rental
dwelling or as required elsewhere by the city code. Containers shall be rodent-
and animal-proof plastic, fiberglass or rust-resistant metal with a tight-
fitting cover. Tenants shall properly dispose of their recyclables, rubbish,
garbage and other organic waste.
   (G)   Unused or discarded items. Discarded, unused and junk appliances,
furniture, mattresses and other items shall be promptly removed from the
premises, but in all cases such removal shall occur within seven days.
   (H)   Storage of items. Large amounts of combustible items and materials
shall not be stored in the attic or basement of the rental dwelling. Storage
shall be maintained two feet or more below ceilings and floor joists.
Combustible materials and items shall not be stored within one foot of any fuel
burning appliances. Storage of items shall be orderly and shall not block or
obstruct exits. A minimum three-foot wide aisle shall be maintained to all
exits, furnaces, water heaters, water meters, gas meters or other equipment
serving the rental dwelling.
   (I)   Fuel storage. LP tanks, gasoline tanks and kerosene tanks shall only
be stored outdoors.
   (J)   Fueled equipment. Fueled equipment including, but not limited to,
motorcycles, mopeds, lawn- care equipment and portable cooking equipment shall
only be stored outdoors or in the garage of a rental dwelling.
   (K)   Barbecues and open flames. No person shall kindle, maintain or cause
any fire or open flame on any balcony above ground level, on any roof or on any
ground floor patio within 15 feet of any rental dwelling unit. Further, no
person shall store or use any fuel, barbecue, torch or similar heating or
lighting chemicals or device in such locations.
   (L)   Sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways and the like. All sidewalks,
walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas on a premises
shall be kept in a proper state of repair and maintained free from hazardous
conditions.
   (M)   Defacement of property. If a rental dwelling is defaced by graffiti,
the graffiti shall promptly be removed.
(Ord. 83C, passed 2-16-2011) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.29 RESPONSIBILITIES.
   Owners are liable for violations of this subchapter even though an
obligation is also imposed on a manager or tenant and even if an owner has, by
agreement, imposed on the manager or tenant the duty of complying with this
subchapter or any part hereof.
(Ord. 83C, passed 2-16-2011)
§ 151.30 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Authority. The Code Official shall enforce or cause the enforcement of
this subchapter. The Code Official shall have the power to render
interpretations of this subchapter in conformity with the intent and purpose of
this subchapter.
   (B)   Compliance inspections. When the Code Official or a Health Officer has
reasonable cause to believe that a condition exists in regard to a rental
dwelling or the premises that violates this subchapter including, but not
limited to, a tenant complaint made in good faith, the Code Official or Health
Officer may enter the rental dwelling, in accordance with §
10.20 to inspect, re-inspect, or otherwise perform the duties imposed by this
subchapter. No such entry shall be made, however, unless:
      (1)   The owner, manager or tenant permits entry;
      (2)   The Code Official or Health Officer secures an administrative
warrant from a court with jurisdiction; or
      (3)   An emergency exists.
   (C)   Compliance order. If the Code Official or Health Officer finds that
any violation of this subchapter has occurred, the Code Official or Health
Officer may immediately seek to enforce the violation. In the alternative, the
Code Official or Health Officer may prepare a compliance order listing all
violations and the date or dates when such violations must be corrected. If a
compliance order is issued, the owner, manager or tenant shall correct all
violations, or cause them to be corrected, within the time limit set forth by
the Code Official or Health Officer. Any violation timely corrected in
compliance with such an order shall be deemed remedied by the city and shall
not form the basis for a rental license suspension or revocation. Extensions of
time to correct may be granted by the Code Official or Health Officer. A
request for extension of time shall be made and delivered to the Code Official
or Health Officer prior to the expiration date of the applicable correction
period. Extensions may be granted by the Code Official or Health Officer upon
due evidence shown that the owner, manager or tenant, as applicable, is using
all reasonable means to timely correct the violation.
   (D)   Notice to vacate. The Code Official may post any rental dwelling unit
as being in violation of this subchapter and prevent further occupancy by a
tenant if a rental dwelling unit is determined, in the opinion of the Code
Official and as defined in this subchapter, a substandard dwelling unit. At the
time of posting, notice shall be sent to the owner via U.S. mail. Existing
tenants shall have 45 days to vacate a posted rental dwelling unit if they are
in occupancy at the time of posting, except that occupants shall immediately
vacate a posted rental dwelling unit if such occupancy will cause imminent
danger to the health or safety of the tenants. No person, other than the Code
Official shall remove or tamper with any placard used for posting. No person
shall reside in, occupy or cause to be occupied any building, structure or
rental dwelling which has been posted to prevent occupancy, except as set forth
herein.
(Ord. 83C, passed 2-16-2011) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.31 APPEAL.
   (A)   Right to appeal. Any owner, manager or tenant may appeal from any
notice and order or any action of the Code Official or Health Officer under
this subchapter by filing an appeal to the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer.
A written appeal to the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall consist of a
brief statement in ordinary and concise language regarding the specific order
or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the
contentions of the appellant.
   (B)   Time allotted for appeal. The appeal shall be filed within 14 days or
within the time of correction as allowed by the Code Official, whichever is
shorter, from the date of the service of such order or action of the Code
Official.
   (C)   Notice of hearing. Notice of a hearing will be served by first class
mail to the appealing party no less than 20 days in advance of the scheduled
hearing, unless a shorter period of time is agreed upon. Service shall be
deemed complete upon depositing the notice of hearing in the U.S. mail,
properly addressed to the last known address of the person requesting the
hearing.
   (D)   Hearing procedures. The hearing will be in front of the City Council.
At the hearing, the party appealing shall have the opportunity to present
testimony and question any witnesses, but the strict rules of evidence shall
not apply. The City Council shall receive and give weight to evidence,
including hearsay evidence, which possesses probative value commonly accepted
by reasonable and prudent people in the conduct of their affairs.
   (E)   Authority on appeal. The City Council has the authority to determine
that a violation did or did not occur, to dismiss a citation, to impose the
scheduled fine or to reduce, stay or waive a scheduled fine either
unconditionally or upon compliance with appropriate conditions.
   (F)   Decisions on appeal. The City Council shall issue a decision in
writing to the appealing party within ten days of the hearing. Any fines or
penalties imposed must be paid no later than 30 days of the date of the order.
The decision of the City Council is final and may only be appealed to the
state’s Court of Appeals by petitioning for a writ of certiorari pursuant to
M.S. § 606.01, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 83C, passed 2-16-2011)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A person who violates the provisions of §§
151.01 through
151.12 of this chapter may be charged with a misdemeanor or be subject to the
issuance of an administrative citation or both. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense. The Code Official may post the
rental dwelling unit by appropriate signs or notices prohibiting occupancy and
may act to cause the rental dwelling unit to be vacated or remain vacant until
the code violations are corrected.
   (B)   A violation of any provision of §§
151.25 through
151.31 of this chapter is a misdemeanor. Each day the violation continues is a
separate violation. In the alternative, the city shall impose the following
administrative penalties upon the owner(s): $50 fine, plus an additional charge
of $5 per day commencing on the day the alleged violation or violations occur.
If, however, the owner has been given a specified correction period by the Code
Official, the fine shall be waived if the violation is confirmed corrected by
the Code Official before the expiration of such period.
(Ord. 82B, passed 2-16-2011; Ord. 83C, passed 2-16-2011)
CHAPTER 152: PUBLIC PROPERTY AND WAYS
Section
   
152.01   Street and alley construction standards
   
152.02   Obstructions to public use
   
152.03   Work on public property and ways
   
152.04   Maintenance on public streets and walkways
   
152.05   Construction of railways
   
152.06   Trees and shrubs on public lands
   
152.07   Use of public lands and buildings for private use
Cross-reference:
   Right-of-Way Management, see
Ch. 93
§ 152.01 STREET AND ALLEY CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   The City Council shall, from time to time, cause certain standards with
regard to the materials, methods and procedures for the construction of public
streets and alleys to be prepared and adopted by this chapter. All such
standards so adopted shall become a requirement under the provisions of this
chapter and the non-authorized deviation therefrom may be cause for action
under the penalties provided herein.
(1994 Code, § 12-1)
§ 152.02 OBSTRUCTIONS TO PUBLIC USE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to place, or cause to be placed,
any obstruction, whether physical or not, to the free use of any public lands,
streets, walkways, buildings or other property. However, this shall not prevent
the Council from scheduling certain events without interference from the
general public or from preventing damages to public properties or injury to
persons.
(1994 Code, § 12-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.03 WORK ON PUBLIC PROPERTY AND WAYS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to perform any work, whether
desirable or not, on any public property or on any public lands or rights-of-
way without the approval of the City Council.
(1994 Code, § 12-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.04 MAINTENANCE ON PUBLIC STREETS AND WALKWAYS.
   (A)   All work involved in maintaining the public streets and alleys shall
be performed by employees of the city or by persons or firms so authorized, by
express authorization of the City Council, to perform such work. For the
purposes of this section, MAINTENANCE WORK shall include, but not be limited
to, the pouring of oil or other material on roadways for dust prevention or
stability and the placement of paving materials on any roadway as a surfacing.
   (B)   Persons or firms occupying any structure adjacent to a public walk
shall be responsible for the upkeep and repair of such walkway and all costs
shall be incurred by such persons or firms. Upkeep to include keeping such
walkway clear of obstructions and free from ice and snow. If it becomes
necessary for the city to upkeep such walkways, the city shall assess all costs
of repair, replacement or maintenance against the taxes of such persons or
firms. Accumulation of snow in excess of one-inch shall be removed within 24
hours of its deposit onto walkways. If it becomes necessary for the city or its
contractor to remove snow it may be conducted without notice to the property
owner. City shall assess the property owner charges as specified in the annual
fee schedule. Assessment of costs shall be pursuant to the provisions of M.S. §
429.101.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to remove a public walkway
without city approval. All costs of replacement for an illegally removed
walkway shall be incurred by such person or firm.
   (D)   Those persons or firms occupying any such structure regardless of the
existence of a walk shall be responsible for maintenance of the grassed
boulevard.
(1994 Code, § 12-4) (Ord. 28, passed 11-13-1997; Ord. 28A, passed 3-18-2015;
Ord. 2019-03, 9-18-2019)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.05 CONSTRUCTION OF RAILWAYS.
   No person or firm shall construct any railway or spur railway line within
the limits of the city without the express approval of plans by the Council.
However, such trackage may be constructed on any land owned by a railway
company at the time of the effective date of this chapter unless such land has
been sold to another person or firm, who or which is not a railway company,
between the effective date and the time of construction.
(1994 Code, § 12-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.06 TREES AND SHRUBS ON PUBLIC LAND.
   (A)   No person or firm shall plant any tree, shrub or other vegetation on
any public lands without the approval of the City Council. However, sodding may
be performed in any street boulevard area without such permission if said
sodding does not further restrict the movement or parking of vehicles thereon.
   (B)   No person or firm shall plant any tree or shrub or any other plant
which shall or may obstruct the vision of any motorist and thus create a
potential hazard. The city shall have the right to enter onto any public land
and to remove any such visual obstruction presently or hereinafter existing.
(1994 Code, § 12-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.07 USE OF PUBLIC LANDS AND BUILDINGS FOR PRIVATE USE.
   (A)   The City Council may, from time to time, approve the private use of
streets, parks, public buildings and other public areas for the exclusive use
of private persons. But in no case shall this be of an unreasonable or
continuous nature such as to deprive the normal use of these properties by the
residents of the city. Such approvals shall be similar to, but not limited to,
the use of parks by private sports teams, the use of city buildings for
organizations of a social or fraternal nature, the use of city buildings for
private weddings and parties and other such uses which the Council deems to be
compatible with the public uses of those facilities.
   (B)   Any person or firm wishing to use such public facilities shall apply
to the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer for such permission and appear before
the Council. The Council shall withhold its approval until the applicant has
guaranteed to be responsible for any and all damages resulting from the private
use and to conform with any other reasonable requirements which the Council
feels is necessary for the protection of the property, the users and the
general public.
   (C)   The Council may establish user fees and impose any necessary cleaning,
maintenance or security requirements it deems reasonable. The applicant shall
not be given approval until any required deposits are made with the City
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer.
(1994 Code, § 12-7)
CHAPTER 153: WETLAND CONSERVATION
Section
   
153.01   Purpose
   
153.02   Incorporation by reference
   
153.03   Scope
   
153.04   Procedures
   
153.05   High priority areas
   
153.06   Delegation
§ 153.01 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is adopted to implement the Wetland Conservation Act of 1991,
M.S. §§ 103A.201 et seq., (Minn. Laws 1991, Ch. 354, as it may be amended from
time to time), and the accompanying rules of the state’s Board of Water and
Soil Resources (Minn. Rules Ch. 8420, as it may be amended from time to time).
(Ord. 13, passed 1-11-1996)
§ 153.02 INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE.
   This chapter incorporates by reference the Act and the rules. Terms used in
this chapter which are defined in the Act or the rules have the meanings given
there.
(Ord. 13, passed 1-11-1996)
§ 153.03 SCOPE.
   This chapter regulates the draining and filling of wetlands and parts of
wetlands within the LGU. It is part of the official controls of the LGU.
(Ord. 13, passed 1-11-1996)
§ 153.04 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Exemption and no-loss determinations. Exemption and no-loss
determinations under Minn. Rules Ch. 8420 shall be made by the Zoning
Administrator. The Administrator should seek the advice of the technical
evaluation panel on questions of wetland delineation and type. The
Administrator’s decision is final unless appealed to the Board of Adjustment
within 30 days.
   (B)   Sequencing and replacement plan decisions.
      (1)   Sequencing and replacement plan decisions under Minn. Rules parts
8420.0520 through 8420.0544 shall be made following the same procedures as for
conditional use permits plus the additional notice and time requirements of
Minn. Rules part 8420.0255.
      (2)   If the amount of wetland to be drained or filled is less than one-
tenth of an acre, the sequencing determination under Minn. Rules part 8420.0520
shall be made by the Zoning Administrator.
   (C)   Monitoring. The Zoning Administrator shall assure that the replacement
plan monitoring and enforcement requirements of Minn. Rules Ch. 8420 are
fulfilled.
   (D)   Wetland banking.
      (1)   Wetlands may be restored or created within the LGU for purposes of
deposit in the wetland bank in accordance with Minn. Rules parts 8420.0700
through 8420.0755.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator is responsible for approving bank plans,
certifying deposits and monitoring of banked wetlands and enforcement under the
rules.
   (E)   Appeals. Decisions made under this chapter may be appealed to the
Board of Water and Soil Resources under Minn. Rules part 8420.0905, after
administrative appeal rights under the official controls have been exhausted.
   (F)   Variances. The Board of Adjustment may issue variances from the
official controls of the LGU so long as the variances do not vary requirements
of the Act or the rules.
   (G)   Technical evaluation panel.
      (1)   The LGU elected body shall appoint a person to serve on the
technical evaluation panel. The person must be a technical professional with
expertise in water resources management.
      (2)   Decisions under this chapter must not be made until after receiving
the determination of the technical evaluation panel regarding wetland public
values, location, size and/or type if the decision-maker, the landowner or a
member of the technical panel asks for such determinations. This requirement
does not apply to wetlands for which such data is included in an approved
comprehensive wetland management plan per Minn. Rules part 8420.0240.
      (3)   The Park/Planning Commission may seek and shall consider
recommendations, if any, made by the technical evaluation panel in making
replacement plan decisions.
(Ord. 13, passed 1-11-1996)
§ 153.05 HIGH PRIORITY AREAS.
   Decisions regarding sequencing, replacement plans and banking shall
particularly favor preservation, restoration and creation of wetlands in high
priority areas as identified in water management plans pursuant to Minn. Rules
Ch. 8420.
(Ord. 13, passed 1-11-1996)
§ 153.06 DELEGATION.
   The LGU elected body may by joint powers agreement delegate to the soil and
water conservation district under M.S. §§ 471.59 and 103C.331, Subd. 19, as
they may be amended from time to time, the authority to administer all or any
part of this chapter.
(Ord. 13, passed 1-11-1996)
CHAPTER 154: FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
154.01   Statutory authorization
   
154.02   Purpose
   
154.03   Lands to which chapter applies
   
154.04   Adoption of flood insurance study and maps
   
154.05   Interpretation
   
154.06   Abrogation
   
154.07   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
154.08   Severability
   
154.09   Definitions
   
154.10   Annexations
   
154.11   Nonconformities
   
154.12   Amendments
Floodplain District
   
154.25   Establishment
   
154.26   Permitted uses and standards
Administration
   
154.40   Zoning Administrator
   
154.41   Development approvals
   
154.42   Permit required
   
154.43   Variances
   
154.44   Notifications for watercourse alterations
   
154.45   Notification for FEMA when physical changes increase or decrease base
flood elevations
 
   
154.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The legislature of the state has, in M.S. Chs. 103F and 462, as they may be
amended from time to time, delegated the responsibility to local government
units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
(Ord. 77A, passed 10-5-2016)
§ 154.02 PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter regulates development in the flood hazard areas of the
city. These flood hazard areas are subject to periodic inundation, which may
result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of
commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base. It is the purpose of
this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare by
minimizing these losses and disruptions.
   (B)   This chapter is adopted to comply with the rules and regulations of
the National Flood Insurance Program codified as 44 C.F.R. parts 59 - 78, as
amended, so as to maintain the community’s eligibility in the National Flood
Insurance Program.
   (C)   This chapter is also intended to preserve the natural characteristics
and functions of watercourses and floodplains in order to moderate flood and
stormwater impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic
and riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic
benefits and enhance community and economic development.
(Ord. 77A, passed 10-5-2016)
§ 154.03 LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter applies to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city shown
on the flood insurance rate maps adopted in §
154.04 as being located within the boundaries of the Floodplain District. The
Floodplain District is an overlay district that is superimposed on all existing
zoning districts. The standards imposed in the overlay districts are in
addition to any other requirements in this chapter. In case of a conflict, the
more restrictive standards will apply.
(Ord. 77A, passed 10-5-2016)
§ 154.04 ADOPTION OF FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY AND MAPS.
   The flood insurance study for the county and incorporated areas, and flood
insurance rate maps for the county and incorporated areas, with map numbers
27053C0270F and 27053C0290F; all of these documents being dated November 4,2016
and prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, are hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this chapter and the official zoning
map. These materials are on file in the city office.
(Ord. 77A, passed 10-5-2016)
§ 154.05 INTERPRETATION.
   The boundaries of the Floodplain District are determined by scaling
distances on the flood insurance rate map.
   (A)   Where a conflict exists between the floodplain limits illustrated on
the official zoning map and actual field conditions, the flood elevations must
be the governing factor. The Zoning Administrator must interpret the boundary
location based on the ground elevations that existed on the site on the date of
the first national flood insurance program map showing the area within the
regulatory floodplain and other available technical data.
   (B)   Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries will be
given a reasonable opportunity to present their case to the City Council and to
submit technical evidence.
(Ord. 77A, passed 10-5-2016)
§ 154.06 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter prevail. All other
ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of
the inconsistency only.
(Ord. 77A, passed 10-5-2016)
§ 154.07 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   This chapter does not imply that areas outside the floodplain districts or
land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This chapter does not create liability on the part of the city or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. 77A, passed 10-5-2016)
§ 154.08 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of law, the remainder of this chapter
shall not be affected and shall remain in full force.
(Ord. 77A, passed 10-5-2016)
§ 154.09 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation of the REGIONAL FLOOD. The term BASE
FLOOD ELEVATION is used in the flood insurance survey.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate
including, but not limited to, buildings, manufactured homes and other
structures, recreational vehicles, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation, drilling operations, or storage of materials or equipment.
   FARM FENCE. A fence as defined by M.S. § 344.02, Subd. 1(a)-(d), as they may
be amended from time to time. An open type fence of posts and wire is not
considered to be a structure under this chapter. Fences that have the potential
to obstruct flood flows, such as chain link fences and rigid walls, are not
permitted in the Floodplain District.
   FLOOD FRINGE. The portion of the floodplain located outside of the floodway.
FLOOD FRINGE is synonymous with the term “floodway fringe” used in the flood
insurance study for the county and incorporated areas.
   FLOODPLAIN. The areas adjoining a watercourse which have been or hereafter
may be covered by the regional flood.
   FLOODWAY. The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and
those portions of the adjoining floodplain which are reasonably required to
carry or store the regional flood discharge.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include the term RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
   OBSTRUCTION. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence
(with the exception of farm fences), stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or
matter in, along, across, or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or
regulatory floodplain which may impede, retard, or change the direction of the
flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by
such water.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is 400
square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, is
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and
is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. For the
purposes of this chapter, the term RECREATIONAL VEHICLE is synonymous with the
term “travel trailer/travel vehicle.”
   REGIONAL FLOOD. A flood which is representative of large floods known to
have occurred generally in the state and reasonably characteristic of what can
be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 1% chance/
100-year recurrence interval. REGIONAL FLOOD is synonymous with the term “base
flood” used in the flood insurance study.
   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. An elevation no lower than one foot
above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation
caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from designation of a
floodway.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the
ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, detached
garages, cabins, manufactured homes and other similar items.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Within any consecutive 365-day period, any
reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair),
repair after damage, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the
“start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures that
have incurred SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a “historic structure” provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
“historic structure.” For the purpose of this chapter, “historic structure” is
as defined in 44 C.F.R. part 59.1.
(Ord. 77A, passed 10-5-2016)
§ 154.10 ANNEXATIONS.
   The flood insurance rate map panels adopted by reference into §
154.04 may include floodplain areas that lie outside of the corporate
boundaries of the city at the time of adoption of this chapter. If any of these
floodplain areas are annexed into the city after the date of adoption of this
chapter, the newly annexed floodplain lands will be subject to the provisions
of this chapter immediately upon the date of annexation.
(Ord. 77A, passed 10-5-2016)
§ 154.11 NONCONFORMITIES.
   (A)   Continuance of nonconformities. A use, structure or occupancy of land
which was lawful before the passage or amendment of this chapter but which is
not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter may be continued subject
to the following conditions. Historic structures, as defined in §
154.09, are subject to the provisions of (A)(1) through (4) of this section.
      (1)   A nonconforming use, structure, or occupancy must not be expanded,
changed, enlarged, or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity. There
shall be no expansion to the outside dimensions of any portion of a
nonconforming structure located within the Floodplain District.
      (2)   The cost of all structural alterations or additions to any
nonconforming structure over the life of the structure may not exceed 50% of
the market value of the structure unless the conditions of this section are
satisfied. The cost of all structural alterations and additions must include
all costs such as construction materials and a reasonable cost placed on all
manpower or labor. If the cost of all previous and proposed alterations and
additions exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure, then the structure
must meet the standards of division (B) of this section.
      (3)   If any nonconforming use, or any use of a nonconforming structure,
is discontinued for more than one year, any future use of the premises must
conform to this chapter. The assessor must notify the Zoning Administrator in
writing of instances of nonconformities that have been discontinued for a
period of more than one year.
      (4)   If any nonconformity is substantially damaged, as defined in §
154.09, it may not be reconstructed unless it is located in the flood fringe
portion of the floodplain and it is reconstructed in accordance with the
standards of division (B) of this section.
      (5)   Any substantial improvement, as defined in §
154.09, to a nonconforming structure, then the existing nonconforming structure
must be located in the flood fringe portion of the floodplain and meet the
requirements of division (B) of this section.
   (B)   Standards for reconstruction of nonconforming structures. The
following standards and procedures apply to nonconforming structures in the
flood fringe portion of the floodplain, as allowed under division (A) of this
section.
      (1)   All structures, including manufactured homes, must be elevated on
fill so that the lowest floor including basement floor is at or above the
regulatory flood protection elevation. The finished fill elevation for
structures shall be no lower than one foot below the regulatory flood
protection elevation and the fill shall extend at such elevation at least 15
feet beyond the outside limits of the structure.
      (2)   Fill must be properly compacted and the slopes must be properly
protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable method.
      (3)   Floodplain developments must not adversely affect the hydraulic
capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any tributary watercourse
or drainage system.
      (4)   All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition
to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
      (5)   On-site sewage treatment and water supply systems: Where public
utilities are not provided: on-site water supply systems must be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and new or
replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into flood waters and they shall not be subject to impairment or
contamination during times of flooding. Any sewage treatment system designed in
accordance with the state’s current statewide standards for on-site sewage
treatment systems shall be determined to be in compliance with this section.
      (6)   The applicant is required to submit certification by a registered
professional engineer, registered architect or registered land surveyor that
the finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter. Floodproofing measures must be certified by a
registered professional engineer or registered architect.
      (7)   The Zoning Administrator must maintain a record of the elevation of
the lowest floor (including basement) of all new structures and alterations to
existing structures in the floodplain. The Zoning Administrator must also
maintain a record of the elevation to which structures and alterations or
additions to structures are floodproofed.
(Ord. 77A, passed 10-5-2016) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.12 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Floodplain designation; restrictions on removal. The floodplain
designation on the official zoning map shall not be removed from floodplain
areas unless it can be shown that the designation is in error or that the area
has been filled to or above the elevation of the regulatory flood protection
elevation and is contiguous to lands outside the floodplain. Special exceptions
to this rule may be permitted by the Commissioner of the Department of Natural
Resources if the Commissioner determines that, through other measures, lands
are adequately protected for the intended use.
   (B)   Amendments require DNR and FEMA approval. All amendments to this
chapter must be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of the Department
of Natural Resources (DNR) prior to adoption. The Commissioner of the DNR must
approve the amendment prior to community approval.
   (C)   Map amendments require ordinance amendments. The floodplain district
regulations must be amended to incorporate any revisions by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency to the floodplain maps adopted in §
154.04.
(Ord. 77A, passed 10-5-2016)
FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT
§ 154.25 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   Areas included. The Floodplain District for the city includes those
areas designated as Zone AE on the flood insurance rate maps adopted in §
154.04. The Floodplain District is an overlay district to all existing land use
districts. The requirements of this chapter apply in addition to other legally
established regulations of the community. Where this chapter imposes greater
restrictions, the provisions of this chapter apply.
   (B)   Compliance. No new structure or land shall hereafter be used and no
structure shall be constructed, located, extended, converted or structurally
altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations. Within the Floodplain District, all uses not listed as
permitted uses in §
154.26 are prohibited.
(Ord. 77A, passed 10-5-2016) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.26 PERMITTED USES AND STANDARDS.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted within the Floodplain
District without a permit provided that they are allowed in any underlying
zoning district and not prohibited by any other ordinance; and provided that
they do not require structures, fill, obstructions, excavations, drilling
operations/storage of materials or equipment or any other form of development
as defined in §
154.09. If the use does require fill, obstruction, excavation, storage of
materials or any other form of development as defined in §
154.09, a permit and compliance with division (B) of this section is required.
The permit requirement may be waived if there is an application for a public
waters work permit from the Department of Natural Resources.
      (1)   Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing,
forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting. Farm fences that do not
obstruct flood flows are permitted;
      (2)   Outdoor plant nurseries and horticulture;
      (3)   Private and public recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis
courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps,
swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, shooting
preserves, target ranges, hunting and fishing areas, and single or multiple
purpose recreational trails;
      (4)   Lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas; and
      (5)   Railroads, roads, bridges, utility transmission lines, pipelines
and other public utilities, provided that the Department of Natural Resources
is notified at least ten days prior to issuance of any permit.
   (B)   Standards for permitted uses.
      (1)   The use must have low flood damage potential.
      (2)   The use must not cause any increase in the stage of the 1% chance
or regional flood or cause an increase in flood damages in the reach or reaches
affected. This provision applies to structures (temporary or permanent), fill
(including fill for roads and levees), deposits, obstructions, storage of
materials or equipment, and all other uses.
      (3)   Floodplain developments must not adversely affect the hydraulic
capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any tributary watercourse
or drainage system.
      (4)   Public utilities, roads, railroad tracks and bridges to be located
within the floodplain must be designed in accordance with subsection (2) and
(3) above, or must obtain a conditional letter of map revision meeting the
requirements of 44 C.F.R. 603(d).
         (a)   When failure or interruption of these public facilities would
result in danger to the public health or safety or where such facilities are
essential to the orderly functioning of the area, such facilities must be
elevated to the regulatory flood protection elevation.
         (b)   Where failure or interruption of service would not endanger
public health or safety, minor or auxiliary roads, railroads or utilities may
be constructed at a lower elevation.
      (5)   New or replacement water supply systems and sanitary sewage systems
must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.
(Ord. 77A, passed 10-5-2016)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 154.40 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   A Zoning Administrator or other official designated by the City Council must
administer and enforce this chapter.
(Ord. 77A, passed 10-5-2016)
§ 154.41 DEVELOPMENT APPROVALS.
   Any construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, improvement, moving or
demolition of any building or structure must comply with the requirements of
this chapter. No mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation,
obstruction, drilling operation or other form of development as defined in this
chapter are allowed, other than the uses permitted in §
154.26(A) and the activities allowed under §
154.11.
(Ord. 77A, passed 10-5-2016) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.42 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   A permit must be obtained from the Zoning Administrator prior to
conducting the following activities:
      (1)   Expansion, change, enlargement or alteration of a nonconforming use
as specified in §
154.11. Normal maintenance and repair also requires a permit if such work,
separately or in conjunction with other planned work, constitutes a substantial
improvement as defined in §
154.09.
      (2)   Any use that requires fill, obstruction, excavation, storage of
materials or any other form of development as defined in §
154.09.
   (B)   Permit applications must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator on
forms provided for that purpose and shall include the following where
applicable: plans drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions and
elevations of the lot; existing or proposed structures, fill or storage of
materials; and the location of the foregoing in relation to the stream channel.
   (C)   Prior to granting a permit, the Zoning Administrator must verify that
the applicant has obtained all necessary state and federal permits.
(Ord. 77A, passed 10-5-2016)
§ 154.43 VARIANCES.
   (A)   An application for a variance to the provisions of this chapter will
be processed and reviewed in accordance with applicable state statutes and city
zoning ordinances.
   (B)   A variance must not allow a use that is not allowed in that district,
permit a lower degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood protection
elevation for the particular area or permit standards lower than those required
by state law.
   (C)   The following additional variance criteria of the Federal Emergency
Management Agency must be met:
      (1)   Variances must not be issued by a community within any designated
regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result;
      (2)   Variances may only be issued by a community upon a showing of good
and sufficient cause; a determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and a determination that the
granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause
fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws
or ordinances; and
      (3)   Variances may only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
   (D)   The City Council must submit hearing notices for proposed variances to
the Department of Natural Resources sufficiently in advance to provide at least
ten days’ notice of the hearing. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or
U.S. mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist.
   (E)   A copy of all decisions granting variances must be forwarded to the
Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources within ten days of such
action. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. mail to the
respective DNR area hydrologist.
   (F)   The Zoning Administrator must notify the applicant for a variance that
the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level
will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as
high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and such construction below the
base or regional flood level increases risks to fife and property.
   (G)   The Zoning Administrator must maintain a record of all variance
actions, including justification for their issuance, and must report such
variances in an annual or biennial report to the Administrator of the National
Flood Insurance Program, when requested by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
(Ord. 77A, passed 10-5-2016)
§ 154.44 NOTIFICATIONS FOR WATERCOURSE ALTERATIONS.
   Before authorizing any alteration or relocation of a river or stream, the
Zoning Administrator must notify adjacent communities. If the applicant has
applied for a permit to work in public waters pursuant to M.S. § 103G.245, as
it may be amended from time to time, this will suffice as adequate notice. A
copy of the notification must also be submitted to the Chicago Regional Office
of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
(Ord. 77A, passed 10-5-2016)
§ 154.45 NOTIFICATION TO FEMA WHEN PHYSICAL CHANGES INCREASE OR DECREASE BASE
FLOOD ELEVATIONS.
   As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the date such
supporting information becomes available, the Zoning Administrator must notify
the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA of the changes by submitting a copy of the
relevant technical or scientific data.
(Ord. 77A, passed 10-5-2016)
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation constitutes a misdemeanor. Violation of the provisions of
this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including
violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants
of variances) constitutes a misdemeanor and is punishable as defined by law.
   (B)   Other lawful action. Nothing in this chapter restricts the city from
taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation. If the responsible party does not appropriately respond to the
Zoning Administrator within the specified period of time, each additional day
that lapses will constitute an additional violation of this chapter and will be
prosecuted accordingly.
   (C)   Enforcement. In responding to a suspected ordinance violation, the
Zoning Administrator and City Council may utilize the full array of enforcement
actions available to it including but not limited to prosecution and fines,
injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders for corrective measures or a
request to the National Flood Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance
availability to the guilty party. The city must act in good faith to enforce
these official controls and to correct ordinance violations to the extent
possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood
Insurance Program.
(Ord. 77A, passed 10-5-2016)
CHAPTER 155: SIGNS
Section
   
155.01   Definitions
   
155.02   Illustrations
   
155.03   Intent and purpose
   
155.04   General provisions
   
155.05   District regulations
   
155.06   Administration and enforcement
§ 155.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AREA, DIGITAL SIGN. The square footage of the sign as measured by
multiplying the maximum width by the maximum height of the face of the sign,
including borders.
   AREA, MONUMENT SIGN. The square footage of the copy of the sign as measured
by drawing the smallest possible box around the copy. Only one box is to be
drawn per side (see illustration in §
155.02 of this chapter) and only one side is to be measured, assuming a mirror
image on the opposite side of the sign. If the sides are not identical, the
larger measurement shall be used. This shall constitute the area of the sign,
unless the border area around the copy on either side or on the top of the sign
is more than 18 inches. In this case, the area of the sign shall be calculated
by multiplying the maximum width of the sign by the height of the sign from
ground level to the highest part of the sign.
   AREA, PYLON SIGN. The square footage of the sign as measured by multiplying
the maximum width by the maximum height of the face of the sign, including
borders.
   AREA, WALL SIGN. The square footage of the copy of the sign as measured by
drawing the smallest possible box around the copy. Only one box is to be drawn
per sign.
   ASSEMBLY. The act of connecting together the parts of something (such as a
machine).
   AWNING. Any cover, often of fabric, plastic, metal or glass, designed and
intended for protection from weather conditions or sunlight or as a decorative
embellishment, which projects from a wall or roof of a structure primarily over
a window, walk or the like.
   CANOPY. Any roof-like cover, often of fabric, plastic, metal or glass, on a
support which provides shelter over a doorway or an area of service.
   GROUND LEVEL. The average elevation of the natural ground on which the sign
is located.
   HEIGHT OF SIGN. The dimension as measured from the ground level to the
highest point of any sign.
   SIGHT TRIANGLE. An area at the intersection of any street, road, driveway or
any point of ingress or egress and public street that shall remain clear of
obstruction or vegetation higher than three feet and clear of any signs. The
triangle’s area shall be measured by extending the curb line or edge of
pavement of each paved surface to a point where they intersect; from that
point, measure 25 feet back along the said lines and connect the two end
points, forming a triangle. (See illustration in § 155.02 of this chapter.)
   SIGN, ADDRESS. Any sign depicting only a street address.
   SIGN, AREA IDENTIFICATION. Any free-standing sign, on the identified
premises, which identifies the name of a commercial area or development,
industrial area or development, or office complex, or any combination of the
above. The sign may not contain advertising.
   SIGN, AWNING. Any sign or graphic printed on or in some fashion attached
directly to the awning material.
   SIGN, BILLBOARD. A sign that is not located on the premises containing the
use or uses which are promoted by such sign.
   SIGN, CAMPAIGN. Any temporary sign promoting the candidacy of a person
running for governmental office, or promoting an issue to be voted on at a
governmental election.
   SIGN, CANOPY. Any sign that is part of or attached to a canopy providing
protective cover over a door, entrance or area of service, such as fuel
islands.
   SIGN, DIGITAL. Any sign or portion of a sign with characters, letters or
illustrations that can be programmed to be displayed, changed or rearranged
digitally. The portion of a sign containing the price of motor fuel is not
included.
   SIGN, DIRECTIONAL. Any sign erected for the purpose of directing traffic
within a site, not to promote or advertise a business.
   SIGN, DIRECTIONAL REAL ESTATE. Any sign meant to direct traffic to a
property for sale or rent.
   SIGN, FREESTANDING. Any sign which is placed in the ground and not affixed
to any part of any structure.
   SIGN, GOVERNMENT. Any sign which is erected by a unit of government.
   SIGN, INSTITUTIONAL or SIGN, RECREATIONAL. Any sign identifying a church,
institution, school or recreational facility.
   SIGN, MONUMENT. Any permanent, freestanding sign with its sign face mounted
on the ground or mounted on a base at least as wide as the sign copy area.
   SIGN, MULTI-TENANT. Any sign identifying tenants on a site, within a
development, or in a building that has more than one tenant, with each tenant
having a separate exterior public entrance.
   SIGN, NAMEPLATE. Any sign depicting the name of a family residing in a
single- or two-family residence.
   SIGN, NEIGHBORHOOD IDENTIFICATION. Any monument sign depicting the name of a
neighborhood, residential subdivision or residential development located at a
generally accepted entrance point.
   SIGN, OFF-PREMISES. A commercial sign which directs the attention of the
public to a business, activity conducted, product sold or offered, or service
rendered at a location not on the same lot where such sign is located. For
purposes of this chapter, easements, rights-of-way and utility poles and other
appurtenances shall be considered to be outside such lot and any sign placed on
or in those areas shall be considered an OFF-PREMISES SIGN.
   SIGN, OPEN HOUSE. Any sign which advertises that a dwelling is open for
inspection.
   SIGN, PORTABLE. Any ground sign designed to be movable from one location to
another and which is not permanently attached to the ground.
   SIGN, PROJECTING. Any sign which is affixed to a building or wall in such a
manner that its leading edge extends more than 18 inches beyond the surface of
such building or wall face.
   SIGN, PYLON. Any freestanding sign that has its supportive structure(s)
anchored in the ground and which has a sign face elevated above ground level by
pole(s) or beam(s) and with any amount of area below the sign copy area open.
   SIGN, READER BOARD. Any sign or portion of a sign that has individual
letters that can be changed manually in order to advertise or convey a message.
The portion of a sign containing the price of motor fuel is not included.
   SIGN, REAL ESTATE. Any sign placed upon property advertising that property
for sale or rent.
   SIGN, ROOF. Any sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet of a building.
   SIGN, TEMPORARY. Any non-permanent sign, banner, inflatable device or flag
or by similar means advertising a product sold or offered, service rendered,
event, store opening or similar item or happening for a limited duration.
   SIGN, WALL. Any sign which is affixed upon and parallel to the wall of a
building, projecting not more than 18 inches from the face of the building.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 155.02 ILLUSTRATIONS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb3ae9d519e1ebb700190a7356b9d1a37685d3c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1081.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb3ae9d519e1ebb700190a7356b9d1a37685d3c6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1083.jpg]
 
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 155.03 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   The purposes of this chapter are as follows:
   (A)   To protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare within
the city by the establishment of standards, regulations and procedures
governing the erection, use and display of devices, signs and symbols serving
as visual communication media to persons upon public rights-of-way;
   (B)   To ensure that signs do not create safety hazards;
   (C)   To preserve and protect property values;
   (D)   To establish standards which permit businesses a reasonable and
equitable opportunity to advertise; and
   (E)   To preserve and protect the right to free expression.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 155.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Illuminated signs must have a shielded light source.
   (B)   Signs located on the interior of a building shall be exempt from the
provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Signs shall not obstruct any window, door, fire escape or opening
intended to provide ingress or egress to any structure or building.
   (D)   No permanent signs other than government signs shall be erected or
placed upon any public street, right-of-way or public easement or project over
public property.
   (E)   At least one address sign identifying the correct address shall be
required on each principal building in all zoning districts. The numbers shall
be at least three inches in height and displayed in such a manner that they can
be seen by emergency responders from the road.
   (F)   Campaign signs posted by or for candidates for political office or in
support of or opposition to any referendum or other ballot question shall be
consistent with state statute. No permit is required for such signs.
   (G)   No individual tax parcel may contain more than two temporary signs
listing the name of the project architects, contractors, leasing agents and/or
financing agencies may be installed at a construction site in any district for
the duration of construction only. Any two such signs shall not exceed 32
square feet each; if only one sign is installed, it may be up to 48 square
feet. Signs shall not be placed closer than ten feet to any street right-of-way
or five feet to any sidewalk, or within any sight triangle. After construction,
the requirements for temporary real estate signs apply.
   (H)   Temporary real estate signs for properties not under construction may
be placed in any district for the purpose of advertising the lease or sale of
property upon which it is placed. Only one such sign shall be permitted per
individual tax parcel.
      (1)   Such sign shall be removed within 14 days following the lease or
sale of all units.
      (2)   Signs shall not be placed closer than ten feet to any street right-
of-way or five feet to any sidewalk or within any sight triangle.
      (3)   The maximum size of such signs for each district is as follows:
         (a)   R-1 and R-2 Districts: nine square feet;
         (b)   R-6 District: 18 square feet; and
         (c)   MU-BR, B-2 and Industrial Districts: 36 square feet.
   (I)   Directional real estate signs are permitted to be placed off-site;
provided, not more than two such signs are used for any one individual tax
parcel being advertised for sale or lease, and no more than two such signs are
placed in each quadrant of an intersection. All such signs must be placed
outside of all street rights-of-way and placements of the signs require the
permission of the owners of the properties on which the signs are erected.
These signs may be left in place for the duration of the time the individual
tax parcel is on the market, and may not exceed two square feet in size and
three feet in height as measured from ground level. No permit is required for
such signs.
   (J)   Garage, neighborhood or estate sale signs are permitted to be placed
off site and within the street right-of-way (but off of any paved surface) for
a maximum of four days; provided, the number of such signs for any one sale
does not exceed eight, the size of such signs does not exceed five square feet,
and the height of such signs does not exceed three feet. No permit is required
for such signs.
   (K)   Open house signs are permitted to be placed off site and within the
street right-of-way (but off of any paved surface) for a maximum of one day;
provided, the number of such signs for any one open house does not exceed two,
the size of such signs does not exceed five square feet, and the height of such
signs does not exceed three feet. No permit is required for such signs.
   (L)   Permanent directional signs are allowed on-premises provided the
number of such signs on a commercial or industrial site do not exceed four. One
or two directional signs are present on any site, such signs may not exceed
four square feet. If three or four directional signs are present on any site,
such signs may not exceed two square feet, unless approved by the City Council
upon City Engineer review.
   (M)   Billboard signs are allowed and shall:
      (1)   Be permitted only on property immediately adjacent to state trunk
highways in business and industrial zoning districts;
      (2)   Require a city permit prior to maintaining, installing, erecting,
relocating or modifying such sign. Application for billboard sign permits shall
be made in writing to the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer upon printed forms
furnished by the city. Each application for a permit shall set forth the
correct legal description of the tract of land upon which the sign presently
exists or is proposed to be located, the location of the sign on said tract of
land, the manner of construction and materials to be used in the sign, a
complete description and elevations of the sign and such information as the
city deems necessary. At the time of application, the applicant shall pay a fee
asset forth in the city’s schedule of fees. Upon receipt of the application and
the fee payment, the permit application shall be placed on the Park/Planning
Commission agenda for its review. If the application is approved by the Park/
Planning Commission, the application shall be forwarded to the City Council for
final action and issuance of the permit. If a sign authorized by permit has not
been installed within 90 days from the date of issuance, said permit shall
become void. No fee shall be refunded;
      (3)   Be restricted to a maximum area for any one sign facing of 300
square feet inclusive of border and trim, but excluding the base or apron,
supports and other structural elements. The maximum sign area shall apply to
each facing of a sign structure. Signs may be placed back-to-back or in a V-
type construction;
      (4)   Be allowed to have advertising changed on the sign without
obtaining a permit;
      (5)   Not be allowed to resemble any official marker erected by the city
or state or any governmental agency, or by reason of position, shape or color
conflict with the proper functioning of any traffic sign or signal;
      (6)   Be established no closer than ten feet or further than 100 feet
from the state trunk highway right-of-way. No portion of any sign shall extend
over the right-of-way line;
      (7)   Be constructed in accordance with the municipal building and
electrical codes;
      (8)   Not be located on property without the consent of the owner,
holder, lessee, agent or trustee(s);
      (9)   Be maintained in good and safe structural condition. The painted
portion of signs shall be periodically repainted and kept in good condition;
      (10)   Contain a current advertisement or message. If not current, the
requirements for abandoned signs as stated in the enforcement section of this
chapter shall apply;
      (11)   Not interfere with the ability of vehicle operators or pedestrians
to see traffic signs or signals or impede the vision of traffic by vehicle
operators or pedestrians;
      (12)   Not exceed 25 feet in height above ground level;
      (13)   When facing the same general direction, whether on the same or
opposite sides of the road, be a minimum of 2,500 feet apart from any other
billboard sign measured down the centerline of the state trunk highway from
which the signs are to be seen;
      (14)   Be established not closer than 300 feet to any residentially-zoned
parcel unless separated by commercial structures or natural screening such as
hedges or mature trees that are higher than the signs; and
      (15)   Not have a message that changes more frequently than once every
eight seconds.
   (N)   Portable signs not otherwise permitted may not exceed 25 square feet
in area. Use of a portable sign shall require a permit. The permit shall be
valid for no more than 15 consecutive days. No more than four permits shall be
granted to any person, business or entity per year.
   (O)   One or more banners not exceeding 32 square feet may be affixed to the
primary structure in a commercial district at any time without a permit. The
total square footage of all wall signs and banners affixed to the same wall may
not exceed 15% of the square footage of the wall to which they are affixed.
   (P)   Banners may not be affixed to retaining walls, pylon or monument
signs, trees, vehicles, trash receptacles, ice chests and the like and may not
be used as the business identification sign. Baseball field fences are
permitted to have an unlimited number of banners affixed to them from April 1
through September 30 each year.
   (Q)   Up to 48 square feet of yard banners (attached to in-ground posts or a
fence) are permitted per tenant/property owner for a duration of not more than
six months, per year. The use of yard banners shall require a permit.
   (R)   Any proposed new development or redevelopment shall have reviewed, as
part of the site plan package, colored elevations, materials and locations of
the signs, and any other information the city deems necessary.
   (S)   The following signs are prohibited in all districts unless noted:
      (1)   Roof signs;
      (2)   Projecting signs (except in MU-BR District);
      (3)   Awning signs (except in MU-BR District);
      (4)   Digital wall signs in the MU-BR District, unless permitted in other
sections of this chapter or approved by the City Council;
      (5)   Off-premises signs, except for directional real estate signs,
garage, neighborhood or estate sale signs or open house signs (see above);
      (6)   Signs painted on or attached or in any manner affixed to trees,
rocks or similar natural surfaces, or painted directly on or affixed to the
wall, roof or outside of windows of a building, unless permitted by the City
Council;
      (7)   Permanent signs painted on particle board, plywood or similar
materials or sheets of wood, unless permitted by the City Council;
      (8)   Illuminated flashing signs, moving or rotating signs or beacons,
zip flashes or similar devices;
      (9)   Portable reader board or portable signs, except by permit;
      (10)   Reader board signs used as a permanent sign or as part of a
permanent sign, unless permitted by the City Council. Permanent reader board
signs must be constructed in a professional manner, permanently affixed to the
ground and landscaped at the base;
      (11)   Temporary signs or banners, except as noted in this section;
      (12)   Signs which interfere with the ability of vehicle operators or
pedestrians to see traffic signs or signals, or which impede the vision of
traffic by vehicle operators or pedestrians; and/or
      (13)   Signs, other than billboards, promoting businesses not within the
city limits.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014; Ord. 3, passed 8-5-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.05 DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   The following signs shall be permitted in each specified district according
to the requirements herein set forth.
   (A)   R-1 and R-2 Districts.
      (1)   Nameplate signs: one sign not to exceed two square feet in area for
each dwelling unit, indicating only name and/or address and placed on the wall
or within ten feet of the structure;
      (2)   Institutional and recreational signs: one sign per street frontage.
Signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area and shall be placed no closer
than ten feet to any street right-of-way or five feet to any sidewalk, or
within any sight triangle;
      (3)   Neighborhood identification signs: one sign not to exceed 32 square
feet in area per neighborhood entrance. Signs shall not be placed closer than
ten feet to any street right-of-way or five feet to any sidewalk, or within any
sight triangle unless placed within a landscaped median on the neighborhood
street, in which case the sign shall not be placed closer than 15 feet to the
right-of way of the intersecting street; and
      (4)   Other signs: signs allowed in subd.             .
   (B)   R-6 District.
      (1)   Wall signs: one sign or symbol per building that houses dwellings
not to exceed six square feet in area per building;
      (2)   Area identification signs: one sign not to exceed 32 square feet in
area per development entrance. Signs shall not be placed closer than ten feet
to any street right-of-way or five feet to any sidewalk, or within any sight
triangle;
      (3)   Institutional signs: one sign per street frontage. Signs shall not
exceed 32 square feet in area and shall not be placed closer than ten feet to
any street right-of-way line or five feet to any sidewalk, or within any sight
triangle; and
      (4)   Other signs: signs allowed in subd.            .
   (C)   MU-BR District.
      (1)   Wall signs on principal structures: one sign per wall or side of
building facing a street or a parcel zoned the same as the subject property,
with a maximum of three. The total area of any wall sign shall not exceed 10%
of the total area of the facades facing the same direction as the wall to which
it is affixed, unless approved by the City Council;
      (2)   Wall signs on leased space: one sign per tenant or, in the case of
a corner space, per public entrance, with a maximum of two. The total area of
any wall sign shall not exceed 10% of the facade of the smallest side of the
leased space to which it is affixed. No sign shall be closer than two feet to
the edge of the leased space;
      (3)   Wall signs on accessory structures: one sign per wall or side of a
building facing a street or property zoned the same as the subject property,
with a maximum of two. The total area of any wall sign shall not exceed 3% of
the total area of the facades facing the same direction as the wall to which it
is affixed;
      (4)   Canopy signs: one sign per side facing a street frontage or a
parcel zoned the same as the subject property. If the sign is not illuminated,
a canopy sign facing a parcel zoned differently than the subject parcel shall
be allowed. The maximum number of canopy signs is three. The length of the sign
shall not exceed 70% of the length of the side to which it is affixed. The
height of the sign shall not exceed two feet;
      (5)   Monument signs: one sign for each street frontage, with a maximum
of two. The area of each sign shall not exceed 32 square feet with a maximum
height of five feet and a maximum length of ten feet. For parcels less than one
acre in size, only one sign shall be allowed, and the maximum size shall be 24
square feet. Signs shall not be placed closer than ten feet to any street
right-of-way line or within any sight triangle;
      (6)   Pylon signs: one sign per site, not to exceed 48 square feet and 25
feet in height. If the subject parcel is adjacent to any residentially-zoned
parcel, the maximum height shall be 20 feet or the height of the principal
structure, whichever is less. Up to 24 square feet of the pylon sign may be
used as a digital sign; if a digital sign is installed as part of a larger
pylon sign, the pylon sign shall be considered one sign. For parcels less than
one acre in size, the maximum size shall be 24 square feet, of which 12 square
feet can be used as a digital sign, and the maximum height shall be 18 feet.
Signs shall not be placed closer than ten feet to any street right-of-way, and
if the pylon(s) on which the face of the sign is mounted is wider than three
feet in any direction, the sign may not be placed within any site triangle;
      (7)   Area identification signs: one sign per development entrance not to
exceed 48 square feet with a maximum height of six feet. For parcels less than
one acre in size, only one sign shall be allowed regardless of the number of
entrances, and the maximum size shall be 36 square feet. Such sign shall not be
placed closer than ten feet to any street right-of-way line or five feet to any
sidewalk, or within any sight triangle;
      (8)   Multi-tenant signs: one sign per street frontage, with a maximum of
two. Multi-tenant signs are considered monument or pylon signs when calculating
the number of signs permitted. The area of each sign shall not exceed 60 square
feet with a maximum height of 14 feet and a maximum length of ten feet for
monument signs and a maximum height of 20 feet for pylon signs. For parcels
less than one acre in size, only one sign shall be allowed, and the maximum
size shall be 48 square feet and the maximum height shall be 12 feet for
monument and 16 feet for pylon signs. Signs shall not be placed closer than ten
feet to any street right-of-way line or five feet to any sidewalk, or within
any sight triangle;
      (9)   Other signs: signs allowed in section:            ; and
      (10)   Maximum number of signs: in the case of a building with multiple
accessory structures, the total number of wall signs, including the principal
structure, shall not exceed five. In the case of multiple canopies, the total
number of canopy signs shall not exceed four. A property may have a monument
sign or signs or a pylon sign, but not both. Directional signs are permitted as
described elsewhere in this chapter.
   (D)   B-2 District.
      (1)   Wall signs on principal structures: one sign per wall or side of
building facing a street or a parcel zoned the same as the subject property,
with a maximum of three. The total area of any wall sign shall not exceed 10%
of the total area of the facades facing the same direction as the wall to which
it is affixed. Digital signs are permitted as less than 50% of the square
footage of the primary wall sign. If the primary wall sign is only a digital
sign, the total area shall not exceed 5% of the total area of the facades
facing the same direction as the wall to which it is affixed. Slight variations
from the requirements of this paragraph may be permitted by the City Council;
      (2)   Wall signs on leased space: one sign per tenant or, in the case of
a corner space, per public entrance, with a maximum of two. The total area of
any wall sign shall not exceed 10% of the facade of the smallest side of the
leased space to which it is affixed. No sign shall be closer than two feet to
the edge of the leased space;
      (3)   Wall signs on accessory structures: one sign per wall or side of a
building facing a street or property zoned the same as the subject property,
with a maximum of two. The total area of any wall sign shall not exceed 3% of
the total area of the facades facing the same direction as the wall to which it
is affixed;
      (4)   Canopy signs: one sign per side facing a street frontage or a
parcel zoned the same as the subject property. If the sign is not illuminated,
a canopy sign facing a parcel zoned differently than the subject parcel shall
be allowed. The maximum number of canopy signs is three. The length of the sign
shall not exceed 70% of the length of the side to which it is affixed. The
height of the sign shall not exceed two feet;
      (5)   Monument signs: one sign for each street frontage, with a maximum
of two. The area of each sign shall not exceed 60 square feet with a maximum
height of seven feet and a maximum length of 14 feet. For parcels less than one
acre in size, only one sign shall be allowed and the maximum size shall be 48
square feet with a maximum height of six feet. Signs shall not be placed closer
than ten feet to any street right-of-way line or five feet to any sidewalk, or
within any sight triangle;
      (6)   Pylon signs: one sign per site, not to exceed 72 square feet and 25
feet in height. Up to 36 square feet of the pylon sign may be used as a digital
sign; if a digital sign is installed as part of a larger pylon sign, the pylon
sign shall be considered one sign. For parcels less than one acre in size, the
maximum size shall be 60 square feet, of which 30 square feet may be used as a
digital sign, with a maximum height of 20 feet. Signs shall not be placed
closer than ten feet to any street right-of-way, and if the pylon(s) on which
the face of the sign is mounted is wider than three feet in any direction, the
sign may not be placed within any site triangle;
      (7)   Area identification signs: one sign per development entrance not to
exceed 80 square feet with a maximum height of eight feet. For parcels less and
one acre in size, only one sign shall be allowed regardless of the number of
entrances, and the maximum size shall be 64 square feet with a maximum height
of six feet. Signs shall not be placed closer than ten feet to any street
right-of-way line or five feet to any sidewalk, or within any sight triangle;
      (8)   Multi-tenant signs: one sign per street frontage, with a maximum of
two. Multi-tenant signs are considered monument or pylon signs when calculating
the number of signs permitted. The area of each sign shall not exceed 120
square feet with a maximum height of 20 feet and a maximum length of 16 feet
for monument signs and a maximum height of 25 feet for pylon signs. For parcels
less than one acre in size, only one sign shall be allowed and the maximum size
shall be 80 square feet with a maximum height of 16 feet. Signs shall not be
placed closer than ten feet to any street right-of-way line or five feet to any
sidewalk, or within any sight triangle;
      (9)   Other signs: signs allowed in section           ; and
      (10)   Maximum number of signs: in the case of a building with multiple
accessory structures, the total number of wall signs, including the principal
structure, shall not exceed five. In the case of multiple canopies, the total
number of canopy signs shall not exceed four. A property may have a monument
sign or signs or a pylon sign, but not both. Directional signs are permitted as
described elsewhere in this chapter.
   (E)   Industrial Districts (I and MU-BI).
      (1)   Wall signs on principal structures: one sign per wall or side of
building facing a street or a parcel zoned the same as the subject property,
with a maximum of three. The total area of any wall sign shall not exceed 5% of
the total area of the facades facing the same direction as the wall to which it
is affixed or 60 square feet, whichever is less;
      (2)   Wall signs on leased space: one sign per tenant or, in the case of
a corner space, per side of building facing a street, with a maximum of two.
The total area of any wall sign shall not exceed 10% of the facade of the
leased space to which it is affixed or 48 square feet, whichever is less;
      (3)   Wall signs on accessory structures: one sign per wall or side of a
building facing a street or property zoned the same as the subject property,
with a maximum of two. The total area of any wall sign shall not exceed 3% of
the total area of the facades facing the same direction as the wall to which it
is affixed or 24 square feet, whichever is less;
      (4)   Canopy signs: one sign per side facing a street frontage or a
parcel zoned the same as the subject property. If the sign is not illuminated,
a canopy sign facing a parcel zoned differently than the subject parcel shall
be allowed. The maximum number of canopy signs is three. The length of the sign
shall not exceed 70% of the length of the side to which it is affixed. The
height of the sign shall not exceed two feet;
      (5)   Monument signs: one sign for each street frontage, with a maximum
of two. The area of each sign shall not exceed 60 square feet with a maximum
height of seven feet and a maximum length of 14 feet. Signs shall not be placed
closer than ten feet to any street right-of-way line or five feet to any
sidewalk or within any sight triangle;
      (6)   Pylon signs: one sign per site, not to exceed 72 square feet and 25
feet in height. Signs shall not be placed closer than ten feet to any street
right-of-way, and if the pylon(s) on which the face of the sign is mounted is
wider than three feet in any direction, the sign may not be placed within any
site triangle;
      (7)   Area identification signs: one sign per development entrance not to
exceed 80 square feet with a maximum height of eight feet. Such sign shall not
be placed closer than ten feet to any street right-of-way line or five feet to
any sidewalk or within any sight triangle;
      (8)   Multi-tenant signs: one sign per street frontage, with a maximum of
two. Multi-tenant signs are considered monument or pylon signs when calculating
the number of signs permitted. The area of each sign shall not exceed 120
square feet with a maximum height of 20 feet and a maximum length of 16 feet
for monument signs and a maximum height of 25 feet for pylon signs. Signs shall
not be placed closer than ten feet to any street right-of-way line or five feet
to any sidewalk or within any sight triangle;
      (9)   Other signs: signs allowed in section                ; and
      (10)   Maximum number of signs: in the case of a building with multiple
accessory structures, the total number of wall signs, including the principal
structure, shall not exceed five. A property may have a monument sign or signs
or a pylon sign, but not both. Directional signs are permitted as described
elsewhere in this chapter.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.06 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Permit required. Except as herein exempted, no person, firm or
corporation shall maintain, install, erect, relocate or modify any sign in the
city without first obtaining a permit from the city. If a permit is not
obtained prior to installation of a permanent sign, the resulting permit fee
shall be two times the cost of a sign permit as stated in the fee schedule.
   (B)   Application and fee. Applications for sign permits shall be made in
writing to the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer upon printed forms furnished
by the city. Each application for a permit shall set forth the correct legal
description of the tract of land upon which the sign presently exists or is
proposed to be located, the location of the sign on said tract of land, the
manner of construction and materials to be used in the sign, a complete
description and sketch of the sign, and such information as the city deems
necessary. At the time of application, the applicant shall pay a fee as set
forth in the schedule of fees. Upon receipt of the application and the fee
payment, the permit application shall be placed on the Park/Planning Commission
agenda for its review. Following review and recommendation by the Park/Planning
Commission, the application shall be forwarded to the City Council for final
action and issuance of the permit if approved, if a sign authorized by permit
has not been installed within 90 days from date of issuance, said permit shall
become void. No fee shall be refunded.
   (C)   Maintenance. All signs shall be constructed in such a manner and of
such materials as to be safe and substantial. The exposed backs of all signs
and sign structures shall be painted in a neutral color. Signs determined by
the city to be in a state of disrepair shall be restored to a good repair by
the sign owner, or property owner on which the sign is situated, within 30 days
after the mailing of written notice of repair from the City Administrator/
Clerk/Treasurer. In the event of non-compliance with said notice, the city
shall be authorized to remove said sign at the expense of the sign or property
owner. The City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer or other designated city
representative may enter at reasonable times, in accordance with §
10.20 any land in the city to inspect or re-inspect any sign.
   (D)   Removal of outdated sign. Any sign now or hereafter existing which no
longer advertises or identifies a bona fide open and operating business
conducted, service rendered or product sold shall be taken down and removed by
the owner, agent or person having beneficial use and/or control of the
buildings, structure or land upon which the sign may be found. Such sign shall
be taken down and removed within 30 days of the discontinuance of the
applicable business, service or product, or within ten days of written notice
at the city, whichever is less. Upon receipt of a notice from the city, the
owner, agent or person having the beneficial use and/or control of the sign may
take appropriate actions to paint over or otherwise render the sign blank and,
concurrently, apply to the city for authorization to leave the blank sign
erected for a defined period of time to be approved by the city so such sign
may be used or otherwise completed for the next bona fide business conducted,
service rendered or product sold in conjunction with the location of the sign.
Such approval shall rest in the sound discretion of the City Council. In the
event of non-compliance, the city shall be authorized to remove such sign at
the expense of the sign or property owner.
   (E)   Removal of sign that endangers public safety. The city shall cause to
be removed any sign that endangers the public safety, such as abandoned,
dangerous or materially, electrically or structurally defective signs, or a
sign for which no permit has been issued. The City Administrator/Clerk/
Treasurer shall prepare a notice that shall describe the sign and specify the
violation involved and shall state that if the sign is not removed or the
violation corrected within seven days, the sign shall be removed at the expense
of the sign or property owner. If the invoice is not timely paid, the city may
certify the amount so billed to the property taxes for the property from which
the sign was removed in the manner of an assessment in accordance with
applicable city codes and state statutes.
   (F)   Exemption. No permit shall be required for the following signs;
provided that, all signs herein exempted from the permit requirements shall
conform with all other requirements of this chapter:
      (1)   Signs placed within a building, but visible from the outside
through a window, glass door or other opening;
      (2)   Signs having an area of two square feet or less;
      (3)   Campaign signs;
      (4)   Signs which are entirely within a building and not visible from
outside of said building;
      (5)   Temporary real estate signs;
      (6)   Address or nameplate signs on or within ten feet of structures;
and/or
      (7)   Directional signs.
   (G)   Non-conforming signs. Any sign legally existing on the effective date
of this chapter that does not conform to the requirements set forth in this
chapter shall become a non-conforming use. Non- conforming, permanent signs
shall be allowed to continue, but shall not be rebuilt, replaced, materially
altered or relocated without being brought into compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 156: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
156.01   Purpose and interpretation
   
156.02   Definitions
Procedures
   
156.15   Application and review
   
156.16   Preliminary sketch plan
   
156.17   Preliminary plat
   
156.18   Final plat
   
156.19   Drawing requirements
   
156.20   Environmentally sensitive areas
   
156.21   Conditions requiring platting
Design Standards and Improvements
   
156.35   General
   
156.36   Streets
   
156.37   Sidewalks and trailways
   
156.38   Easements
   
156.39   Blocks
   
156.40   Lots
   
156.41   Required improvements
Administration
   
156.55   Hardship variance or waiver
   
156.56   Building permit
   
156.57   Minor subdivision; review
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.01 PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION.
   This chapter is enacted for the purpose of safeguarding the best interests
of the public, the homeowner, the subdivider and the investors by encouraging
well planned subdivisions through the establishment of adequate standards for
design and construction.
(1994 Code, § 13-1.1) (Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 156.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOULEVARD. The portion of the street right-of-way lying between the property
line and the edge of the traveled street.
   BUTT LOT. A single lot at the end of a block which is located between two
corner lots.
   COMPREHENSIVE GUIDE PLAN. A plan accepted by the City Council to be used as
a guide in determining future land use and other general aspects of the city,
and includes any unit or part of such a plan separately adopted in any
amendment to said plan or part thereof.
   EASEMENT. A grant of an interest in land by an owner for the specific use of
said land by the public generally or by another person or persons.
   ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS. Those areas that have 12% or greater
slopes, land or soils subject to flooding, wetlands (including streams,
ditches, drainage ways, ponds and marshes), high water table, woods and soils
that are unsuitable for building sites. In the areas where severe development
limitations exist, as determined by the city, there shall be detailed
examinations and careful study should proceed before any type of development is
allowed to be constructed. The goal is to provide for the orderly and
harmonious physical development of the city.
   MINOR SUBDIVISION. The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two
lots, tracts or parcels.
   OWNER. Any individual, firm or other legal entity having sufficient
proprietary interest in the land to commence and maintain proceedings to
subdivide under this chapter.
   PRELIMINARY PLAT. The preliminary document which indicates the proposed
layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Park/Planning Commission and
Council for consideration.
   PRELIMINARY SKETCH PLAN. The preliminary document, drawn roughly to scale
end submitted prior to the preliminary plat, which indicates in a general
manner the proposed subdivision to be submitted only to the Park/Planning
Commission.
   RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS. Those contracts entered into between parties
constituting restrictions on the use of property within the subdivision for the
benefit of property owners and which provide a mutual protection against
undesirable aspects of development which would tend to impair the values of the
properties.
   SETBACK LINE. A line within a lot, as designated on the preliminary plat or
within the language of Ch. 157 of this code of ordinances, between which line
and the adjacent street right-of-way line or adjacent property line the
erection of a structure is prohibited.
   STREETS. All public thoroughfares whether designated as streets, highways,
roads, avenues, boulevards or however otherwise designated on maps, plats or
drawings. In the broad sense of the term, the definition shall mean that
portion lying within the right-of-way lines of any public property used for
street purposes whether or not actual title rests with the public or by
easement.
      (1)   ACCESS STREETS OR SERVICE ROADS. Minor streets which are parallel
to and adjacent to arterial streets and which provide access abutting
properties while maintaining protection from through traffic.
      (2)   ARTERIAL STREETS AND HIGHWAYS. Those streets used primarily for
fast or heavy traffic and which may or may not have limited access.
      (3)   COLLECTOR OR FEEDER STREETS. Those which carry traffic from minor
streets to the system of arterial or major streets and include the principal
street of a residential development.
      (4)   CUL-DE-SACS. Minor streets with only one outlet and on which
provision has been made for the turning around of vehicles at the end opposite
from the entrance outlet.
      (5)   MAJOR STREETS. Heavily traveled streets of considerable continuity
and which are used primarily for intercommunication between large areas.
      (6)   MINOR STREETS. Those used primarily for access to the abutting
properties.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person, firm or other legal entity commencing proceedings
under this chapter to effect a subdivision of land for themselves or for
another.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into three or
more lots, plats, sites or other divisions of land.
   WIDTH OF LOT. The lot’s mean width measured at the building setback line.
(1994 Code, § 13-1.2) (Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
PROCEDURES
§ 156.15 APPLICATION AND REVIEW.
   The following procedure shall be followed during the application and review
of any subdivision submitted as follows.
(1994 Code, § 13-1.3) (Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 156.16 PRELIMINARY SKETCH PLAN.
   Subdividers shall submit 15 copies of the sketch plan to the Park/Planning
Commission prior to their submission for formal review of a preliminary plat.
Such sketch plan shall be considered as submitted for informal discussion
between the subdivider and the Park/Planning Commission and no fees shall be
required by the subdivider for the submission of the sketch plan. However,
submission of a sketch plan shall not constitute formal filing of a preliminary
plat with the Park/Planning Commission. As far as may be practical on the basis
of the information on the sketch plan, the Park/Planning Commission will
informally advise the subdivider as promptly as possible of the extent to which
the proposed subdivision conforms with the design standards of this chapter and
with other provisions of this code and will discuss possible modifications
necessary to secure approval of the plan. The Minnehaha Watershed District
shall be invited to such meeting.
(1994 Code, § 13-1.3) (Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 156.17 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   A preliminary plat is required for all subdivisions not defined as a
minor subdivision elsewhere in this chapter. Before subdividing any land within
the city, the subdivider shall file the following documents in the office of
the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer at least 14 days prior to the date of
the regular Park/Planning Commission meeting:
      (1)   Fifteen copies of the preliminary plat together with any other
information required in this chapter;
      (2)   A filing fee of an amount as set forth in the annual fee schedule;
and
      (3)   A completed application form obtained from the City Administrator/
Clerk/Treasurer.
   (B)   Upon receipt of the above information, the City Administrator/Clerk/
Treasurer shall refer the preliminary plat to the Park/Planning Commission for
its recommendations. The Park/Planning Commission shall reserve the right to
decline to consider any preliminary plat which has not been submitted in
accordance with the strict provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   The Park/Planning Commission shall make a report of its findings to
the Council within 30 days after the subdivider has submitted the preliminary
plat together with all other necessary information required by this chapter or
by the Park/Planning Commission.
   (D)   After final review by the Park/Planning Commission of the preliminary
plat, the subdivider shall request the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer to
enter his or her petition for plat approval on the agenda of the Council.
However, no item shall be placed on the agenda for the Council until the Park/
Planning Commission has made its final recommendations for approval or denial
unless the time limit stated above has expired and no positive action, whether
for approval or denial, has been taken by the Park/Planning Commission or no
extension notice has been sent to the applicant.
   (E)   Upon filing of said request for the approval of the plat, the Council
shall give notice according to law and hold a public hearing thereon. Within 30
days after the hearing, the Council shall either deny or tentatively approve
said plat by resolution recorded in the minutes and shall notify the subdivider
of its action setting forth objections to the plat, if any.
   (F)   Fees shall be used to defray the administrative expense of the city in
connection with review of said plat. City expense incurred in employing the
services of the City Engineer, City Attorney and other professional consultants
in connection with the review of said plat shall be reimbursed to the city by
the subdivider.
   (G)   Said plats shall also be sent to the City Engineer for his or her
comments along with any other affected agencies having review authority (i.e.,
Minnesota Department of Transportation (MnDOT), Department of Natural Resources
(DNR), and the like).
   (H)   It is the subdivider’s responsibility to furnish the city with the
names and mailing addresses of the owners of all lands within 350 feet of the
boundaries of the preliminary plat. The cost of the required public hearing
notice in the official newspaper of the city shall be paid by the subdivider.
(1994 Code, § 13-1.3) (Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 156.18 FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   After receiving approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall
file with the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer 15 paper print copies, one
Mylar or approved equal reproducible copy to the standard plat scale, one
reproducible copy to a scale of one inch equals 200 feet and other reproducible
or linen copies as required by state law or county regulations, all of which
shall incorporate all changes or modifications required by the Council in its
action for approval. However, if the subdivider does not file said copies of
the final plat for signature and seal within six months following approval of
the preliminary plat, the approval of the preliminary plat shall be considered
void.
   (B)   Upon filing of a final plat for signatures and seal, the Engineer and
Planner shall review the final plat copies and shall notify the Council in
writing of their comments regarding the similarity or dissimilarity of all
items on the final plat copies submitted for signature and seal with the
preliminary plat as previously approved by the Council.
   (C)   Upon signing and sealing of the final plat by the Council, the
subdivider shall file it with the county’s Recorder of Deeds or Registrar of
Titles within 60 days after the date of execution by the proper officials. If
the final plat has not been filed within the time limit herein stated, the
approval of the final plat shall be considered void.
   (D)   Prior to, and as a condition of, the execution of the final plat by
the Council, the subdivider shall enter into an approved development contract
according to the provisions of §
156.41(C) of this chapter to ensure the successful completion of certain
required public improvements.
   (E)   The subdivider shall also pay all reasonable costs incurred by the
city for review and inspection, including preparation and review of plans,
plans and specifications by the Engineer, review by the Planner and Attorney,
and any other costs of a similar nature upon receipt of a statement therefrom
from the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer. This payment shall be in addition
to the subdivision fee stated and provided for.
(1994 Code, § 13-1.3) (Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 156.19 DRAWING REQUIREMENTS.
   The following data shall be required on or incorporated into all exhibits
submitted in conjunction with this application.
   (A)   Sketch plans.
      (1)   Tract boundaries;
      (2)   North point and scale;
      (3)   Streets on and adjacent to the tract;
      (4)   Significant topographical and physical features;
      (5)   Proposed general street layout; and
      (6)   Proposed general lot layout with appropriate lot sizes.
   (B)   Preliminary plat.
      (1)   Proposed name of subdivision, which name shall not duplicate or be
similar to the name of any other plat within the county;
      (2)   Legal description;
      (3)   Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider, surveyor and designer
of the plat; if the subdivider is not the fee owner of land, the subdivider
shall submit the written consent of the fee owner to the filing of the
preliminary plat;
      (4)   Graphic scale of not more than 100 feet to an inch;
      (5)   North point;
      (6)   Date of preparation;
      (7)   Certification by surveyor certifying to the correctness of the
boundary survey;
      (8)   Boundary line of proposed subdivision clearly indicated;
      (9)   Existing zoning classification, if any;
      (10)   Proposed zoning classification, if to be revised;
      (11)   Total approximate acreage;
      (12)   Location, width and names of all existing or previously platted
streets or other public rights-of-way showing type, width and condition of
improvements, if any, railroad and utility rights-of- way, parks and other
public spaces, permanent buildings and structures, and easements, all within a
distance of 100 feet beyond the tract boundaries; such data as street grades,
invert elevations and locations of catch basins, manholes and hydrants,
sanitary sewer lines and water mains, if any;
      (13)   Boundary lines of adjoining subdivided or undivided land within
100 feet, identifying by name and ownership all such lands;
      (14)   Topographic data, including contours at vertical intervals of not
more than two feet, watercourses, marshes, wooded areas, rock out-croppings,
power transmission poles and lines and other significant features;
      (15)   All elevations, topography and vertical control data shall be
adjusted to U.S. geodetic survey data;
      (16)   Locations, dimensions and purpose of any easements;
      (17)   An identification system for all lots and blocks;
      (18)   Sites, if any, to be reserved for parks, walkways or other public
uses and the areas in acres thereof;
      (19)   Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites with the
scaled width of the lot shown at the setback line;
      (20)   Protective or restrictive covenants, if any, in a form for
recording on a separate sheet;
      (21)   Other information such as certificates, affidavits, endorsements,
photographs or data as may be required by the Park/Planning Commission, on a
separate sheet;
      (22)   Typical street sections together with centerline profiles of
proposed grades on a separate sheet;
      (23)   Soil survey map information and soil borings, if required by
Engineer;
      (24)   Source of water supply;
      (25)   Statement of sewage disposal methods;
      (26)   Plans or program for storm water, drainage and flood control;
      (27)   Approximate area in square feet and dimensions of all lots;
      (28)   Street names; and
      (29)   Landscape and erosion control plan.
   (C)   Final plat.
      (1)   The final plat shall be on sheets 20 inches wide and 30 inches long
and shall be at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet unless specific approval
for the use of a different size or scale is granted and shall in all other
respects conform with the applicable statutes of the state and with the
requirements of the county’s Surveyor’s office.
      (2)   For large subdivisions, the final plat may be submitted for
approval progressively in contiguous sections of the preliminary plat, each of
which is satisfactory to the Council.
      (3)   The subdivider shall provide the city one reproducible intermediate
copy of the final plat (this may be sepia intermediate) on which the computed
net area of each individual lot has been indicated to the nearest square foot.
This intermediate copy shall be signed and certified by a registered land
surveyor or professional engineer that the areas shown thereon are true and
correct and that the calculations were made by him or her, or under their
direct supervision.
(1994 Code, § 13-1.4) (Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 156.20 ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS.
   (A)   If, within the proposed development, there is an area which is
designated as “environmentally sensitive”, the developer must file a
development plan for the development in addition to a preliminary plat. The
elements of the development plan shall contain all of the following required
information.
      (1)   Names and addresses of the subdivider and designer making the plat;
      (2)   Graphic scale of plat, not less than one inch to 100 feet, with
north indicated on the development proposal which will show all dimensions;
      (3)   Location of all existing buildings and structures on the site;
      (4)   Location of all proposed buildings and structures on the site;
      (5)   Location and size of all required parking spaces;
      (6)   Location and names of all proposed streets, curb cuts, driveways,
access roads, loading areas and sidewalks;
      (7)   Landscaping plan including location, size and type of proposed
planting materials;
      (8)   Indication of location, size and type of storage facilities for the
storage of trash and other waste materials;
      (9)   Design layout and size of all proposed signs;
      (10)   Grading and drainage plans of the proposed site showing in detail
existing topography at two-foot contour intervals on preliminary plat only;
      (11)   Detailed soils analysis which shows that the environmentally
sensitive area is suitable for development (soil borings can be required by the
City Engineer); and
      (12)   Area must be identified and labeled as an “environmentally
sensitive area” on the preliminary plat and is subject to a fee as set forth in
the annual fee schedule in addition to the fees required for the preliminary
plat.
   (B)   Note: the plan is subject to approval by the City Engineer and City
Planner as well as the Park/Planning Commission and City Council.
(1994 Code, § 13-1.5) (Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 156.21 CONDITIONS REQUIRING PLATTING.
   (A)   Any tract of land to be divided into three or more parcels shall be
subdivided by means of a record plat.
   (B)   Any tract of land to be used for purposes other than single-family
dwellings shall be platted prior to the issuance of a building permit
regardless of whether or not the tract of land is to be divided into three or
more separate parcels.
(1994 Code, § 13-1.6) (Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
DESIGN STANDARDS AND IMPROVEMENTS
§ 156.35 GENERAL.
   The following design standards shall apply to all subdivisions submitted
under this chapter.
(1994 Code, § 13-1.7) (Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 156.36 STREETS.
   (A)   The arrangement, character, width and location of all streets shall
conform to the existing comprehensive/master plan or street layout plan and
shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets,
topographic conditions, public convenience and safety, and to their appropriate
relationship to the proposed use of the land to be served by such streets.
   (B)   Where streets are not shown on a master plan, the arrangement in the
subdivision shall either:
      (1)   Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing
principal streets and surrounding areas; or
      (2)   Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the
Council to meet a particular situation where topographic or other conditions
make continuance of or conformance to existing streets impractical.
   (C)   Minor streets shall be so arranged that their use by through traffic
will be discouraged.
   (D)   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial
street, the Council may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with
screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear property
line, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of
residential property and to afford separation of through and local traffic. The
subdivider shall only be required to pay for his or her appropriate share of
the cost of an arterial street as determined by the assessment policies of the
city.
   (E)   Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or
limited access highway right-of-way, the Council may require a street
approximately parallel to and on each side of such right- of-way at a distance
suitable for the appropriate use of intervening land, as for park purposes and
residential districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard
for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.
   (F)   Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited,
except where the control is placed under city jurisdiction under conditions
approved by the Council.
   (G)   Jogs in streets with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shall be
avoided.
   (H)   A tangent of at least 100 feet shall be introduced between reverse
horizontal curves on arterial and collector streets.
   (I)   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles, and no streets shall intersect any other street at less than 60
degrees. Intersections of more than four corners are prohibited.
   (J)   The Council may require that sight easements be provided at street
intersections to ensure a sight distance of not less than 150 feet for minor
and collector streets and a greater radii as the Engineer shall determine for
heavier traveled streets. The Council may permit property lines at street
intersections to be rounded with a radius sufficient to ensure the above stated
distance in lieu of the sight easement.
   (K)   All cul-de-sacs and minor streets built by the developer shall be
designed for a minimum seven- ton axle load or such load as set forth in the
current Minnesota Department of Transportation’s (MnDOT) Road Design Manual (§
291.5 at the date of this chapter). Thoroughfare streets, which are expected to
carry heavier traffic, shall be designed for a nine-ton load, or current MnDOT
manual specifications. Minimum requirements of the city are shown in division
(M) of this section. This drawing shall be considered a part of these
standards. Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed 600 feet in length as measured along
the centerline from the intersection of origin to the end of the right-of-way.
   (L)   When submitting street plans to the city for approval, the developer
shall submit typical design sections showing the depth and type of the base to
be constructed, the thickness and type of wearing surface to be used, the width
of pavement planned and the general dimensions of the roadway showing crown and
related information as determined by the City Engineer to ensure adequate
review of said street plans.
   (M)   Minimum pavement width for streets built by the developer shall be as
shown in the following table.
 
Classification  Right-of-Way Width  Paved Roadway Width  Ton Loading (tons)
                (ft.)               (ft.)
Arterial        100                 44                   9
Collector/major 80                  36                   9
Cul-de-sac      50                  30                   7
Minor           60                  30                   7
 
   (N)   The street plan proposed by the developer shall meet all of the
requirements of the city’s comprehensive plan for thoroughfares. Requirements
to be met include those for alignment, right-of-way width, layout of
intersections and related requirements. In submitting his or her proposed
street plan, the developer shall provide drawings and engineering details
showing the horizontal alignment and vertical grades planned for each
individual street. Plans and profile elevations datum for the street grades
shall be given in reference to the U.S. Geodetic Survey 1929 or the 5th General
Adjustment.
   (O)   All underground utilities, street grading and compacted road base
shall be in place before building permits will be issued to the abutting
property.
   (P)   Street rights-of-way shall not be planned so as to cause hardship to
owners of adjoining property.
(1994 Code, § 13-1.7) (Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 156.37 SIDEWALKS AND TRAILWAYS.
   Where required by the city, sidewalks shall be provided on one or both sides
of all collector and major streets and in such other areas as are necessary to
adequately provide for the safety and welfare of pedestrians. The Council may
require sidewalks or trailways in addition to those shown on the city’s
comprehensive sidewalks and trails plan.
(1994 Code, § 13-1.7) (Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 156.38 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Utility easements shall be provided where needed across lots or
centered on rear or side lot lines where necessary and shall total at least ten
feet wide.
   (B)   (1)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage
easement conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse.
      (2)   Additional easement width may be required for maintenance or
construction of the watercourse.
   (C)   Where a pond or lake exists or is created in a subdivision, there
shall be provided a drainage easement conforming substantially with the
expected high water line of the waterbody. Lots shall be platted to include the
waterbody on one or more lots, but in no case shall a separate lot be created
for the waterbody alone in such a manner as to preclude the construction of a
structure thereon equal in size or value to the structures in the remainder of
the plat.
   (D)   (1)   The city shall apply National Urban Run-Off Program (NURP)
standards for the design of required storm water ponds. A copy of said
standards is on file in the office of the City Engineer.
      (2)   Subdivision development shall conform to the current MPCA storm
water management regulations to reduce non-point source pollution loadings in
storm water run-off. A copy of said standards is on file in the office of the
City Engineer.
(1994 Code, § 13-1.7) (Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 156.39 BLOCKS.
   (A)   Length, width and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard
to the following:
      (1)   Provisions of adequate building sites suitable to the needs of the
use contemplated;
      (2)   Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions;
      (3)   Need for convenient access, circulation control and safety of
street traffic; and
      (4)   Limitation and opportunities of topography.
   (B)   Block lengths shall not exceed 1,800 feet or be less than 400 feet
unless limited by property ownership or difficult topographic features.
   (C)   Pedestrian crosswalks, not less than ten feet wide, shall be required
where deemed essential to provide circulation of access to schools,
playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities.
(1994 Code, § 13-1.7) (Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 156.40 LOTS.
   (A)   The lot size, width and depth shall be appropriate for the location of
the subdivision and for the type of development and shall be in accordance with
the applicable zoning regulations.
   (B)   Depth and width of properties reserved for multiple commercial and
industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for off-street parking and
service facilities as contemplated.
   (C)   Corner lots for residential use shall have an extra width to permit
appropriate building setbacks from and orientation to both streets.
   (D)   Subdivision shall be laid out in such a manner as to provide each lot
with satisfactory access to a public street.
   (E)   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided, except
where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic
arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A
planting screen easement of at least ten feet in width shall be provided along
any line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantaged use
where required by the city.
   (F)   Side lot lines shall wherever possible be substantially at right
angles to street lines or radial from the radius point in the case of a cul-de-
sac or curved street.
   (G)   In the subdividing of land, regard shall be shown for all natural
features, including tree growth, watercourses, historic places and similar
amenities of the area, which if preserved will add attractiveness and stability
to the area. Such irreplaceable asset shall be preserved in the design of the
subdivision to the extent possible.
   (H)   Lot remnants which are below minimum lot area or dimension must be
added to adjacent or surrounding lots rather than to be allowed to remain as an
unusable outlot or parcel unless the subdivider can show acceptable plans for
the future use of such remnants.
(1994 Code, § 13-1.7) (Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 156.41 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
   The following required improvements shall be installed in accordance with
the engineering standards and specifications which have been or may in the
future be adopted by the Council and filed with the City Administrator/Clerk/
Treasurer and/or Engineer. Where standards and specifications have not been
adopted, the improvement shall be made in accordance with good engineering
practices and in all cases must meet with the approval of the Engineer.
   (A)   Survey monuments.
      (1)   Survey monuments consisting of one-inch diameter iron pipe or
approved equal shall be placed at all block corners, angles, points, points
curve and lot corners and also at any other locations required by state
statutes; and
      (2)   No building permit shall be issued for any particular lot unless
said monuments have been placed on that lot as evidenced by certification by a
registered land surveyor.
   (B)   Utility improvements.
      (1)   Sanitary sewer collection systems. Where available, municipal sewer
facilities shall be provided where practicable and acceptable. The use of
private systems shall be prohibited.
      (2)   Water distribution systems. Where available, municipal water
facilities shall be provided for the subdivision. The use of private water
supplies shall be prohibited.
      (3)   Other facilities, associated easements. Storm sewers, open drainage
or other facilities and associated easements shall be installed or provided as
will adequately provide for the drainage of surface waters.
      (4)   Construction. Subdividers shall provide for the construction of all
streets, alleys and sidewalks within the subdivision.
      (5)   Concrete curbs. All street curbs constructed in new subdivisions
shall be concrete curbs.
      (6)   Landscaping. Landscaping as required by this chapter or the plat
review process.
   (C)   Funding.
      (1)   Before a final plat is signed by the proper city officials, the
intentions of the subdivider shall be guaranteed by submitting either a
petition requesting the city to install said improvements or by entering into
an agreement and posting an acceptable performance bond or cash escrow to
ensure that the subdivider shall install, by private contract with competent
contractors subject to approval by the city, all improvements required in the
subdivision.
      (2)   The petition shall be the standard city petition form for the
installation of the improvements whereby the city agrees to design and install
the improvement facilities and the petitioner agrees to pay the assessments
against the benefitted property.
      (3)   The performance bond or cash escrow shall be equal to one and one-
half times the estimated cost of the required improvements. The subdivided
engineer shall submit a detailed cost estimate to the City Engineer for his or
her approval. If the improvements are not completed within two years of the
date of the development performance bond or cash escrow agreement, or within
such extended period as approved by the Council, all amounts held under the
escrow agreement or development performance bond shall be turned over and
delivered to the city and applied to the cost of the required improvements. Any
balance remaining after such improvements have been made shall be returned to
the subdivider.
(1994 Code, § 13-1.8) (Ord. passed 12-17-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
ADMINISTRATION
§ 156.55 HARDSHIP VARIANCE OR WAIVER.
   (A)   General. Where the Council finds that extraordinary hardships may
result from strict compliance with one or more portions of this chapter, it may
vary or waive those portions of the section upon specific request by the
subdivider so that substantial justice may be done and the public interests
secured. This is provided that such variation or waiver will not have the
effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the code or of the master plan.
A request for such variance shall be submitted in writing at the time the
preliminary plat is filed with the city.
   (B)   Conditions of variance. In granting variance and modifications, the
Council may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure
substantially the objective of the standards or requirements so varied or
modified.
(1994 Code, § 13-1.9) (Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 156.56 BUILDING PERMIT.
   (A)   General. Building permits shall not be issued for construction or
improvement on any land required to be subdivided until all requirements of
this chapter have been fully complied with.
   (B)   Survey required.
      (1)   Building permits shall not be issued until a certificate of survey
of that lot or tract of land has been submitted to the Building Inspector and/
or City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer. Said certificate shall show the proposed
building size and location by dimensions.
      (2)   Constructed buildings shall not be occupied until such time as the
city has received assurance from the subdivider, the builder or the owner of
such structure that the location of said building is in conformance with all
setback regulations provided for in this chapter and in any other codes or
regulations of the city. Said assurance shall be in the form of a signed and
certified copy of a survey on which the land surveyor of the subdivider has
indicated critical dimensions sufficient to prove that the location of such
structure conforms with city ordinances, codes and regulations.
      (3)   Building permits shall not be issued for any structure until the
city has been assured in writing or by a statement on the certificate that the
structure shall be placed in such a location and at such an elevation that it
will be practicable to service the structure to the existing or proposed
sanitary sewer system.
   (C)   Occupancy permit. No building shall be occupied, following
construction after issuance of a building permit, unless an occupancy permit is
issued by the Building Inspector.
(1994 Code, § 13-1.10) (Ord. passed 12-17-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.57 MINOR SUBDIVISION; REVIEW.
   (A)   General. In the case of a subdivision resulting in no more than two
parcels, lots or tracts being created, situated in a locality where conditions
are well defined, the City Council may exempt the subdivider from complying
with some of the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Application procedure. Each subdivider seeking to create a minor
subdivision may apply to the city for approval of a minor subdivision. Each
application shall meet the following requirements:
      (1)   It shall be submitted on an application form provided by the city;
      (2)   An application fee of as set forth in the annual fee schedule shall
be included with the application; and
      (3)   Submission of a survey prepared by a registered land surveyor
indicating the original lot, tract or parcel and the proposed subdivision. The
survey shall show the dimensions of said property as presently existing and
also as divided. A written legal description of the separately described tract
or tracts which will result from the proposed subdivision shall be filed with
said survey.
   (C)   City review. After receipt of the application, the City Administrator/
Clerk/Treasurer shall examine it and if it appears to the City Administrator/
Clerk/Treasurer that the proposed division will result in two lots, tracts or
parcels, each of which shall have not less than the minimum dimensions required
to meet the minimum lot area and other dimensional requirements specified in
Ch. 157 of this code of ordinances for the particular zoning classification in
which the property exists and the lots, tracts or parcels to be created shall
not be in violation of any other ordinance then the City Administrator/Clerk/
Treasurer shall refer the application to the City Council for review. If the
proposed subdivision does not meet the dimensional requirements of
Ch. 157 of this code of ordinances or other provisions of the ordinances, then
the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall refer the matter to the Park/
Planning Commission for review.
   (D)   Park/Planning Commission review. if the application is referred to the
Park/Planning Commission for review, the Park/Planning Commission shall review
said application and determine the extent to which the lots, tracts or parcels
created by the proposed division are compatible in area, dimension, road
frontage and contour with the surrounding lots, tracts or parcels. The Park/
Planning Commission shall hold such public hearings as it deems appropriate.
Within 30 days of the Park/Planning Commission meeting reviewing said
application, the Park/Planning Commission shall issue its report and
recommendation to the City Council which shall then review the application and
the Park/Planning Commission report.
(1994 Code, § 13-1.11) (Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
CHAPTER 157: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
157.001   Intent and purpose
   
157.002   Scope of regulations
   
157.003   Definitions
Zoning Districts
   
157.015   General district regulations
   
157.016   R-1 Single-Family (Low Density) Residential District
   
157.017   R-2 Multi-Family Residential (Medium Density) District
   
157.018   R-6 Multi-Family Residential (High Density) District
   
157.019   B-2 Highway Commercial Business District
   
157.020   MU-BR Mixed Use - Business Residential District
   
157.021   MU-BI Mixed Use - Business Industrial District
   
157.022   I Industrial District
   
157.023   Table of land uses
Planned Unit Developments
   
157.035   Intent and purpose
   
157.036   Standards
   
157.037   Procedures for processing a PUD
   
157.038   Purpose and interpretation
   
157.039   Separability
   
157.040   Amendments
   
157.041   Conditions
   
157.042   Definitions
Conditions and Restrictions
   
157.055   Residential uses
   
157.056   Commercial/industrial uses
   
157.057   Civic uses
   
157.058   Additional requirements
Off-Street Parking, Access and Loading
   
157.070   Off-street parking regulations
   
157.071   Traffic access regulations
   
157.072   Loading regulations
   
157.073   Parking motor vehicles, machinery and equipment (such as tractors and
bobcats), trailers and boats for sale
Landscaping and Screening
   
157.085   General
   
157.086   Minimum standards for residential zoning districts
   
157.087   Minimum standards for business and industrial zoning districts
   
157.088   Landscaping requirements applicable to all districts
   
157.089   Size and species of plantings
Supplementary Regulations
   
157.100   Architectural standards
   
157.101   Exceptions from height limitation
   
157.102   Accessory and utility buildings
   
157.103   Lots of record
   
157.104   Affordable housing and lots
   
157.105   Number of principal buildings on a lot
   
157.106   Fences
   
157.107   Outdoor storage
   
157.108   Supplementary yard regulations
   
157.109   Fallout shelters
   
157.110   Private utility systems
   
157.111   Antennas and towers
   
157.112   Non-conforming buildings, structures and uses
   
157.113   Performance standards; nuisances, hazards and drainage
   
157.114   Farming
   
157.115   Mining
   
157.116   Land reclamation
   
157.117   Grading
   
157.118   Motor fuel stations and convenience stores
   
157.119   Drive-in establishments
Sexually-Oriented Businesses
   
157.135   Purpose and findings
   
157.136   Definitions
   
157.137   Classification
   
157.138   License required
   
157.139   Issuance of license
   
157.140   Fees
   
157.141   Inspections
   
157.142   Expiration of license
   
157.143   Suspension of license
   
157.144   Revocation of license
   
157.145   Transfer of license
   
157.146   Locations
   
157.147   Adult motels
   
157.148   Sexually-explicit films, videos or live entertainment in viewing
rooms
   
157.149   Escort agencies
   
157.150   Nude model studios
   
157.151   Public nudity
   
157.152   Children prohibited
   
157.153   Exemptions
Administration and Enforcement
   
157.165   Enforcement Officer; duties
   
157.166   Zoning Board of Appeals
   
157.167   Variances
   
157.168   Amendments; rezoning amendments
   
157.169   Conditional use permits
   
157.170   Site plan review procedure
 
   
157.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 157.001 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   This chapter is adopted for the following purposes:
   (A)   To promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare
of the people;
   (B)   To divide the city into zones or districts restricting and regulating
therein, the location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration and
use of buildings, structures and land for residence, business, manufacturing
and other specified uses;
   (C)   To protect the character and stability of the residential, business
and manufacturing areas within the city and to promote the orderly development
of such areas;
   (D)   To provide adequate light, air, privacy and convenience of access to
property;
   (E)   To regulate the intensity of use of lot areas, and to determine the
area of open spaces surrounding buildings, necessary to provide adequate light
and air and to protect the public health;
   (F)   To protect the quality of natural resources;
   (G)   To establish building lines and the location of buildings designed for
residential, business, manufacturing or other uses within such areas;
   (H)   To establish reasonable standards to which buildings or structures
shall conform;
   (I)   To prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the
character of development or intended uses within specified zoning districts;
   (J)   To limit congestion in the public streets and protect the health,
safety and general welfare by providing for the off-street parking of motor
vehicles and the loading and unloading of commercial vehicles;
   (K)   To protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards in
the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare;
   (L)   To conserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the
city;
   (M)   To provide for the elimination of non-conforming uses of land,
buildings and structures which are adversely affecting the character and value
of development within each district; and
   (N)   To define the limit of the powers and duties of the administrative
officers and bodies as provided herein.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.002 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   Within each zoning district, no permitted use, permitted accessory use, uses
permitted with special restrictions or conditional use shall be allowed unless
it is specifically listed or otherwise noted.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A detached structure larger than 200 square feet,
subordinate to and serving the principal structure on the same lot.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use incidental to, and on the same lot as, a principal use.
   ADULT DAY CARE FACILITY. Care facilities as licensed by the state.
   ASSEMBLY. The act of connecting together the parts of something (such as a
machine).
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR. General repair, rebuilding, body work, frame work, major
painting service, replacement of or repair of parts, upholstering and other
work similar to and incidental to the repair of automobiles, trucks and
trailers.
   AUTO REDUCTION YARD. A lot or yard where three or more unlicensed vehicles
or the remains thereof are kept for the purpose of dismantling, sale of parts
or scrap, storage or abandonment.
   BASEMENT. A portion of the building located wholly or partially underground,
but having at least one-half of its floor to ceiling height below the grade of
the adjoining ground.
   BLOCK. An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by
streets, exterior boundary lines of the subdivision and/or bodies of water.
   BOARDING HOUSE. A building, other than a hotel or motel where, for
compensation and pre-arrangement, meals and lodging are provided.
   BOULEVARD. The portion of a street right-of-way between the curb or curb
line and the property line.
   BUILDING. A structure which may provide shelter and enclosure for persons,
chattels or animals and, when such structure is divided by party walls without
openings, each portion so formed and separated shall be deemed to be a separate
BUILDING.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the average elevation of the
adjoining ground level to the top of the highest point of the structure.
   CHURCH. A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where
persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which building, together
with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a
religious body organized to sustain public worship.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. A compilation of policy statements, goals, standards and
maps for guiding the physical, social and economic development, both private
and public, of the city.
   CONTRACTOR’S YARD. Storage of materials, equipment, machinery and the like
for business use on or off site.
   DAY CARE NURSERY. A building or structure where care, protection and
supervision of children are provided for a fee as licensed by the state and in
accordance with this chapter.
   DECK. A structure which is either freestanding or attached to a principal or
accessory building, constructed at grade or above grade, intended or designed
for use as outdoor living space and unenclosed by solid or non-solid walls or a
roof.
   DRIVE-IN FACILITY. An establishment that, by design of physical facilities
or by service or packaging procedures, encourages or permits customers to
receive a service or obtain a product that may be used or consumed in a motor
vehicle on the premises or to be entertained while remaining in an automobile.
   DWELLING. A building or portion thereof used exclusively for residential
purposes, including one-family, two-family, townhouse and multiple-family
dwellings, but not including hotels and boarding and lodging houses.
   DWELLING, MOBILE HOME. A transportable, single-family dwelling suitable for
year-round occupancy and containing the same water supply, waste disposal and
electric conveniences as permanent housing.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building having three or more dwelling units.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. One dwelling unit having open space on all four
sides.
   DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE. A dwelling unit attached to other dwelling units by
common walls, side by side, extending from the foundation to the roof and with
each dwelling unit having a separate entrance from outside the building.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building having two dwelling units.
   ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS. Areas that have 12% or greater slopes, land
or soil subject to flooding, wetlands (including streams, ditches, drainage
ways, ponds and marshes), high water tables and woods and soils that are
unsuitable for building sites. In the areas where severe development
limitations exist, as determined by the city, there shall be detailed
examination and careful study before any type of development is allowed to
proceed. The goal is to provide for the orderly and harmonious physical
development of the city with respect to the natural amenities that nature has
provided.
   FAMILY UNIT. An individual or two or more persons living together as a
single housekeeping unit and maintaining a common household.
   FENCE. A structure, other than a building, which is a barrier and used as a
boundary or means of protection or confinement.
   FINAL PLAT. The final map and/or plan and/or record of a subdivision and any
accompanying material presented material to the City Council for approval and
which, if approved, will be duly filed with the county’s Register of Deeds.
Said plat must conform to all state laws.
   GARAGE. A building for the private use of the owner or occupant of a
principal building situated on the same lot of the principal building for the
storage of motor vehicles with no facilities for mechanical service or repair
of a commercial or public nature.
   GENERAL FARMING. A parcel of land, under one ownership, used primarily for
the commercial, soil-dependent cultivation of agricultural crop production and/
or for the raising of livestock. The term “one ownership” shall include an
individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership,
association or two or more persons having a joint or common interest in the
land.
   GENERAL FLOOR PLANS. A graphic representation of the anticipated utilization
of the floor area within a building, but not necessarily being as detailed as
are construction plans.
   HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation or profession carried on by a member of the
immediate family residing on the premises that meet the following criteria:
      (1)   The occupation is conducted within the principal structure;
      (2)   Evidence of the occupation is not visible from the street;
      (3)   Only signs permitted in the respective residential district are
visible from the street;
      (4)   No stock in trade is stored on the premises;
      (5)   No over-the-counter retail sales are involved; and
      (6)   Entrance to the home occupation is gained from within the structure
and no separate entrance is used.
   HOME OCCUPATION, CONDITIONAL. Any occupation or profession carried on by a
member of the immediate family residing on the premises that meet the criteria
of a home occupation and carry additional conditions as listed in §§ 157.055
through
157.058 of this chapter.
   HOTEL. A building containing guest rooms in which lodging is provided and
which are open to either transient or permanent guests, in which no provision
is made for cooking in the guest rooms and in which access is provided through
an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge.
   IMPROVEMENTS. The construction or installation of public or private
utilities including, but not limited to, potable water, sanitary sewer systems,
storm sewers, roads and other barricades, trees and other plantings, lighting,
fuel or energy and the transmission thereof, transportation systems or
facilities connected therewith and communication systems which are necessary,
desirable or convenient in the maintenance of the health, safety and the
general welfare.
   JUNK YARD. A parcel of land on which waste material or inoperative vehicles
and other machinery are collected, stored, salvaged or sold.
   LANDSCAPING. Plantings such as trees, grass, bushes and shrubs.
   LOT (OF RECORD). A lot that has had its existence, location and dimensions
legally recorded or registered in a deed or on a plat.
   LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the
rear lot line.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. The boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated
public street and, in the case of a corner lot, it shall be the shortest
dimension on a public street.
   LOT LINE, REAR. The boundary of a lot which is opposite the front lot line.
If the rear lot line is less than ten feet in length or if the lot forms a
point at the rear, the REAR LOT LINE shall be a line ten feet in length within
the lot, parallel to the front lot line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a
rear lot line.
   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured at the
required front setback.
   MINING. The extraction of sand, gravel, rock, soil or other material from
the land in the amount of 400 cubic yards or more and the removal thereof from
the site. The only exclusion from this definition should be removal of minerals
associated with the construction of a building for which a building permit has
been issued.
   MOTEL. A facility offering lodging accommodations for those traveling by car
usually with easy access from each room to an area for cars.
   MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL. A building or area in which freight brought by motor
truck is transferred and/or stored for movement.
   MOTOR FUEL STATION. A retail place of business engaged primarily in the sale
of motor fuels. Accessory services may include the sale of petroleum products,
sale and servicing of tires, batteries, automotive accessories and replacement
items, washing and lubrication services and the performance of minor automotive
maintenance and repair.
   MOTOR FUEL STATION CONVENIENCE STORE. A store operated in conjunction with a
motor fuel station offering a limited selection of food and other products and
staying open for longer hours at a convenient location.
   NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE. A structure that does not meet the requirements of
the zoning district in which it is located due to the enactment of this chapter
or any amendment thereto, but that lawfully existed as of the date of its
construction or placement.
   NON-CONFORMING USE. A use that does not meet the requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located due to the enactment of this chapter or any
amendment thereto, but that was a lawful use as of the date it was first
commenced.
   NOXIOUS MATTER. Any substance capable of causing injury to living organisms
or of causing detrimental effects on the physical or economic well-being of
individuals.
   OFF-STREET PARKING. A maintained area, other than on a public street or
right-of-way, for the storage of an automobile.
   OPEN SALES LOT. Land devoted to the display of goods for sale, rent, trade
or lease when such goods are not normally kept within a building during the
business day.
   OWNER. Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity having proprietary interest in the
land.
   PERFORMANCE STANDARDS. Standards that are established to assure that
development will not be a detriment to the public health, safety and general
welfare of the municipality.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). A self-contained development, sometimes with
a mixture of housing types and densities, in which the subdivision and zoning
controls are applied to the project as a whole rather than to individual lots,
as in most subdivisions. Therefore, densities are calculated for the entire
development, usually permitting a trade-off between clustering of houses and
provision of common open space.
   PORTABLE STORAGE/SHIPPING CONTAINERS. Any container designed to store or
ship personal property and which is typically rented to owners or occupants of
residences and intended to be delivered, temporarily used, and removed by
truck.
   PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE. A building in which the primary use of the lot on which
the building is located is conducted.
   PUBLIC SERVICE INSTALLATION. Public utility structures including, but not
limited to, transformers, lift stations, water towers and public utility
buildings.
   PUMP SETBACK. The distance from the street right-of-way line to the center
of a pump island at a motor fuel station measured as perpendicular from the
right-of-way.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. An area or strip of land, either public or private, on which
an irrevocable right-of-passage has been recorded for the use of vehicles or
pedestrians or both.
   SHELTER, FALLOUT. Any portion of a structure intended to provide human
protection during periods of danger from nuclear radiation, blasts, storms or
other emergencies.
   SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between a structure and the nearest
property line or right-of-way line.
   SETBACK, FRONT. The shortest horizontal distance from the forward most point
of a building to the nearest point on the front lot line.
   SETBACK, REAR. The shortest horizontal distance from any part of a building
to the nearest point on a rear lot line.
   SETBACK, SIDE. The shortest horizontal distance from any part of a building
to the nearest point on a side lot line.
   SETBACK, STREET SIDE. The shortest horizontal distance from any part of a
building to the nearest point on a side lot line that adjoins a street.
   SIGN. Any written announcement used to advertise or promote the interest of
any person when displayed or placed out of doors in view of the general public.
   SIGN, BILLBOARD. A sign that is not located on the premises containing the
use or uses which are promoted by such sign.
   SIGN, BUSINESS. A sign which directs attention to a business or profession
or to a commodity offered on the premises on which the sign is located, whether
attached to or detached from a building.
   SIGN, FLASHING. An illuminated sign in which the light is not maintained
constant in intensity or color at all times in which the sign is in use.
   SIGN, GROSS AREA. The total area, including the frame, if any, of the
display. Each surface so utilized shall be measured as a separate sign; except
that, only one face of a double-faced sign shall be measured in computing the
gross area.
   SIGN, ILLUMINATED. Any sign which is illuminated by electric lights or
luminous tubes as an integral part of the attractive effect.
   SIGN, NAMEPLATE. Any sign which states the name or address, or both, of the
business where the sign is placed, or the name and address of the occupant or a
directory listing the name, addresses and businesses of occupants.
   STREET. A public or private thoroughfare used, or intended to be used, for
passage or travel by motor vehicles.
   STRUCTURE. Anything built or constructed, an edifice or building of any
kind, or any piece of work composed of parts joined together in some definite
manner, except parking lots and driveways.
   THROUGH LOT. Any lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting two
substantially parallel streets and which is not a corner lot. For purposes of
applying this definition to this chapter, both street lines shall be considered
as front lot lines.
   TRUCK STOP. Any motor fuel station devoted primarily to the needs of over-
the-road trucking and which shall include eating and/or sleeping facilities and
located within 500 feet of a major arterial road.
   USE, CONDITIONAL. Those occupations, vocations, skills, arts, businesses,
professions or uses specifically designated in each zoning use district, which
for the respective conduct or performance in such designated use districts may
require reasonable, but special, peculiar, unusual or extraordinary
limitations, facilities, plans, structures, thoroughfares, conditions,
modification or regulations in said district for the promotion and preservation
of the general public welfare, health or safety therein and in the county and,
therefore, may be permitted in said district only by a conditional use permit
(CUP).
   USE, PERMITTED. A use which conforms with the requirements of the zoning
district within which it is located.
   USE, PRINCIPAL. The primary use of land or structures as distinguished from
accessory uses.
   UTILITY BUILDING. An accessory building which is not usable for the storage
of vehicles, is one-story in nature, is used or intended for the storage of
hobby tools, garden equipment and the like is detached from the principal
structure, is 200 square feet or smaller, and which is naturally and normally
incidental to the principal dwelling structure.
   VARIANCE. Any modification or variation of official controls where it is
determined that because of hardship or practical difficulty, strict enforcement
of official control is impractical.
   VEHICLE STORAGE. Storage of automobiles and/or recreational vehicles in a
rented or leased space or in a display area when those automobiles and/or
recreational vehicles are for sale on premises.
   WAREHOUSING. The storage of materials or equipment within an enclosed
building.
   YARD. A required open space on a lot, which is unoccupied and unobstructed
by any structure.
   ZONING DISTRICT. An area of the city designated in the chapter text and
delineated on the zoning map, in which requirements for the use of land and
building and development standards are prescribed.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014; Ord. 4, passed 4-27-2016; Ord. 2025-01, passed 7-2-
2025)
ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 157.015 GENERAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Establishment of districts. For purposes of this chapter, the city
shall be divided into the following districts:
      (1)   R-1, Single-Family Residential District;
      (2)   R-2, Two-Family Residential District;
      (3)   R-6, Multiple-Family Residential District;
      (4)   B-2, Highway Commercial Business District;
      (5)   MU-BR, Mixed Use - Business Residential District;
      (6)   MU-BI, Mixed Use - Business Industrial District;
      (7)   I, General Industrial District; and
      (8)   PUD, Planned Unit Development.
   (B)   Zoning district map. The boundaries of these districts are hereby
defined and established as shown on the zoning district map which accompanies
this chapter. Said map with all explanatory matter thereon is hereby made a
part of this chapter. See zoning map in the following section.
   (C)   Interpretation of district boundaries. Where uncertainty exists with
respect to the boundaries of any zoning district indicated on the zoning
district map, the following rules shall apply.
      (1)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
streets or highways shall be construed as following the centerlines of streets
or highways.
      (2)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following lot lines shall be
construed as following such lot lines.
      (3)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following city boundary lines
shall be construed as following such city boundaries.
      (4)   Boundaries indicated as approximately parallel to the centerlines
of streets or highways shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such
distance therefrom as may be indicated on the zoning districts map. If no
distance is given, such dimensions shall be determined by the use of the scale
shown on the zoning district map.
      (5)   Boundaries following the shoreline of a stream, lake or other body
of water shall be construed to follow the ordinary high water elevation and in
the event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the high
water elevation. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline
of streams, rivers, channels or other bodies of water shall be construed to
follow such centerlines.
      (6)   Where the application of the aforementioned rules leaves a
reasonable doubt as to the boundaries between two districts, the regulations of
the more restrictive district shall govern the entire parcel in question,
unless otherwise determined by the City Council after recommendation from the
Park/Planning Commission.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.016 R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY (LOW DENSITY) RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Intent and purpose. To provide areas primarily intended for single-
family residential development as designated by the comprehensive plan.
   (B)   Comprehensive plan allowable density. The density range in the R-
1 District shall be two to three units per net acre.
      (1)   Permitted uses: see Land Use Table;
      (2)   Permitted accessory uses: gazebos, decks, accessory structures,
utility buildings 144 square feet or smaller, detached private garages, fences,
off-street parking, nameplate signs, swimming pools;
      (3)   Uses permitted with special restrictions: see Land Use Table;
      (4)   Uses permitted by conditional use permit (CUP subject to procedures
in §
157.169 of this chapter): see Land Use Table. The City Council may require
additional conditions for any CUP to preserve the public welfare, health and
safety of the community; and
      (5)   Lot requirements: see §
157.058 of this chapter. Refer to §§
157.100 through
157.119 of this chapter for exceptions.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014; Ord. 4, passed 4-27-2016)
§ 157.017 R-2 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (MEDIUM DENSITY) DISTRICT.
   (A)   Intent and purpose. To provide areas primarily intended for two-family
or medium density multi-family residential development as designated by the
comprehensive plan.
   (B)   Comprehensive plan allowable density. The density range in the R-
2 District shall be five to 15 units per net acre.
      (1)   Permitted uses: see Land Use Table;
      (2)   Permitted accessory uses: gazebos, decks, accessory structures,
utility buildings 144 square feet or smaller, detached private garages, fences,
off-street parking, nameplate signs, swimming pools;
      (3)   Uses permitted with special restrictions: see Land Use Table;
      (4)   Uses permitted by conditional use permit (CUP subject to procedures
in §
157.169  of this chapter): see Land Use Table. The City Council may require
additional conditions for any CUP to preserve the public welfare, health and
safety of the community; and
      (5)   Lot requirements: see §
157.058 of this chapter. Refer to §§
157.100 through
157.119 of this chapter for exceptions.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014; Ord. 4, passed 4-27-2016)
§ 157.018 R-6 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (HIGH DENSITY) DISTRICT.
   (A)   Intent and purpose. To provide areas primarily intended for high
density multi-family residential development as designated by the comprehensive
plan.
   (B)   Comprehensive plan allowable density. The density range in the R-
6 District shall be five-plus units per net acre.
      (1)   Permitted uses: see Land Use Table;
      (2)   Permitted accessory uses: gazebos, trash enclosures, utility
buildings 144 square feet or smaller, detached private garages, fences, off-
street parking, identification signs, in-ground swimming pools;
      (3)   Uses permitted with special restrictions: see Land Use Table;
      (4)   Uses permitted by conditional use permit (CUP subject to procedures
in §
157.169  of this chapter): see Land Use Table. The City Council may require
additional conditions for any CUP to preserve the public welfare, health and
safety of the community; and
      (5)   Lot requirements: see §
157.058 of this chapter. Refer to §§
157.100 through
157.119 of this chapter for exceptions.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014; Ord. 4, passed 4-27-2016)
§ 157.019 B-2 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (A)   Intent and purpose. To provide commercial and service oriented
businesses that cater not only to the motoring public but to area residents as
well. These areas will primarily be located along the State Highway 7 corridor
and along the west side of C.R. 92 south of Highway 7.
   (B)   Regulations.
      (1)   Permitted uses: see Land Use Table;
      (2)   Permitted accessory uses: trash enclosures, detached private
garages, fences, off-street parking, identification signs and incidental
repair/processing/storage necessary to conduct a permitted use;
      (3)   Uses permitted with special restrictions: see Land Use Table;
      (4)   Uses permitted by conditional use permit (CUP subject to procedures
in §
157.169  of this chapter): see Land Use Table. The City Council may require
additional conditions for any CUP to preserve the public welfare, health and
safety of the community; and
      (5)   Lot requirements: see §
157.058 of this chapter. Refer to §§
157.100 through
157.119 of this chapter for exceptions.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.020 MU-BR MIXED USE - BUSINESS RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Intent and purpose. To promote this district as the commercial core of
the community - as identified in the comprehensive plan - in order to meet the
needs of local residents, with allowance for existing residential use; to aid
in the determent of vacancies. Development and redevelopment will be permitted
at high densities to reflect historic downtown development patterns. These
areas will be identified on the zoning map.
   (B)   Regulations.
      (1)   Permitted uses: see Land Use Table;
      (2)   Permitted accessory uses: trash enclosures, detached private
garages, fences, off-street parking, identification signs and incidental
repair/processing/storage necessary to conduct a permitted use;
      (3)   Uses permitted with special restrictions: see Land Use Table;
      (4)   Uses permitted by conditional use permit (CUP subject to procedures
in §
157.169  of this chapter): see Land Use Table. The City Council may require
additional conditions for any CUP to preserve the public welfare, health and
safety of the community; and
      (5)   Lot requirements: see §
157.058 of this chapter. Refer to §§
157.100 through
157.119 of this chapter for exceptions.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.021 MU-BI MIXED USE - BUSINESS INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Intent and purpose. To provide areas of development allowing light
industrial and commercial uses that mix well considering the unique land use
needs of certain businesses, and that can be serviced by direct access to major
road networks as referenced in the comprehensive plan. Uses intended include
those which generate a minimum of noise, glare, dust, odor, vibration, air and
water pollution, fire and safety hazards and obtrusive views. These areas will
be identified on the zoning map.
   (B)   Regulations.
      (1)   Permitted uses: see Land Use Table;
      (2)   Permitted accessory uses: trash enclosures, fences, off-street
parking and loading, identification signs and offices which are incidental to
the principal use;
      (3)   Uses permitted with special restrictions: see Land Use Table;
      (4)   Uses permitted by conditional use permit (CUP subject to procedures
in §
157.169  of this chapter): see Land Use Table. The City Council may require
additional conditions for any CUP to preserve the public welfare, health and
safety of the community; and
      (5)   Lot requirements: see §
157.058 of this chapter. Refer to §§
157.100 through
157.119 of this chapter for exceptions.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.022 I INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Intent and purpose. To provide areas of industrial development that
can be serviced by direct access to major road networks as referenced in the
comprehensive plan. Uses intended include those which generate a minimum of
noise, glare, dust, odor, vibration, air and water pollution, fire and safety
hazards and obtrusive views. These areas will be identified on the zoning map.
   (B)   Regulations.
      (1)   Permitted uses: see Land Use Table;
      (2)   Permitted accessory uses: trash enclosures, fences, off-street
parking and loading, identification signs and offices which are incidental to
the principal use;
      (3)   Uses permitted with special restrictions: see Land Use Table;
      (4)   Uses permitted by conditional use permit (CUP subject to procedures
in §
157.169  of this chapter): see Land Use Table. The City Council may require
additional conditions for any CUP to preserve the public welfare, health and
safety of the community; and
      (5)   Lot requirements: see §
157.058 of this chapter. Refer to §§
157.100 through
157.119 of this chapter for exceptions.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.023 TABLE OF LAND USES.
         Zoning District
Land Use R-1 R-2 R-6 B-2 MU-BR MU-BI I
NOTES TO TABLE:
Blank = Not permitted.
C = Conditional use; minimum conditions listed in
157.055 through
157.058 of this chapter.
P = Permitted use.
S = Permitted with special restrictions; restrictions listed in
157.055 through
157.058 of this chapter.
-For all parking requirements not listed in conditions/restrictions,
157.070 through
157.072 of this chapter.
-For all uses that have conditions/special restrictions that are not
listed, a site plan review will be required, at a minimum.
-Any use may be required to provide a noise, lighting/glare, sight line,
parking and the like study at the discretion of the City Council.
                                                 Zoning District
Land Use                                         R-1 R-2 R-6 B-2 MU-BR MU-BI I
NOTES TO TABLE:
Blank = Not permitted.
C = Conditional use; minimum conditions listed in
157.055 through
157.058 of this chapter.
P = Permitted use.
S = Permitted with special restrictions; restrictions listed in
157.055 through
157.058 of this chapter.
-For all parking requirements not listed in conditions/restrictions,
157.070 through
157.072 of this chapter.
-For all uses that have conditions/special restrictions that are not listed, a
site plan review will be required, at a minimum.
-Any use may be required to provide a noise, lighting/glare, sight line,
parking and the like study at the discretion of the City Council.
CIVIC USES
City administration                              C   C   C   P         P
Club or lodge                                    S           P   P     P
College or university                                        C   C     C
Community center                                 S   S   S   S   S     S
Community recreation (private)                   S   S   S
Community recreation (public)                                P   P     P
Convention center                                            C         C
Counseling services                              S   S   S   P   P     P
Cultural services                                S   S   S   P   P     P
Day care services                                S   S   S   S   S     S
Day care services - accessory                                S   S     S
Education facilities (private)                               C   C     C
Education facilities (public)                                C   C     C
Employee recreation                                  S   S   S   S     S
Local utility services                           C   C   C   C   C     C     C
Military installations                                                       P
Post office                                                  C   C     C
Public facilities                                C   C   C   C   C     C     C
Religious assembly                               C   C   C   C   C     C
Residential treatment                                        S   S     S
Telecommunications tower                         C   C   C   C   C     C     C
Transportation terminal                                      S   S     S     S
COMMERCIAL USES
Administrative offices                                       P   S     P
Agricultural sales/service                                   C         C     p
Antique shop                                                 P   P     P
Art gallery                                                  P   P     P
Art workshop                                     S   S   S   P   P     P
Automotive rental                                            P         P
Automotive repair                                            C   C     C     P
Automotive sales                                             P   P     P
Automotive wash                                              P         P
Bakery                                                       P   P     P
Brewery                                                      P   P     P     P
Brewpub                                                      P   P     P
Cannabis cultivation facility                                          C     C
Cannabis distribution facility                                         C     C
Cannabis manufacturing facility                                        C     C
Cannabis retail sales                                        C   C
Cannabis testing facility                                              C     C
Cannabis wholesaling facility                                          C     C
Commercial off-street parking                                P   P     P
Contractor s yard                                            S   S     S     S
Convenience store                                            P   P     P
Distillery                                                   P   P     P     P
Convenience store w/fuel                                     S   S     S
Drop-off recycling collection                                S   S     S     S
Florist                                                      P   P     P
Food sales                                                   P   P     P
Funeral services                                             P   P     P
General sales/service                                        P   P     P
Hotel/motel                                                  P         P
Indoor entertainment                                         P         P
Indoor sports/recreation/fitness                             P   P     P
Laundry services                                             P   P     P
Laundry services - drop-off                                  P   P     P
Liquor sales                                                 P   S     P
Lower-potency hemp edible manufacturing facility                       C     C
Lower-potency hemp edible sales                              P   P
Medical offices                                              P   P     P
Off-site accessory/shared parking                            S   P     S
Outdoor sports and recreation                                P   P     P
Outdoor storage                                                        C     C
Pawn shop                                                    P   P     P
Pet services                                                 P         P     P
Plant nursery                                                P   C     P     P
Printing/copying                                             P   P     P
Professional office                                          P   P     P
Research and development/lab                                 S   P     S     S
Restaurant - w/wait staff                                    P   P     P
Restaurant - fast food                                       P   P     P
Restaurant - fast food w/drive-thru                          S   P     S
Service station                                              P   S     S
Spa/salon                                                    P   P     P
Taproom                                                      P   P     P     P
Theater                                                      P   S     S
Veterinary services                                          P   S     S     P
INDUSTRIAL USES
Adult entertainment                                                          S
Assembly                                                               P     P
Basic industry                                                         P     P
Convenience storage facility                                           C     C
Manufacturing                                                          P     P
Printing and publishing                                                P     P
Recycling                                                                    P
Resource extraction                                                          P
Scrap and salvage                                                            P
Vehicle storage                                                        P     P
Warehousing and distribution                                           P     P
RESIDENTIAL USES
Bed and breakfast                                S   S           P
Condominium/apartment                                S   P   S   S
Group home                                       S   S   S       P
Home occupation                                  C   C   C       C
Mobile home
Multi-family                                         P   P       S
Multi-family - upper levels                          P   P   P   S     P
Senior/assisted living                               S   S       S
Single-family                                    P   P           P
Townhome                                             P   P       S
Two-family                                           P           S
 
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014; Ord. 2021-01, passed 6-2-2021; Ord. 2025-04, passed 9-
3-2025)
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
§ 157.035 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is the intent of this section to accommodate creative and
imaginative planned unit development (PUD) for the purpose of accommodating
greater flexibility in site plan design than is provided under the strict
application of zoning regulations, while at the same time preserving the
health, safety and general welfare of the city and its citizens.
   (B)   In summary, a PUD is intended to be used to achieve the following
objectives:
      (1)   Take advantage of natural features;
      (2)   Provide flexibility in design to enhance the city’s visual
character;
      (3)   A more efficient use of land and public facilities and services;
and
      (4)   Accumulation of large areas of usable open space and preservation
of areas with significant natural features worth preserving.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.036 STANDARDS.
   (A)   A PUD shall have a minimum of five acres; except that, a smaller
parcel may qualify for the use of a PUD where total ownership is less than five
acres and, in the judgment of the city, there is a benefit to the city to
consider a smaller PUD for such reason as the conservation of natural features.
   (B)   All property within a PUD shall be under the control of one owner or
group of owners capable of planning and developing the PUD site as a unit.
   (C)   The maximum density of development shall not exceed densities
consistent with the city’s long range comprehensive land use plan.
   (D)   Standards throughout the zoning and subdivision ordinances will be
used to review and guide the development of a proposed PUD. Deviation from
those standards may be permitted only if deviation is consistent with the total
design of the development, encourages a desirable living environment and is not
detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the city or its
residents.
   (E)   Design standards of roads, lots utility easements, storm drainage,
utilities or other facilities shall be accomplished in accord with those design
standards specified in Ch. 156 of this code of ordinances.
   (F)   Whenever possible, common open space shall be linked into the open
space areas of surrounding developments.
   (G)   All land uses shall abut on a public street or have adequate access to
a public street by means of an interior access drive. All streets and drives
must tie in effectively with the city’s existing street system and other
streets as may be proposed in the comprehensive plan.
   (H)   The architectural style of individual structures should be related and
compatible with other structures in the PUD, with the overall site design and
with surrounding land uses.
   (I)   Whenever a question arises concerning the interpretation of any
portion of this chapter, the Park/Planning Commission shall ascertain all facts
concerning the question and forward all data and a recommendation to the City
Council for determination.
   (J)   In considering an application for a PUD, the City Council shall
consider:
      (1)   The advice and recommendation of the city staff and Park/Planning
Commission;
      (2)   The effect of the proposed plan upon the health, safety and general
welfare of the occupants of surrounding land;
      (3)   The existing and anticipated traffic conditions, including parking
facilities on adjacent streets and land;
      (4)   The consistency of the proposed plan with the city’s comprehensive
plan;
      (5)   The provision within the plan for preservation of natural amenities
such as streams, wooded areas and rough terrain and its offset upon the
environment; and
      (6)   The availability of financing to the applicant and the applicant’s
financial ability to assure completion of the development by requiring a
performance bond as specified in Ch. 156 of this code of ordinances.
   (K)   Lands within a planned unit development district shall only be used
for uses designated on the comprehensive plan. Upon approval of a development
plan, the PUD shall become the zoning district for the PUD site and any change
in use will require a zoning amendment. Amendments shall follow the procedures
established by §
157.168 of this chapter.
   (L)   Subdivision review shall be carried out simultaneously with the review
of the PUD. The plans required by this section shall be submitted in a form
which will satisfy the requirements of Ch. 156 of this code of ordinances for
the preliminary and final plat.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.037 PROCEDURES FOR PROCESSING A PUD.
   (A)   Pre-application conference. Upon filing an application for PUD, the
applicant shall arrange for a meeting with appropriate city staff. The purpose
of this meeting is to provide the applicant with as much background information
as may be available which could have a bearing in the PUD and to obtain
guidance as to the general suitability of the proposed PUD.
   (B)   Concept plan.
      (1)   The applicant shall submit a concept plan for review by the Park/
Planning Commission as a means to further establish the general suitability of
the PUD.
      (2)   Fifteen copies of the concept plan shall be submitted including the
following information:
         (a)   Proposed street, building and open space locations along with
general landscaping/ screening plans;
         (b)   Height and square footage of buildings;
         (c)   Proposed uses and acreages by use;
         (d)   Number of dwelling units, architectural drawings;
         (e)   Generalized grading showing major cuts and fills; and
         (f)   A general staging plan illustrating the sequence and approximate
timing of the development phases.
   (C)   Information meeting.
      (1)   This information meeting on the concept plan shall be held with
neighboring property owners (within 350 feet of the site), the Park/Planning
Commission and City Council prior to the development plan - rezoning request.
      (2)   The city will notify all persons as to the time and place of the
meeting.
   (D)   Development plan (rezoning). The applicant shall submit a development
plan and rezoning application to be reviewed by the Park/Planning Commission at
a public hearing and by the City Council.
   (E)   Development plan requirements. Fifteen sets of exhibits, maps, and
plans at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet, and written support information
shall be submitted including the following information:
      (1)   An existing conditions element including maps illustrating existing
zoning and land use within 300 feet of the property, relationship to the
comprehensive plan and existing site conditions including:
         (a)   Existing topography and slopes;
         (b)   Tree inventory (size, type, condition);
         (c)   Wetland inventory;
         (d)   Existing drainage patterns;
         (e)   Soils conditions;
         (f)   Existing utilities and streets; and
         (g)   Property lines and easements.
      (2)   A graphic and tabular development plan element including:
         (a)   Building locations, height, bulk and square footage;
         (b)   Areas and square footage of all land uses including parks, open
space, water surface areas and conservation areas;
         (c)   Number of dwelling unit by types;
         (d)   Major circulation elements (streets and trails);
         (e)   Drainage and utilities plan;
         (f)   Grading plan;
         (g)   Landscaping plan;
         (h)   Lighting and signage plans;
         (i)   A phasing plan illustrating the timing and sequence of
development; and
         (j)   Elevation drawings of the entrance side of all principal
structures.
      (3)   A preliminary plat in accordance with Ch. 156 of this code of
ordinances. Public hearing requirements shall be the same as for preliminary
plat hearings as outlined in §
156.17 of this code of ordinances. For purposes of administrative
simplification, public hearings required for the rezoning and preliminary plat
may be combined into one hearing.
      (4)   A written element including:
         (a)   Landowner/applicant’s name and address;
         (b)   Evidence of ownership;
         (c)   Development objectives;
         (d)   Legal description;
         (e)   Proposed restrictive covenants and detailed information on the
organization of the homeowner’s association; and
         (f)   Open space maintenance provisions and agreements.
   (F)   Findings. The Park/Planning Commission and City Council shall not
approve a PUD District unless they shall find as follows:
      (1)   The proposed development is not inconsistent with the city’s
comprehensive plan;
      (2)   The development satisfies most, if not all, of the objectives of
the district; and
      (3)   The PUD will not be detrimental to surrounding neighborhoods and
provides some benefit not gained through adherence to the underlying zoning
district requirements.
   (G)   Development agreement. Upon approval of a development plan, the City
Council shall direct the City Attorney to draft a development agreement in a
manner so as to allow its filing with the county’s Recorder.
   (H)   Final development plan and final plat.
      (1)   Within 60 days of City Council approval of the development plan and
preliminary plat, the applicant shall file a final development plan and the
final plat for all that portion to be platted.
      (2)   The final development plan and the final plat shall contain those
changes as recommended by the Park/Planning Commission and approved by the City
Council during the preliminary review process.
      (3)   The final development plan and final plat shall be submitted to the
Park/Planning Commission for review. The Commission shall make its
recommendation within 60 days of referral.
      (4)   The City Council shall review the final development plan and act on
the final plat within 30 days of receiving the recommendation from the Park/
Planning Commission.
      (5)   Once the final development plan and final plat have been approved,
the final plat shall be filed with the county’s Recorder’s Office. Final plat
requirements shall be in accordance with §
156.18 of this code of ordinances.
      (6)   If development has not occurred within one year, the City Council
may rezone the property to the original district and shall not have to find
that the PUD zoning was in error.
   (I)   Major amendments.
      (1)   The procedure for a major amendment shall be the same as for
approval of the original PUD. A major amendment is an amendment which:
         (a)   Substantially alters the locations and size of buildings,
streets and parking areas;
         (b)   Increases or decreases the number of residential dwelling units
by more than 5%;
         (c)   Increases the floor area of non-residential buildings by more
than 5%;
         (d)   Increases the number of stories of any building;
         (e)   Decreases the amount of open space so as to alter the original
design or intent; and
         (f)   Does not comply with a condition attached to the approval of the
development plan.
      (2)   Other amendments may be made by a simple majority vote of the Park/
Planning Commission and City Council.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.038 PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION.
   This chapter is adopted for the following purposes:
   (A)   Safeguarding the best interests of the public, the homeowner, the
subdivider and investors by encouraging planned, efficient and attractive
subdivisions, by establishing adequate and impartial standards for design and
construction;
   (B)   To guide the future growth and development of the city in accordance
with the comprehensive plan;
   (C)   To provide for the health and safety of residents, by requiring
properly designed streets, storm drainage facilities, sewer and water services,
park and open space provisions and grading and landscaping features;
   (D)   To place the cost of improvement against those benefitting from their
construction;
   (E)   To secure the rights of the public with respect to public lands and
waters; and
   (F)   To establish the minimum requirements necessary to protect the public
health, safety and general welfare.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.039 SEPARABILITY.
   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this
chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions of
this chapter not specifically included in said judgment.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.040 AMENDMENTS.
   For the purpose of providing for the public health, safety and general
welfare of the city, the City Council, with the consultation of the Park/
Planning Commission, may from time to time amend the provisions imposed by
these subdivision regulations. Public hearings on all proposed amendments shall
be held by the Park/Planning Commission in the manner prescribed by law.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.041 CONDITIONS.
   Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable
conditions to land subdivision is an exercise of valid police power delegated
by the state to the city. The developer has the duty of compliance with
reasonable conditions laid down by the City Council and Park/Planning
Commission for design, dedication, improvement and restrictive use of the land
so as to conform to the physical and economic development of the city and to
allow for the health, safety and general welfare of future landowners in the
subdivision and of the community at large.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.042 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BLOCK. An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by
streets, exterior boundary lines of the subdivision and/or bodies of water.
   FINAL PLAT. The final map and/or plan and/or record of a subdivision and any
accompanying material presented material to the City Council for approval and
which, if approved, will be duly filed with the county’s Register of Deeds.
Said plat must conform to all state laws.
   IMPROVEMENTS. The construction or installation of public or private
utilities including, but not limited to, potable water, sanitary sewer systems,
storm sewers, roads and other barricades, trees and other plantings, lighting,
fuel or energy and the transmission thereof, transportation systems or
facilities connected therewith and communication systems which are necessary,
desirable or convenient in the maintenance of the health, safety and the
general welfare.
   LOT. A lot whose existence, location and dimensions have been legally
recorded or registered in a deed or on a plat.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). A self-contained development, sometimes with
a mixture of housing types and densities, in which the subdivision and zoning
controls are applied to the project as a whole rather than to individual lots,
as in most subdivisions. Therefore, densities are calculated for the entire
development, usually permitting a trade-off between clustering of houses and
provision of common open space.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. An area or strip of land, either public or private, on which
an irrevocable right of passage has been recorded for the use of vehicles or
pedestrians or both.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.043 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Preliminary plat. For regulations on preliminary plats, see §
156.17.
   (B)   Lots. For regulations on lots, see §
156.40.
   (C)   Storm water management. For regulations on storm water management, see
§
156.38.
CONDITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS
§ 157.055 RESIDENTIAL USES.
   (A)   Bed and breakfast.
      (1)   Off-street parking must be provided;
      (2)   If more than two units are planned, a full site plan review is
required, including a review of the interior layout; and
      (3)   State and building codes apply.
   (B)   Condominium/apartment/townhomes/two family/multi-family/multi-family
upper levels/senior-assisted living.
      (1)   In R-6, three-plus units are permitted at approximately five
through 15 units per acre;
      (2)   In business zones, residential is permitted on the upper floors as
part of a commercial development subject to full site plan review; off-street
parking must be provided; and
      (3)   In MU-BR townhomes, two family, multi-family, multi-family upper
levels and senior assisted living are permitted subject to full site plan
review; architectural review including detail of appearance from the street;
off-street parking must be provided.
   (C)   Group home.
      (1)   Must be licensed by the state;
      (2)   In R-1 and R-2, a maximum of six residents;
      (3)   In R-6, a maximum of 16 residents;
      (4)   Safety issues, as required by the state and the city’s rental
ordinance, shall be reviewed;
      (5)   Off-street parking for employees must be provided; and
      (6)   State and building codes apply.
   (D)   Home occupation.
      (1)   CUP does not run with the property; new owner or new use must apply
for a new CUP;
      (2)   No outside storage of materials;
      (3)   All activities shall be clearly incidental to the use of the
property for residential purposes;
      (4)   Hours of operation and number of employees shall be limited by the
CUP;
      (5)   Retail sales are limited to products manufactured on site unless
authorized by the CUP;
      (6)   Off-street parking is not required unless the City Council deems it
necessary;
      (7)   A customer entrance separate from that of the main residential
entrance must be provided; and
      (8)   The proposed use will be reviewed during the CUP process to ensure
that all nuisance ordinance requirements will be met and that the use will not
be detrimental to the area.
   (E)   Senior/assisted living.
      (1)   Must be licensed by the state;
      (2)   If more than six residents are to be served, a full site plan
review is required, including a review of the interior layout; conditions may
be added at the discretion of the City Council;
      (3)   Safety issues, as required by Ch. 151 of this code of ordinances,
shall be reviewed;
      (4)   Off-street parking for employees must be provided; and
      (5)   State and building codes apply.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.056 COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL USES.
   (A)   Administrative offices. If more than four employees are present at one
time for more than three months of the year, off-street parking must be
provided.
   (B)   Agricultural sales/service.
      (1)   No outdoor storage of items for sale unless screened to a height of
eight feet and an opaqueness of 100%;
      (2)   No outdoor storage of machinery for sale or to be serviced unless
screened to a height of eight feet and an opaqueness of 100%; and
      (3)   Additional height of screening may be required at the discretion of
the City Council.
   (C)   Art workshop. If workshops occur more frequently than four times per
year, home occupation rules apply.
   (D)   Automotive repair.
      (1)   Outdoor storage of vehicles to be repaired must be on a paved
surface with striped parking stalls;
      (2)   Maximum of two tow-trucks permitted outside, unless screened in the
rear of the building; and
      (3)   No storage of unlicensed or junk vehicles.
   (E)   Automotive wash.
      (1)   A noise (decibel) study must be provided for any wash adjacent to a
residential zone or outdoor; and
      (2)   A water usage study must be provided.
   (F)   Contractor’s yard.
      (1)   Screening of storage area shall be provided from residential zones
and from other zones at the discretion of the City Council; and
      (2)   A site plan review is required.
   (G)   Convenience store w/fuel. See §
157.118 of this chapter.
   (H)   Drive-thru establishments.
      (1)   Design of site should ensure that ordering station and pick-up or
service window do not necessitate headlights facing residential zones;
      (2)   If constraints of the site don’t allow such a layout, a 100% opaque
combination of fencing and landscaping must be installed to buffer headlights
from the residential zone, and a sight line study showing the fence and
landscaping (size at installation) must be provided; and
      (3)   A waiting area in addition to and not interfering with the required
number of parking stalls must be provided.
   (I)   Drop-off recycling collection.
      (1)   In business zones, only drop-off receptacles are permitted; no
drive through or loading areas;
      (2)   Must not interfere with the flow of traffic or use required parking
stalls; and
      (3)   In division (I)(1) above, the same restrictions apply; however,
recycling centers are also permitted; provided, they meet all state and local
nuisance standards.
   (J)   Off-site accessory/shared parking.
      (1)   Number of parking stalls in overall development must meet the total
required for each individual use;
      (2)   If the City Council deems two or more uses complementary (e.g.,
different hours, offices with employee numbers changing by shift and the like),
the overall parking requirement may be reduced; any change of use will result
in a new site review and may warrant additional parking or proof of parking;
and
      (3)   Parking setback requirement may be waived in the case of shared
parking or a common lot adjacent to individual lots that will solely utilize
the common lot parking.
   (K)   Outdoor storage. Screening from rights-of-way and adjacent parcels, in
a manner determined during site plan review, must be provided.
   (L)   Professional office. If more than four employees are regularly present
at one time, off-street parking must be provided.
   (M)   Research and development/lab.
      (1)   Off-street parking must be provided; and
      (2)   The proposed use must be reviewed with the City Council to ensure
that all nuisance ordinance requirements will be met and that the use will not
be detrimental to the area.
   (N)   Cannabis cultivation facility, cannabis distribution facility,
cannabis manufacturing facility, cannabis testing facility, cannabis
wholesaling facility, lower-potency hemp edible manufacturing facility.
      (1)   Compliance with all requirements of local, state, and federal law
and applicable rules and
regulations from the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, the Minnesota
Department of Health, and any other state or federal agency.
      (2)   Obtain and maintain all required licenses and permits from local,
state or federal government.
      (3)   Use equipment to mitigate odor, including a ventilation system with
carbon filters sufficient in type and capacity to eliminate odors emanating
from the premises.
      (4)   No consumption allowed on-site including smoking, vaping, and
aerosolizing of any cannabis or lower-potency hemp edible product.
      (5)   Compliance with the following buffer requirements:
         (a)   Schools. No operations will occur within 600 feet of a school. A
school means a public charter, or private school for pupils in kindergarten
through grade 12.
         (b)   Day care nursery. No operations will occur within 500 feet of a
day care nursery. A day care nursery means a building or structure where care,
protection and supervision of children are provided for a fee as licensed by
the state and in accordance with Title XV,
Chapter 157 of the city’s code.
         (c)   Attraction within a public park. No operations will occur within
500 feet of an attraction within a public park that is regularly used by
minors, including playgrounds or athletic fields.
         (d)   Measurement. The measurement of distance in this section will be
determined by a straight line from the closest lot line of the premises upon
which the commercial use is to be located to the lot line of the school, day
care nursery, or attraction within a public park.
   (O)   Cannabis retail sales, lower-potency hemp edible sales. Obtain and
maintain all required licenses and registrations from local, state, or federal
government.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014; Ord. 2025-04, passed 9-3-2025)
§ 157.057 CIVIC USES.
   (A)   City administration.
      (1)   Minimum lot size of one acre;
      (2)   Off-street parking must be provided;
      (3)   Parking areas must be buffered from residential zones in the same
manner a commercial use is required to be;
      (4)   No building shall be located within 50 feet of any lot line; and
      (5)   A maximum of 50% impervious lot coverage.
   (B)   Club or lodge.
      (1)   Off-street parking must be provided; and
      (2)   Potential uses and activities must be provided with the CUP
application.
   (C)   College or university.
      (1)   Off-street parking must be provided; and
      (2)   Parking should be located in the front or on the sides of the
building, with headlights directed away from residential zones; staff parking
may be placed in the rear of the building with fencing and/or landscaping
installed at the discretion of the City Council.
   (D)   Community center.
      (1)   Off-street parking must be provided; and
      (2)   Parking should be located in the front or on the sides of the
building, with headlights directed away from residential zones; staff parking
may be placed in the rear of the building with fencing and/or landscaping
installed at the discretion of the City Council.
   (E)   Community recreation (private).
      (1)   Off-street parking must be provided;
      (2)   A noise (decibel) study must be provided for any outdoor uses; and
      (3)   Amenities are intended for the use and enjoyment of residents of
the neighborhood or association and their guests.
   (F)   Counseling services.
      (1)   Off-street parking must be provided; and
      (2)   Must be licensed by the state.
   (G)   Day care services.
      (1)   Must be licensed by the state;
      (2)   In R-1 and R-2, a maximum of 12 children;
      (3)   In R-6, a maximum of 16 children; and
      (4)   In MU-BR, an off-street drop-off/pickup area with spaces numbering
two-thirds of the maximum number of children served is required.
   (H)   Day care services - accessory.
      (1)   Services are to be utilized only by employees working on-site;
      (2)   Must be licensed by the state; and
      (3)   One off-street parking space per day care employee on each shift,
in addition to any primary use parking, is required.
   (I)   Employee recreation. Amenities are intended for the use and enjoyment
of employees of the primary use only; if the primary use employs shift-workers,
additional parking may be required at the discretion of the City Council.
   (J)   Utility services.
      (1)   Buildings must meet the architectural standards of this chapter and
be compatible with the neighborhood;
      (2)   No building shall be located within 50 feet of any lot line; and
      (3)   Structures shall be buffered from residential zones and uses to the
extent possible, at the discretion of the City Council.
   (K)   Maintenance facilities.
      (1)   Off-street parking must be provided;
      (2)   Parking areas must be buffered from residential zones in the same
manner a commercial use is required to be;
      (3)   No building shall be located within 50 feet of any lot line;
      (4)   A maximum of 50% impervious lot coverage; and
      (5)   Shall not include outdoor storage of maintenance equipment and
trucks over one and one- half tons, stock piling or unscreened storage of
materials.
   (L)   Post office.
      (1)   Minimum lot size of one acre;
      (2)   Off-street parking must be provided;
      (3)   Parking areas must be buffered from residential zones in the same
manner a commercial use is required to be;
      (4)   Drop-off areas may not be on a side of the lot adjacent to
residential zones;
      (5)   No building shall be located within 50 feet of any lot line; and
      (6)   A maximum of 50% impervious lot coverage.
   (M)   Education facilities (private or public).
      (1)   Minimum lot size of one acre;
      (2)   Off-street parking must be provided; and
      (3)   Parking should be located in the front or on the sides of the
building, with headlights directed away from residential zones; staff parking
may be placed in the rear of the building with fencing and/or landscaping
installed at the discretion of the City Council.
   (N)   Religious assembly.
      (1)   Minimum lot size of one acre;
      (2)   No building shall be located within 50 feet of any lot line; and
      (3)   A maximum of 50% impervious coverage.
   (O)   Residential treatment.
      (1)   Off-street parking must be provided; and
      (2)   Must be licensed by the state.
   (P)   Telecommunications tower.
      (1)   Base of tower must be screened with a 100% opaque combination of
fence and landscaping, at the discretion of the City Council, to a height of
ten feet to buffer it from residential zones;
      (2)   Fences must be compatible with the neighborhood;
      (3)   Setback from property lines must be equal to one-half the height of
the tower; and
      (4)   Access ladder shall be stored at a height of 12 feet or higher.
   (Q)   Park-n-ride terminal. Parking areas shall be fenced and buffered from
residential zones at the discretion of the City Council.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.058 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The City Council may require additional conditions for any CUP to
preserve the public welfare, health and safety of the community.
   (B)   All non-residential uses shall direct light away and shield light
sources from residential zones.
Zoning District Requirements
  R-1 R-2 R-6 B-2 MU-BR MU-BI I PUD
Zoning District Requirements
                         R-1    R-2    R-6      B-2    MU-BR MU-BI  I      PUD
          Front/ROW      25’  25’  35’/50�35’  NA    40’  40’  ****
Accessory Side/ROW       15’  15’  25’    35’  5’  30’  30’  ****
structure Side/interior  10’  10’  10’    10’  5’  15’  15’  ****
setbacks  Rear           10’  10’  10’    30’  10’ 30’  30’  ****
          From R-1/      NA     NA     25’    30’  10’ 40’  50’  ****
          2 zoning
          Impervious (%) 35     50     65       75     100   75     75     ****
          Building       35’  35’  40’    45’  45’ 50’  50’  ****
          height
Maximums  Accessory
          building                                     15’
          height
          Driveway width 24’  24’  30’    30’  30’ 30’  30’  ****
          Lot area (sq.  15,000 19,500 30,000   10,000 NA    30,000 30,000 ****
Minimums  ft.)
          Lot width      80’  130’ 100’   100’ NA    100’ 100’ ****
          Driveway width 12’  12’  24’    24’  24’ 24’  24’  ****
          Front/ROW      10’  10’  25’    10’  10’ 10’  10’  ****
          Side/ROW       10’  10’  25’    10’  10’ 10’  10’  ****
Pavement  Side/interior  5’   5’   25’    5’   5’  5’   5’   ****
setbacks  Rear           10’  10’  25’    5’   5’  5’   5’   ****
          From R-1/      NA     NA     25’    25’  10’ ***20�***20�****
          2 zoning
          Front/ROW      25’  25’  *35’/5035’  0’  40’  40’  ****
Principal Side/ROW       25’  25’  50’    **35’0’  30’  30’  ****
structure Side/interior  15’  ^15’ ^35’   10’  0’  15’  15’  ****
setbacks  Rear           20’  20’  40’    30’  0’  30’  30’  ****
          From R-1/      NA     NA     NA       50’  10’ 50’  50’  ****
          2 zoning
NOTES TO TABLE:
See each zoning district’s section of this chapter for additional requirements
* - In the R-6 District, principal structure front/ROW setbacks are 35’ from
local streets and 50’ from arterial streets or highways.
^ - In the Multi-Family Residential Districts (R-2, R-6), minimum lot areas
(including common areas) shall be 3 times the square footage of the building(s)
footprint; interior side setbacks for common wall developments shall be 0’.
** - In the B-2 District, street side/ROW setback may be reduced to 30’ from a
dedicated, but unimproved ROW.
*** - In the I Districts, if parcel is abutting or across the street from a
residential district, parking/drive aisle setback must be 20’.
**** - In the PUD District, the requirements of the underlying zoning district
shall be adhered to unless otherwise determined by the City Council
- All setbacks are measured from the property line, not street/curb/sidewalk.
- Front/ROW pavement setbacks do not apply to driveways leading to garage, only
to parking areas.
- Driveway width maximum and minimum are measured at curb cut/street; other
dimensions may be allowed if recommended by the City Engineer and approved by
the City Council.
- Pavement includes curb when measuring setbacks.
- Pavement for sport courts and similar uses must be placed outside of utility
easements (if easement is larger than setback).
- Minimum lot width is measured at the building setback line.
- Attached garages are part of the principal structure.
- Accessory structures must be placed outside of utility easements (if easement
is larger than setback) and are not allowed in front of the primary structure
in residential zones, regardless of setback listed.
- Utility buildings may be placed 5’ from the side and rear property lines but
may not be placed in front of the front building line of the principle
structure or within any utility easements.
- Fences may be built on the property line with permission of the affected
neighbors).
- Decks accessed from the primary structure are considered part of that
building and may not encroach the setbacks.
- Landscaping should be placed outside of utility easements; if within easement
and work is performed, owner will not be compensated.
 
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014; Ord. 4, passed 4-27-2016)
OFF-STREET PARKING, ACCESS AND LOADING
§ 157.070 OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General provisions.
      (1)   The purpose of this section is to alleviate or prevent congestion
of the public streets, and so promote the safety and welfare of the public, by
establishing minimum requirements for the off-street parking and loading and
loading of motor vehicles in accordance with the use to which property is put.
      (2)   These provisions shall not apply to existing MU-BR area uses as
long as the general use and purpose for which the property is now used shall be
continued. This shall not exempt any business from municipal parking
assessments.
      (3)   Floor area shall, for the purpose of calculating the number of off-
street parking spaces, be the net useable floor area of the various floors,
exclusive of hallways, utility spaces and storage areas other than warehousing.
      (4)   Under no circumstances shall required parking facilities accessory
to residential structures in a residentially-zoned district be used for the
storage of commercial vehicles or for parking of automobiles belonging to the
employees, owner, tenants or customers of nearby commercial establishments.
      (5)   Required off-street parking spaces shall not be utilized for open
storage of goods or for the storage of vehicles are that are inoperable, or for
rent or for sale.
      (6)   Adequate space for snow storage shall be provided on the site so as
not to reduce the required minimum number of parking spaces.
      (7)   Required off-street parking in the residential districts shall be
on the same lot as the principal building.
   (B)   Location requirements. See §
157.058 of this chapter for location requirements.
   (C)   Joint parking facilities.
      (1)   This provision applies to all districts, except the residentially-
zoned districts of the city.
      (2)   Required parking facilities serving two or more uses may be located
on the same lot, with the following conditions or restrictions.
         (a)   There are a sufficient number of stalls to satisfy minimum
parking requirements for each use within 400 feet of that use.
         (b)   The total number of parking spaces provided shall not be less
than the sum total of the separate requirements for each use during any period
when the parking facilities are utilized at the same time by two or more uses.
         (c)   The applicants may request a reduction in the total number of
stalls provided. The applicant must prove that there is no substantial conflict
in the principal operating hours of the two or more buildings or uses for which
joint use of off-street parking facilities is proposed, or that there is
sufficient parking to accommodate peak-hour use for businesses with conflicting
hours.
         (d)   A properly drawn legal instrument, approved by the City Attorney
and executed by the parties concerned, for joint use of off-street parking
facilities shall be filed with the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer. The
instrument shall be a three or more party agreement which shall include the
city as one of the parties. Legal costs incurred by the city shall be
reimbursed by the other parties involved in the agreement.
   (D)   Design standards.
      (1)   All off-street parking spaces shall be no less than nine feet in
width and 18.5 feet in length, exclusive of access drives. All parking spaces
shall be clearly marked. Minimum aisle width for accessing parking stalls will
be dependent upon the angle of the parking stall (all dimensions in feet):
 
Parking Angle Stall Width Width Parallel to Length of Stripe Drive Aisle Width
                          Drive Aisle
90            9           9                 18.5             24
75            9           9.3               20               22
60            9           10.4              22               18
45            9           12.7              25               14
 
      (2)   All off-street parking facilities shall be designed and constructed
with appropriate means of vehicular access to and from a public street.
      (3)   Except for single-family, two-family and townhouse dwellings, head-
in parking directly off of and adjacent to a public street, with each stall
having its own direct access to a public street, is prohibited.
      (4)   When calculating required stalls, each fraction shall constitute
another space.
      (5)   All of the area intended to be utilized for parking space and
driveways shall be surfaced with bituminous or concrete material to control
dust and promote good drainage.
      (6)   Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be
hooded, shielded and arranged to reflect the light away and shield the light
from abutting or nearby residential uses. A light meter may be used by the city
to ensure compliance with the approved lighting plan.
      (7)   All open off-street parking areas shall provide a tire bumper or
curb of adequate height and properly located to ensure that no part of any car
will project beyond the required setback as identified in this chapter. In all
zoning districts, except R-1 and R-2, the boundaries of all parking areas shall
be defined by a curb of a design and material approved by the City Engineer.
   (E)   Parking requirements. The following minimum number of off-street
parking spaces shall be provided and maintained by ownership, easement and/or
lease for and during the life of the respective uses hereinafter set forth:
      (1)   In auditoriums, churches and other places of public assembly in
which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or other similar seating
facilities, each 22 inches of such seating facilities shall be counted as one
seat for the purpose of determining required parking.
      (2)   Parking requirements for specific uses within any of the groups
listed below are superseded by the section of the ordinance listing special
restrictions and conditions for those specific uses:
         (a)   Residences (single-family, two-family and townhouse dwellings):
a minimum of one open space and two enclosed garage parking spaces per dwelling
unit;
         (b)   Multiple-family dwellings: a minimum of one open space and one
enclosed garage space per dwelling unit;
         (c)   Churches, auditoriums, mortuaries: one space for every three and
one-half seats based on the design capacity of the main assembly hall;
         (d)   Theater, athletic field: one space for each four seats of design
capacity;
         (e)   Elementary and junior high schools: one space for each employee,
plus one space per classroom;
         (f)   Pool halls, community center, post offices, lodges, private and
public clubs: ten spaces, plus one space for each 300 square feet of floor area
in excess of 2,000 square feet of floor area in the principal structure;
         (g)   Motel or hotel: one space for each guest room provided in the
design of the building, plus one space for each employee during the busiest
shift;
         (h)   Professional, personal and business offices: one space per 200
square feet of gross floor area, but at least three spaces;
         (i)   Fast food establishments, drive-in restaurants: one space for
each 35 square feet of seating area and an additional two spaces shall be added
for drive through facilities;
         (j)   Motor fuel stations and motor fuel station convenience stores: a
minimum of four outside parking spaces, plus three additional outside spaces
for each enclosed service stall. One additional parking space shall be provided
for each 150 square feet of floor space which is devoted to retail sales in a
motor fuel station convenience store;
         (k)   Retail sales: four spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross
floor space, less storage space;
         (l)   Restaurants, cafés, bars, taverns, nightclubs: one space for
every three seats based on design capacity, plus one space for each employee
during the busiest shift;
         (m)   Furniture stores, appliance stores, repair shops, studios,
commercial green houses: two spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area, less storage space;
         (n)   Auto repair, boat and marine sales, garden supply stores,
building materials sales: eight spaces, plus one space for each 800 square feet
of floor area over 1,000 square feet;
         (o)   Manufacturing, fabricating or processing of a product or
material: one space for each 400 square feet of floor area, plus one 12-foot by
24-foot space for each company owned truck (if not stored inside the principal
building);
         (p)   Warehousing, storage or handling of bulk goods: one space for
each 1,000 square feet of floor area, plus one space for each employee on the
busiest shift; and
         (q)   Uses not specifically noted: determined by the City Council upon
recommendation by the Park/Planning Commission.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.071 TRAFFIC ACCESS REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The distance from a driveway to the intersection of two or more
streets shall not be less than 25 feet. The distance shall be measured from the
intersection of lot lines. The city may require greater distances if future
traffic conditions warrant. Such greater distances shall be required subject to
approval of the City Council.
   (B)   Curb cut openings shall be a minimum of five feet from the side yard
property line in all districts.
   (C)   Driveway access curb openings on a public street, except for single-
family, two-family and townhouse dwellings, shall not be located less than 40
feet from one another.
   (D)   Single-family uses shall be limited to one curb cut access per
property.
   (E)   All properties shall be entitled to at least one curb cut.
   (F)   In applicable situations, state and/or county access permits must be
obtained prior to the city authorizing construction for buildable lots along
state or county roads.
   (G)   Access driveways for single-family dwellings and townhouse dwellings
shall not be less than 12 feet wide or more than 24 feet wide measured (at the
street/driveway transition) between curb faces of the driveway unless otherwise
recommended by the City Engineer.
   (H)   Access driveways for commercial or industrial uses shall be 30 feet
wide measured (at the street/driveway transition) between curb faces of the
driveway unless otherwise recommended by the City Engineer.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.072 LOADING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All loading berths/docks shall be located on the same lot as the
building or use to be served.
   (B)   No loading berth/dock shall be located closer than 100 feet from a
residential district unless within a structure. All berths shall be screened
with planting or fencing that faces a residentially-zoned area. (See §§
157.085 through
157.089 of this chapter for more detail.)
   (C)   Loading berths/docks shall not occupy the required front yard setback.
   (D)   Loading berths/docks shall not conflict with pedestrian movement or
obstruct the view of the public right-of-way from off-street parking areas or
driveways.
   (E)   Each loading berth/dock shall be located with appropriate means of
vehicular access to a street or public alley in a manner which will cause the
least interference with traffic.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.073 PARKING MOTOR VEHICLES, MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT (SUCH AS TRACTORS AND
BOBCATS), TRAILERS AND BOATS FOR SALE.
   (A)   Purpose. It is appropriate and necessary to regulate the parking of
vehicles, machinery and equipment (such as tractors and bobcats), trailers and
boats for sale in the city to assure public health, safety and welfare by
preventing congestion and traffic hazards; to prevent unauthorized use and
trespass on vacant property; to prevent damage and erosion problems associated
with off-road motor vehicle travel on unimproved surfaces; and to preserve
civic beauty.
   (B)   Definitions. For purpose of this §
157.073, the term MOTOR VEHICLE shall have the meaning given in M.S. § 169.01.
   (C)   Public property. No person shall park a motor vehicle, machinery and
equipment (such as tractors and bobcats), trailers and boats on public property
that displays a sign on or near the motor vehicle, machinery and equipment
(such as tractors and bobcats), trailers and boats with identifying information
intended to facilitate the sale, consignment, lease, trade or exchange of the
motor vehicle, machinery and equipment (such as tractors and bobcats), trailers
and boats (e.g. "Call xxx-xxxx").
   (D)   Private property. No owner or occupant of private property shall allow
a motor vehicle, machinery and equipment (such as tractors and bobcats),
trailers and boats to be parked on the private property and no person shall
park a motor vehicle, machinery and equipment (such as tractors and bobcats),
trailers and boats on private property that displays a sign on or near the
motor vehicle, machinery and equipment (such as tractors and bobcats), trailers
and boats indicating the motor vehicle, machinery and equipment (such as
tractors and bobcats), trailers and boats is for sale, consignment, lease,
trade or exchange or that displays a sign on or near the motor vehicle,
machinery and equipment (such as tractors and bobcats), trailers and boats with
identifying information intended to facilitate the sale, consignment, lease,
trade or exchange of the motor vehicle, machinery and equipment (such as
tractors and bobcats), trailers and boats (e.g. "Call xxx-xxxx") unless one of
the following exceptions is met:
      (1)   The motor vehicle, machinery and equipment (such as tractors and
bobcats), trailers and boats with the display sign is parked on a motor
vehicle, machinery and equipment (such as tractors and bobcats), trailers and
boats sales lot in the B-2 District that meets the requirements of this
chapter; or
      (2)   The motor vehicle, machinery and equipment (such as tractors and
bobcats), trailers and boats with the display sign is parked on private
property in full compliance with each of the following requirements:
         (a)   The motor vehicle, machinery and equipment (such as tractors and
bobcats), trailers and boats is registered to either the owner or occupant of
the private property on which it is parked;
         (b)   The motor vehicle, machinery and equipment (such as tractors and
bobcats), trailers and boats is parked on a hard surface designed and improved
as off-street parking for automobiles; and
         (c)   No more than one motor vehicle, machinery and equipment (such as
tractors and bobcats), trailers and boats with a display sign is parked on a
lot (as the term "lot" is defined in St. Bonifacius City Code §
157.003 at any given time.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 4-17-2019; Ord. 2019-01A, passed 7-3-2019)
LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING
§ 157.085 GENERAL.
   (A)   The primary purpose of this policy is to establish minimum
requirements and standards relative to landscaping, buffering and screening to
be implemented concurrently with site plans approved by the city.
   (B)   The objectives of these requirements are to establish and maintain
forestation of the city; to provide appropriate ground cover vegetation to
control soil erosion; to enhance, when necessary, the natural environment,
particularly in instances where the natural environment is disturbed during the
course of development; and to establish standards for utilization of natural
materials to achieve desired screening and buffering.
   (C)   This policy sets forth minimum requirements of landscaping and
limitations to assure that the result is consistent with reasonable maintenance
requirements on a long-term basis and to assure that the results provide an
aesthetically pleasing environment.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.086 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   An earth berm, not exceeding a slope of three to one, but at least
three feet high, shall be placed in all newly-platted residential developments
that abut a state highway or county road. The berm shall be placed on the side
(s) abutting the state highway or county road, and shall be in addition to
other minimum planting requirements. Evergreen trees and shrubs shall be
planted on or at the base of the berm to at least 75% opaqueness at maturity
and a total height (combined with the berm height) of at least six feet in
order to screen the development from the highway or county road.
   (B)   In the R-1 and R-2 Zoning Districts, each newly-platted single- or
two-family lot shall have two shade trees planted in the front building
setback. Each new multi-family lot shall have one tree per unit planted in the
front building setback.
   (C)   In the R-6 Zoning District, there shall be one shade tree or two
ornamental trees for every two dwelling units on any given property.
   (D)   In the R-6 Zoning District, landscaped areas averaging three feet in
width with at least one shrub every five feet shall be installed along
sidewalks. If there is an off-street parking area with a required screen hedge
along one side of a sidewalk, the landscape area requirement will be considered
met along that stretch of sidewalk.
   (E)   Vacant lots shall be kept mowed to a height of not more than six
inches by the developer or owner.
   (F)   Multiple-family dwellings shall have trash and trash handling
equipment stored within the principal structure or within an attached structure
accessible from within the principal structure that is screened, through the
use of vegetation, from public streets and adjacent residential properties.
   (G)   Where any multiple-family use with more than four parking spaces abuts
another residential use, the off-street parking for such use shall be screened
from adjoining properties by a hedge or other various plantings as approved by
the City Council.
   (H)   Light from automobile headlights and other sources shall be screened
whenever it may be directed onto residential windows, including those within
the same development.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.087 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   One tree for every 50 feet of site perimeter shall be planted. The
City Council may determine that trees should be grouped in certain instances.
   (B)   If landscaping cannot be accommodated on a MU-BR District site, the
City Council shall require the plantings to be placed in a city park or city
right-of-way. Placement of such landscaping shall be approved by the City
Council.
   (C)   Any off-street parking or stacking areas or drive aisles that face or
abut a residentially-zoned area shall be screened so as to minimize the visual
impact of the large expanses of asphalt and automobiles. This screening shall
be accomplished by an earth berm, not exceeding a slope of three to one, but at
least three feet high with shrubs at least two feet in height planted on top of
the berm and spaced to create 75% opaqueness at the time of planting and
growing to a 100% opaque hedge within two years. The berm shall be placed on
the side(s) abutting the residential zone(s), and shall be in addition to other
minimum planting requirements. An evergreen hedge installed at a minimum of 42
inches in height and 100% opaqueness at the time of planting or other
combinations (including fences) may be approved by the City Council during site
plan review.
   (D)   Loading docks, loading berths or other delivery areas that are on the
side of the lot nearest a residentially-zoned area shall be screened so as not
to be seen from the residential area. Various schemes of berms, plantings and/
or fencing or walls approved by the City Council may be used.
   (E)   All trash and trash handling equipment shall be stored within the
principal structure, within an attached structure accessible from within the
principal structure that is screened, through the use of vegetation, from
public streets and adjacent residential properties.
   (F)   Light from automobile headlights and other sources shall be screened
whenever it may be directed onto adjacent residential windows.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.088 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Unless otherwise directed by the City Council, all plantings shall be
placed on the private property on which the development is taking place.
   (B)   All areas not otherwise improved in accordance with approved site
plans or subdivisions shall be sodded or seeded and maintained.
   (C)   All off-street parking areas shall include unpaved, landscaped islands
at a rate of one island for each 12 parking stalls (the islands do not need to
be installed at exact 12-stall intervals, but the total number of required
islands must be met by spreading the islands at intervals designed to achieve
the desired aesthetic effect of breaking up large expanses of pavement). Each
landscaped island shall be 180 square feet in size (eight feet by 18 feet
measured from back of curb; eight feet by 37 feet if combined in head-to-head
parking row) and shall be contained by a raised concrete curb that meets city
standards. Plantings shall include one shade tree and two shrubs per 18-foot
island, or two shade or ornamental trees and four shrubs between the two trees
per 37-foot islands. Sod or minimum-maintenance groundcover shall be placed on
the remainder of the island.
   (D)   The owner shall provide the city with cash, approved letter of credit,
or other surety satisfactory to the city to guarantee the proper installation
and growth of the approved landscape plan. The performance bond shall be
furnished by the developer prior to obtaining a building permit that is equal
to the amount of the required landscaping to be installed. The bond may be held
by the city for up to one year subsequent to the installation of required
landscaping.
   (E)   Root barriers may be required for trees in parking islands or near
pavement or utilities, at the discretion of the City Council as recommended by
the City Planner or City Engineer.
   (F)   Transition areas between landscaped and sodded areas are required to
have landscape edging installed.
   (G)   GROUNDCOVER is defined as minimum-maintenance, low-growing vegetation
designed to be planted in lieu of grass, or ornamental rock, wood chips, mulch
and the like.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.089 SIZE AND SPECIES OF PLANTINGS.
   (A)   (1)   Required plantings shall be of the following minimum size:
 
Coniferous trees                6’ ht. (total height with berm)
Ornamental trees                1.5” DBH
Shade/deciduous island trees    1.5” DBH
Shade/deciduous perimeter trees 1.5” DBH
Shrubs                          5-gal or 24” ht. unless specified above
 
      (2)   Shade/deciduous trees typically grow to a height of greater than 25
feet at maturity and have a canopied appearance; ornamental trees are shorter,
typically flowering, without much shade value.
   (B)   (1)   Required plantings shall conform to the following species
standards: all trees used in site developments shall be indigenous to the
appropriate hardiness zone and physical characteristics of the site.
      (2)   Perimeter trees may be 100% deciduous, but may not be more than 33%
coniferous. The City Council may determine a different percentage is necessary
to allow for screening, sight lines and the like.
      (3)   Required trees shall not be more than 25% of any single species.
      (4)   All tree, shrub and groundcover species submitted on the landscape
plan will be reviewed by the City Planner.
      (5)   All trees shall be chosen from species other than those listed
below.
 
Acer negundo         Boxelder (ash-leaved maple)
Fraxinus (Alt)       Ash (all species, varieties and cultivars)
Ginkgo biloba        Ginkgo (maidenhair tree female only)
Populus deltoids     Eastern cottonwood
Populus nigra italic Lombardy poplar
Rhamnus Cathartica   Buckthorn (common or European)
Rhamnus Frangula     Buckthorn (glossy, including all cultivars)
 
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
§ 157.100 ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   Purpose and intent.
      (1)   It is in the best interests of the city to promote high standards
of architectural design and compatibility with surrounding structures and
neighborhoods.
      (2)   However, it is not the intent of the city to unduly restrict design
freedom when reviewing project architecture in connection with a site plan.
   (B)   Applicability. This subdivision applies to all construction that
requires a site plan review in the R-6, B-2, MU-BR, MU-BI, I and PUD Zoning
Districts.
   (C)   Submission requirements. Architectural plans shall be prepared by a
registered architect or other qualified person acceptable to the City
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer and shall show the following:
      (1)   Elevation of all sides of the building;
      (2)   Type and color of exterior building materials;
      (3)   Typical floor plan;
      (4)   Dimensions of all structures;
      (5)   Location and proposed screening of trash and recycling containers,
outdoor storage items and heating, ventilation and air conditioning equipment;
and
      (6)   All proposed materials, board-mounted.
   (D)   District architectural standards.
      (1)   In the R-6, B-2, MU-BR, MU-BI, and Non-Residential PUD zoning
districts, at least 75% of the exterior building finish on all sides shall
consist of materials comparable in grade and quality to the following: brick,
natural stone, architecturally-enhanced concrete block, glass, stucco, wood, or
Hardi™ and other fiber cement siding. Architecturally-enhanced concrete block
or panels, pre-finished metal, and EIFS (Exterior Insulation and Finishing
System), may be used on the remaining 25% of the building exterior at the
discretion of the City Council. The rear elevation shall not exceed 75% of one
color if the rear of the building faces a paved street, an R-I district, or a
residential PUD.
      (2)   In the I-Industrial zoning district, at least 75% of the exterior
building finish shall consist of materials comparable in grade and quality to
the following: brick, natural stone, glass, stucco, architecturally-enhanced
concrete block or panels, or Hardi™ and other fiber cement siding. Pre-finished
metal, EIFS, and wood may be used on the remaining 25% of the building exterior
at the discretion of the City Council.
      (3)   In the R-6, B-2, MU-BR, MU-BI, I, and Non-Residential PUD
districts, if the building is designed that garage doors are not visible to any
adjacent properties at a site line of an eight foot mean elevation, they may be
prefinished metal with Council approved screening.
   (E)   General standards.
      (1)   All buildings must have a continuous, perimeter foundation. Post-
frame construction method is permitted.
      (2)   All rooftop or ground-mounted mechanical equipment shall be
screened from view with materials compatible with the principal structure. Low-
profiled mechanical units that blend in with the building architecture are
exempt from this screening requirement.
      (3)   In the refacing of existing, metal-finished structures, at least
75% of the new exterior building finish on the front and side elevations shall
consist of materials comparable in grade and quality to the following: brick,
natural stone, glass, EIFS, EIFS panels, stucco, wood, or Hardi™ and other
fiber cement siding. Architecturally enhanced concrete block or panels and pre-
finished metal may be used on the remaining 25% of the front and side building
exteriors at the discretion of the City Council. The rear elevation may consist
of 100% architecturally enhanced concrete block, EIFS, stucco, or EIFS panels.
If the rear of the building faces a paved street, the aforementioned front
elevation requirements shall apply.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014; Ord. 2, passed 4-1-2015; Ord. 2018-2, passed 12-19-
2018; Ord. 2025-01, passed 7-2-2025)
§ 157.101 EXCEPTIONS FROM HEIGHT LIMITATION.
   (A)   Church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes which do not contain
useable space; monuments, fire and hose towers, flag poles, chimneys and
parapets, and walks extending not more than three feet above the maximum height
of the building. Cooling towers and elevator penthouses may be constructed to a
height which is up to 50% in excess of the limitations set forth elsewhere in
this chapter if approved as provided within this chapter.
   (B)   Heights allowed under this section shall be permitted only by a
conditional use permit granted by resolution of the City Council determining
that such structure would not be dangerous to the public and would not
adversely affect adjoining or adjacent property.
   (C)   (1)   On that portion of any lot which slopes downhill from the street
at an average slope of 25% or more (measured in the general direction of the
side lot lines) and is to be occupied by the main building, an additional 12
feet of height may be permitted in such main building provided the lowest floor
shall not be less than ten feet below the average established property line
grades along the front lot.
      (2)   The floor of the basement shall be considered the lowest floor and
a cellar or sub-basement floor shall not be counted.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.102 ACCESSORY AND UTILITY BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Except where specifically stated, the following restrictions apply
only to structures in R-1 and R-2 Zoning Districts.
   (B)   Footings or concrete slabs are required for buildings larger than 200
square feet in any zoning district where permitted.
   (C)   Building permits are required except for buildings smaller than 200
square feet that are detached in all districts.
   (D)   Accessory buildings shall not be constructed on any lot prior to the
time of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory.
   (E)   Detached accessory buildings shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
   (F)   In the R-6 Zoning District, the height of the accessory building shall
not exceed 80% of the principal building.
   (G)   In multi-family and commercial zoning districts, accessory structures
shall be constructed of the same building material as the principal structure.
   (H)   Cellars, basements, tents, trailers and accessory buildings shall not,
at any time, be used as an occupied dwelling unit.
   (I)   Maximum size of combined accessory structures shall not exceed 1,000
square feet. Total impervious coverage for any lot shall not exceed 35%.
   (J)   All detached structures larger than 200 square feet shall be of
compatible design and a complementary color scheme to that of the principal
building.
   (K)   Maximum number of accessory buildings (not including primary garage)
serving any one principal structure shall be two, with a limit of one over 200
square feet.
   (L)   Any utility building shall not be used for storage of commercial
equipment.
   (M)   Minimum size of utility buildings shall be 36 square feet and maximum
size shall be 200 square feet. Maximum height shall be 15 feet.
   (N)   Utility building setbacks shall be five feet from all property lines
and outside of utility easements.
   (O)   One utility building per property.
   (P)   Shipping/storage containers and trailers in residential areas shall be
prohibited for use as a storage structure, except as a temporary unit for
moving purposes for a period of not more than one consecutive month in a 12-
month period or as a temporary construction project container for a limited
time not to exceed three consecutive months.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014; Ord. 4, passed 4-27-2016; Ord. 2025-01, passed 7-2-
2025)
§ 157.103 LOTS OF RECORD.
   Any residential lot created and recorded prior to the effective date of this
chapter may be used for any permitted use even though the lot area and/or
dimensions are less than those required for the district in which the lot is
located; provided that:
   (A)   Other requirements of the district are met;
   (B)   No adjacent land or lot is owned by the owner of the lot in question
or has been sold by an adjacent owner since the effective date of this chapter;
and
   (C)   Any lot so excepted shall not be less than 40 feet in width.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.104 AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND LOTS.
   (A)   If, within any proposed plat in the R-1 District, the subdivider feels
that it will not violate the intent of this chapter to deviate from the width
and area requirements listed within the R-1 Zoning District, he or she may
propose a plan to provide alternate sized lots.
   (B)   No lot shall be approved for a reduction in width or area by more than
5% unless the subdivider indicates the type of house to be constructed upon
such lots; and, provided that, not more than 10% of the lots in such plat are
so reduced and that no other variances from the lot setback or impervious
surface requirements are required to construct a structure.
   (C)   All such undersized lots shall be specifically called to the attention
of both the Park/Planning Commission and City Council by the applicant during
the platting process.
   (D)   The minimum dimension of any part of the basic dwelling shall be 22
feet. This shall not be construed to prohibit smaller individual room additions
or to restrict architectural design flexibility or integrity.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.105 NUMBER OF PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS ON A LOT.
   No more than one principal building shall be located on a zoning lot.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.106 FENCES.
   (A)   Boundary line fences shall be located entirely upon the private
property of the party constructing the fence. The party constructing the fence
shall be responsible for maintaining that part of its property between the
fence and the property line.
   (B)   Any applicant for a fence permit must establish the boundary lines of
the property by a survey thereof, existing or to be made by any registered land
surveyor or by showing the stake markers of the surveyed lot.
   (C)   Fences in all districts shall conform to the following.
      (1)   Fences in all districts shall be maintained so that all surfaces
shall be uniformly painted, unpainted or stained in a neat and aesthetically
pleasing condition.
      (2)   The fence shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair
and shall not be allowed to become and remain in a condition of disrepair or
danger, or constitute a nuisance, public or private.
      (3)   No fence shall be permitted on a public right-of-way or boulevard
area.
      (4)   No fence shall be erected on a corner lot that will obstruct or
impede the clear view of an intersection by approaching traffic.
      (5)   Any fence which is dangerous to the public’s safety or general
welfare and health is a public nuisance and the city may commence proceedings
for the abatement thereof. Electric fences may not be used as boundary fences
and such material as hog wire, barbed wire, safety, construction, silt or snow
fencing will not be allowed as permanent fencing.
      (6)   Snow fencing may be used from November 1 to April 1 with the
approval of a fence permit from the City Council.
      (7)   All construction or silt fencing may be used for any work requiring
a building permit and for the duration of said permit; no fence permit shall be
required. Other jurisdictions may require a longer time period for the silt
fence or construction fence to remain in place.
      (8)   The side of the fence considered to be the face (finished side as
opposed to structural supports) shall face abutting property.
   (D)   Fencing in residential districts (R-1, R-2, R-6): a fence may be
located inside the rear lot line to a maximum height of six feet and to a
maximum of six feet inside the side lot lines up to the point where it is
parallel to the front edge of a house. From this point forward to the right-of-
way, the height of the fence shall not exceed a height of four feet. Any fence
that crosses the width of the front yard shall not exceed a height of four
feet.
   (E)   Fencing in business and industrial districts (MU-BR, B-2 and I-1):
fences may be located along a lot line to a height of eight feet.
   (F)   A variance is needed for fences exceeding the above mentioned heights.
   (G)   (1)   Outdoor swimming pools as described below shall be adequately
fenced to prevent uncontrolled access from the street or adjacent property.
      (2)   Outdoor swimming pools with a capacity of 1,500 gallons or more, or
with a depth of three feet or more, of water shall be fenced in compliance with
regulations below.
      (3)   A fence at least four feet in height measured from ground level
shall completely enclose any permanent, outdoor swimming pool, whether it is an
above-ground or in-ground pool, that equals or exceeds the conditions set forth
above. Any fence over six feet in height measured from ground level shall
require a variance.
      (4)   No existing fence in violation of this subdivision will be allowed
to be replaced or rebuilt. Should an existing fence be replaced or rebuilt, it
must come under the regulations of this division (G).
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.107 OUTDOOR STORAGE.
   (A)   (1)   Recreational vehicles, camping trailers, pop-up campers
(collectively “RV” or “RVs”) may not be used for living, sleeping or
housekeeping while parked or stored on any property within the city except as
expressly authorized herein. RVs shall not be parked within any setback
required on any parcel of land within the city under this chapter, except on a
driveway (bituminous, concrete or pavers or two inches of Class 5 material). An
RV may encroach upon the front yard setback, but not block any sidewalk. Once
each calendar year, a RV may be used for camping purposes on an individual tax
parcel (multiple adjacent tax parcels under common ownership are considered to
be one tax parcel for the purpose of this division (A)) for up to 14 continuous
days. The use must be continuous. By way of example, it is not permissible to
use a RV on a tax parcel for overnight camping for two non-consecutive seven-
day periods. Any use of a RV for camping purposes beyond 14 consecutive days
requires a permit issued by the city and will only be issued based on a
reasonable hardship such as a fire or other damage to the residential property
on the tax parcel which precludes occupancy at the dwelling house.
      (2)   Additionally, a RV may be stored (but not used or occupied) on a
bituminous, concrete, pavers or two inches of Class 5 material driveway;
provided, it does not encroach upon any setback, except upon the front yard
setback, and does not block any sidewalk.
   (B)   In all residential districts, all materials and equipment shall be
stored within a building or fully screened so as not to be visible from
adjoining properties, except for the following:
      (1)   Laundry drying and recreational equipment;
      (2)   Construction and landscaping materials and related equipment
currently being used on the premises; and
      (3)   Agricultural equipment and materials if these are used or intended
for use on the premises. (Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.108 SUPPLEMENTARY YARD REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No burial of human remains shall be permitted, except in church or
municipal cemeteries.
   (B)   The following shall be permitted setback or yard encroachments:
      (1)   Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels,
ornamental features, mechanical devices, cornices, eaves, gutters and the like;
provided, they do not encroach the setback by more than three feet;
      (2)   Yard lights; provided, the direct light source is not visible from
a public right-of-way or an adjacent residential property;
      (3)   Fences as regulated within the text of this code;
      (4)   Name plate signs for one- and two-family dwellings;
      (5)   Plant material, trellises and open arbors;
      (6)   Flagpoles, sidewalks and driveways (as permitted in §§
157.058 and
157.070 through
157.072 of this chapter);
      (7)   Balconies in rear yards;
      (8)   Awnings and canopies not supported by posts or pillars; and
      (9)   In side and rear yard areas: fire escapes not to exceed a width of
three feet and bay windows not to exceed a depth of two feet and a 20 square
foot area.
   (C)   Except in the MU-BR, Mixed Use - Business Industrial District,
expanded minimum setbacks shall apply for structures located adjacent to
arterial roadways as identified in the comprehensive plan: arterial streets -
50 feet.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.109 FALLOUT SHELTERS.
   (A)   Fallout, blast or storm shelters are permitted as principal or
accessory uses and structures in any district are subject to the yard and
setback regulations of the zoning district.
   (B)   (1)   Such shelters may contain, or be contained in, other structures
or may be constructed separately.
      (2)   Additionally, the shelter may be used for any principal or
accessory use permitted in the district subject to the district regulations on
such use.
   (C)   Shelters shall not be used for principal uses or accessory uses
prohibited expressly or by implication in the district.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.110 PRIVATE UTILITY SYSTEMS.
   (A)   On-site water supply systems.
      (1)   All new residential, commercial, industrial and institutional
buildings shall have their water supply provided by the municipal water supply
system.
      (2)   No wells for the purpose of providing domestic water for human
household use shall be drilled, installed or constructed, and no existing well
shall be further developed to provide potable water.
      (3)   New wells may be drilled for agricultural and horticultural use,
but there shall be no cross-connections between these wells and the city water
system. A cross-connection shall be any means by which a private system could
contaminate the city water system and need not be a direct pipe connection.
      (4)   Any private well now providing water shall be completely
disconnected from the plumbing system at such time as the consumer installs a
service connection to the city system.
   (B)   On-site sewage disposal systems.
      (1)   Existing and future buildings intended for human habitation or use
shall not be allowed to use any method of sewage disposal other than the city
sewer system.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any
privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended for the
treatment or disposal of sewage or wastes.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.111 ANTENNAS AND TOWERS.
   (A)   Introduction.
      (1)   The city has studied the impact of amateur communication antennas
and the towers which support them within the city limits.
      (2)   The city has considered and referred to FCC Rule PRMU-BR concerning
amateur radio communications.
      (3)   The city acknowledges that it is obligated to accommodate
reasonable amateur radio communications and that the regulations imposed by the
city in relation to antennas and the towers which support such antennas shall
create the minimal practical regulations which are necessary to ensure the
public health, safety and welfare. The city has determined that the regulations
enacted herein are reasonable and necessary in order to maximize both the use
of existing structures and in order to reduce the number of antennas needed to
serve the community and to minimize the adverse visual effects of antennas
through careful siting standards.
   (B)   Towers supporting amateur radio antennas. In the R-1, R-2 and R-
6 Zoning Districts, towers more than 35 feet in height supporting amateur radio
antennas and antennas on such towers may be a conditional use subject to the
following.
      (1)   No more than one tower may be constructed on any lot.
      (2)   The tower (including the antenna) shall not exceed 60 feet in
height as measured from ground level. The tower must be constructed within the
rear yard setback of the lot in question. The tower may not be constructed in
the front or side yard setbacks. The tower may not be constructed on any
drainage or utility easement.
      (3)   Roof mounted antennas may not exceed a height of 15 feet from the
point at which the lower of the tower or antenna joins the roof.
      (4)   No tower or any antenna array on such tower shall have affixed or
attached to it in any way any lights, signs, flashers or reflectors, unless
required by the Federal Aviation Agency or the Federal Communications
Commission.
      (5)   Every tower affixed to the ground shall be enclosed from ground
level to a height of at least six feet above the ground with some type of a
mechanism designed to preclude children from climbing on the tower.
      (6)   Each tower shall be screened to the greatest extent practicable to
minimize visual impacts on surrounding properties. The tower shall comply with
all applicable building, electrical, fire code and manufacturing standards.
      (7)   As a condition precedent to erecting the tower, the person desiring
to erect such tower shall provide the city with proof of liability insurance
covering personal injury or property damage in the event that such injury or
damage is caused by the tower.
      (8)   By applying for a conditional use permit to construct such a tower,
the applicant agrees to indemnify the city and its officers and personnel,
against any claim, demand, damages, actions or causes of action and from any
fees, costs, disbursements or expenses of defending the same in relation to the
tower and any antenna raised thereon.
      (9)   No tower or antenna in an R-1, R-2 or R-6 Zoning District may be
used for commercial wireless communication purposes including cellular
telephones, personal communication services, specialized mobilized radios,
enhanced specialized mobilized radios, paging and similar services that are
sold to businesses and the general public.
      (10)   As a condition precedent to the issuance of a conditional use
permit, the applicant must agree that in the event any resident within 150 feet
of the tower and antenna claims that the antenna interferes with the affected
resident’s radio or television reception, the applicant, at the applicant’s
expense, must retain an engineer licensed in the state experienced in
telecommunications interference to conduct an interference study. The
interference study must be provided to the city within 60 days of the complaint
of interference. If the interference study determines that the applicant’s
operations are the source of the interference, the applicant shall take
appropriate corrective actions to eliminate the interference. If the
interference study determines that the applicant’s operations are not the
source of the interference, for purposes of the conditional use permit, the
study shall be presumed conclusive, and any further claims of interference by
the complaining resident shall be resolved by the Federal Communications
Commission.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.112 NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES.
   It is the purpose of this section to provide for the regulation of non-
conforming buildings, structures and uses and to specify those requirements,
circumstances and conditions under which non-conforming structures and uses
will be operated and maintained.
   (A)   Any structure or use lawfully existing upon the effective date of this
chapter may be continued as a legal non-conforming use, except as hereinafter
stated. Whenever a legal non-conforming use has been changed to a conforming
use, it shall not thereafter be changed to a non-conforming use. No expansion,
enlargement or intensification of a non-conforming use or structure is
permitted.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the repair, replacement,
restoration, maintenance or improvement, but not including the expansion, of a
legally non-conforming building or use to prevent deterioration, obsolescence,
depreciation and wear. Any non-conformity, including lawful use or occupation
of land or premises existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter, may
be continued unless the non-conforming use is destroyed by fire or other peril
to the extent of greater than 50% of its market value and no building permit
has been applied for within 180 days of when the property was damaged. Market
value shall be determined based upon the building’s assessed value on record
with the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer at the time immediately prior to
the loss or damage to the use in question.
   (C)   Whenever a legal non-conforming structure has been damaged in any
manner, it may be constructed and continued as a legal non-conforming use
within 12 months unless the damages to such structure total more than 50% of
its fair market value as determined by the Building Inspector and approved by
the City Council. If the damage exceeds 50% of fair market value, the owner
may, within six months, apply to the City Council for a special permit to
reconstruct and continue its non-conforming use or operation. Approval to
rebuild shall be granted only upon finding:
      (1)   Such rebuilding or restoration will not substantially extend the
probable duration of such non-conforming use;
      (2)   Restoration will not increase the size, intensity or character of
the use that was destroyed;
      (3)   Restoration constitutes no more than the replacement of the damaged
non-conforming use; and
      (4)   Restoration will be in compliance with all Building Code
requirements.
   (D)   Whenever a legal non-conforming use of land shall have been
discontinued for a continuous period of one year, any future use shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
   (E)   (1)   Any legal non-conforming use of land not involving a structure,
or any structure with a market value of $1,000 or less, may be continued for a
period of 36 months from the effective date of this chapter. Any sign subject
to control by this code, regardless of its value, may be continued as a legal
non-conforming use for a period of 24 months. At the end of the aforementioned
time periods, the use shall be illegal non-conforming and the offenders shall
be in violation of this chapter.
      (2)   Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to
transfer an area from one district to another district of another
classification, the provisions in this chapter shall also apply to any existing
uses that become non-conforming as a result of the boundary changes.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.113 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS; NUISANCES, HAZARDS AND DRAINAGE.
   (A)   The guiding of urban development so as to develop a compatible
relationship of uses depends upon certain standards being maintained.
   (B)   Uses permitted in the various district, conditional uses, uses
permitted with restrictions and accessory uses shall conform to the following
standards.
      (1)   Nuisance standards.
         (a)   Noise. Any use established shall be so operated that no undue
noise resulting from said use is perceptible beyond the boundaries of the
property on which such use is located. This standard shall not apply to
incidental traffic, parking, loading, construction, farming or maintenance
operations. Noise standards shall be in compliance with the state’s Pollution
Control Agency standards.
         (b)   Vibration. Any use creating periodic earth shaking vibrations
shall be prohibited if such vibrations are perceptible beyond boundaries of the
property on which the use is located. The standards shall not apply to
vibrations created during the process of construction of the building or
parking areas.
         (c)   Glare and heat. Any use requiring an operation producing an
intense heat or light transmission shall be performed with the necessary
shielding to prevent such heat or light from being detectable at the lot line
of the site in which the use is located. Lighting in all instances shall be
diffused or directed away from the residential districts and public streets.
         (d)   Smoke and particulate matter. Any use established, enlarged or
remodeled after the effective date of this chapter shall be so operated as to
control the emission of smoke or particulate matter to the degree that it is
not detrimental to or shall endanger the public health, safety or general
welfare of the public. Any use shall be so operated as to meet the minimum
requirements of the state’s Pollution Control Agency standards.
         (e)   Odors. Any use established, enlarged or remodeled shall be so
operated as to prevent the emission of odorous matter of such quality as to be
readily detectable at any point beyond the lot line of the site on which such
use is located. The emission of odor by any use shall be in compliance with and
regulated by the state’s Pollution Control Agency standards.
         (f)   Toxic or noxious matter. Any use established shall be so
operated as not to discharge across the boundaries of the lot or through
percolation into the subsoil beyond the boundaries of the lot wherein such use
is located toxic or noxious matter in such concentrations as to be detrimental
to or endanger the public health, safety or welfare, or cause injury or damage
to property or business.
      (2)   Hazard standards.
         (a)   Explosives. Any use requiring the storage, utilization or
manufacturing of products which could decompose by detonation shall be located
not less than 400 feet from any residential district and shall require a
conditional use permit. All uses must have a certificate of compliance from the
state’s Fire Marshal office as well as the Pollution Control Agency. This
section shall not apply to the storage or usage of liquid petroleum or natural
gas for normal residential or business purposes.
         (b)   Radiation emissions. All activities that emit radioactivity
shall comply with the minimum requirements in the state’s pollution standards.
         (c)   Electrical emissions. There shall be no electrical disturbance
adversely affecting the operation of any equipment, including, but not limited
to, radio and television reception, other than that of the creator of the
disturbance.
         (d)   Toxic material. Any use shall not discharge toxic matter into
the atmosphere, water or subsoil.
      (3)   Drainage standards. No land shall be developed and no use shall be
permitted that result in water run-off causing flooding or erosion on adjacent
properties. Such run-off shall be properly channeled into a storm drain,
watercourse, ponding area or other suitable facility.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.114 FARMING.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, a FARM shall be defined as a parcel of
land that is used primarily for the commercial, soil-dependent cultivation of
agricultural crop production and/or for the raising of livestock.
   (B)   All farms currently in existence, from the effective date of this
chapter, shall be permitted to continue operation subject to the following
conditions.
      (1)   Limited sales of products produced may be conducted on the premises
from a roadside stand but such stands shall not exceed 12 feet in height or 500
square feet in floor area, and no portion of any such stand shall be located or
erected closer than 45 feet from any curb line or edge of roadway.
      (2)   Agricultural uses including truck gardening and other horticultural
uses, but excepting commercial animal farms, fur farms, kennels and poultry
farms, are permitted uses in the district in which an existing operation is
located provided any new building or stable in which farm animals are kept
shall be a distance of 100 feet or more from any other lot in any other
residential district.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.115 MINING.
   (A)   Permits for mining operations in all zoning districts shall be by
conditional use permit only.
   (B)   The following conditions must be met:
      (1)   Submittal of a registered land survey indicating where the
processing is to be done;
      (2)   No permit shall be granted for a period of longer than 12 months;
      (3)   Operations shall have direct access to an arterial road as
identified in the comprehensive plan;
      (4)   A plan showing the route of trucks moving to and from the site in
removing processed material from the site;
      (5)   The site shall be returned to its natural state as it was prior to
mining including, but not limited to, trees (on a caliper inch basis), grasses,
private roads and the like; and
      (6)   Any other conditions the Council deems necessary in order to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the city.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.116 LAND RECLAMATION.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, LAND RECLAMATION is the reclaiming of
land by depositing of materials so as to elevate the grade or elevation of
land.
   (B)   Land reclamation shall be permitted only by conditional use permit in
all districts.
   (C)   Land reclamation shall be defined as meeting both of the following
conditions:
      (1)   The deposition of more than 400 cubic yards of fill; and
      (2)   The raising of any portion of the property to an elevation greater
than two feet above the original grade.
   (D)   The following conditions shall be met:
      (1)   A finished grade plan of the site which will not adversely affect
the adjacent lands and as a condition thereof shall regulate the type of fill
permitted;
      (2)   Plan for rodent control;
      (3)   Plan for fire control and general maintenance of the site;
      (4)   Plan for vehicular ingress and egress to the site;
      (5)   Plan for the control of material disturbed by wind or hauling of
material to and or from the site;
      (6)   Upon receipt of application the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer
shall forward a copy to the City Engineer for review. Where watersheds or
wetlands are in question, the state’s Department of Natural Resources shall
also be contacted. These technical advisers shall be instructed by the City
Council to prepare reports for the Council; and
      (7)   Any other conditions the Council deems necessary in order to
protect the health, safety and
welfare of the city.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.117 GRADING.
   (A)   Grading is the process of changing the existing landscape by altering
the existing elevation of any property. Subject to the exceptions set forth
below, no land shall be altered or graded and no vegetation shall be removed
without first obtaining a permit from the city. The following exception shall
be allowed:
      (1)   A fill less than one foot in depth and placed on natural terrain
with a slope flatter than five horizontal to one vertical, or less than three
feet in depth, not intended to support structures, which does not exceed 50
cubic yards on any one lot and does not obstruct a drainage course, and such
other exceptions as listed in Ch. 70 of the Uniform Building Code;
      (2)   Construction of buildings for which a permit has been applied for
and issued, provided the contemplated excavation or filling operation was
sufficiently described at the time of building permit application;
      (3)   Excavations or fills by state, county or city authorities in
connection with the construction or maintenance of roads, highways, parks or
utilities or on slope or utility easements; provided, such activity is
conducted within public rights-of-way or easements;
      (4)   Curb cuts, utility hook-ups or street openings for which another
permit is required from the city; and
      (5)   Grading plans approved as part of plat approvals.
   (B)   Issuance of a grading permit shall be made subject to the following
minimum requirements and such other requirements as the City Council may
specify to protect the public interest.
      (1)   All operations shall be conducted within the property lines.
Grading that extends over the property lines shall require easements from
adjacent property owners. Grading within the city right-of- way shall be by
city permission.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to dig and leave open,
unfenced, unbarricaded or uncovered any pit, quarry, hole or excavation,
including basements, wells, septic tanks or cesspools.
      (3)   Finished grades shall not adversely affect adjacent properties.
      (4)   Drainage facilities shall be provided to effectively divert or
convey storm water run-off.
      (5)   Upon completion of grading operations the disturbed area shall be
restored with topsoil or other approved cover material and shall be reseeded to
establish approved vegetation.
      (6)   Provisions for effectively controlling fire, rodents and dispersal
of material by wind, or by hauling to and from the site, and for general
maintenance of the site shall be made.
   (C)   The permit shall be in effect for six months unless otherwise
specified by the City Council.
   (D)   The city may require appropriate erosion control measures to prevent
soil erosion.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.118 MOTOR FUEL STATIONS AND CONVENIENCE STORES.
   Motor fuel stations and motor fuel station convenience stores shall be
allowed in the MU-BR, B-2 and I-1 Zoning Districts subject to the following.
   (A)   For architectural purposes, each side of a motor fuel station/
convenience store shall be considered as a front face.
   (B)   Motor fuel station/convenience stores shall be architecturally
designed so as to be as compatible as possible with the general architectural
intent of the area on which they are located.
   (C)   The setback of any overhead canopy or weather protection, freestanding
or projecting from the station structure, shall be not less than ten feet from
the street right-of-way line or less than 20 feet from an adjacent property
line.
   (D)   The total height of any overhead canopy or weather protection shall
not exceed 20 feet.
   (E)   Open dead storage of motor vehicles, other than motor vehicles for
rent, shall not be permitted for a period of more than 72 hours.
   (F)   No sales of trailers, campers, motor vehicles or boats shall be
permitted.
   (G)   A minimum 15-foot landscaped yard shall be planted and maintained
behind the property line along all adjacent public streets.
   (H)   No less than 25% of the gross lot area shall be landscaped.
   (I)   The entire motor fuel site, other than that part devoted to
landscaping and structures, shall be surfaced with concrete or bituminous
surfacing to control dust and to provide adequate drainage, and such surfaces
shall be designed to meet the requirements of a minimum five-ton axle load.
   (J)   (1)   All interior curbing shall be constructed within the property
lines to separate driving and parking areas from landscaping areas.
      (2)   Such curbing shall be constructed of concrete or bituminous
material and shall be of a six- inch non-surmountable barrier type design.
   (K)   Whenever a motor fuel station/convenience store abuts a residential
district, a fence or compact landscaped hedge not less than 50% opaque nor less
than six feet in height shall be erected and maintained along the side and rear
property line that abuts the residential district.
   (L)   All trash, waste materials and obsolete automobile parts shall be
stored within a separate enclosure behind the principal structure.
   (M)   (1)   All rental campers, trailers or motor vehicles shall be stored
within the rear and/or side yards not adjacent to the street.
      (2)   Said rental shall not be stored within the front yard setback or
the side yard adjacent to the street.
   (N)   Adequate area shall be designed for snow storage such that clear
visibility shall be maintained from the property to any public street.
   (O)   All outdoor lighting shall be provided with lenses, reflectors or
shades which will concentrate the light upon the premises so as to prevent any
undue glare or rays of light therefrom being directly visible from any adjacent
street, roadway or private property occupied for residential purposes.
   (P)   Minimum lot width at the front building setback line shall be 150
feet.
   (Q)   Setbacks:
      (1)   Front yard: 60 feet;
      (2)   Adjacent to street right-of-way: 60 feet;
      (3)   Adjacent to another lot: 30 feet; and
      (4)   Pump setback from right-of-way: 25 feet.
   (R)   Outdoor storage and display of goods for sale are permitted as
follows:
      (1)   Pump island storage and display of goods for sale shall:
         (a)   Be allowed only at the interior fuel pump islands;
         (b)   Be allowed only between the canopy stanchions;
         (c)   Not exceed four feet by four feet by four feet size per eligible
island;
         (d)   Not interfere with the movement of traffic; and
         (e)   Be kept in a neat and orderly appearance with excess wrapping
removed regularly.
      (2)   Sidewalk storage and display of goods for sale shall allow a
minimum width of 36 inches free of displays, except where Americans with
Disabilities Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq., regulates differently.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.119 DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   For purposes of this chapter, DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENTS shall mean
drive-in restaurants, fast food businesses with a drive thru and drive-in
theaters.
   (B)   Drive-in establishments shall be allowed in the MU-BR, B-2 and I
Industrial Zoning Districts subject to the following.
      (1)   No drive-in structure shall be located within 150 feet of any
residentially-zoned property.
      (2)   No drive-in structure shall be located within 200 feet of a school
or church.
      (3)   No drive-in shall be located on any street other than an arterial
roadway or business service road.
      (4)   No access drive shall be within 100 feet of intersecting street
right-of-way lines.
      (5)   No less than 25% of the gross lot area shall be landscaped.
      (6)   Adequate area shall be designated for snow storage so that clear
visibility shall be maintained from the property to any public street.
      (7)   A six-inch non-surmountable curb shall separate all walks and
landscape areas from parking areas.
      (8)   Should the use be a drive-in theater, an opaque fence not less than
eight feet in height and extending at least to within two feet of the ground
shall be constructed around the property.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014) Penalty, see §
157.999
SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
§ 157.135 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this subchapter to regulate sexually-
oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually-
oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this chapter have
neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the
content of any communicative materials, including sexually- oriented materials.
Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny
access by adults to sexually-oriented materials protected by the First
Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually-
oriented entertainment to its intended market. Neither is it the intent nor
effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene
material.
   (B)   Findings. Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects
of adult uses on the community presented in hearings and in reports made
available to the City Council, and on findings incorporated in the cases of
City of Renton v. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v.
American Mini Theaters, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), and Northend Cinema. Inc. Seattle,
585 P. 2d 1153 (Wash. 1978), and on studies in other communities including, but
not limited to: Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston, Texas;
Indianapolis, Indiana, Amarillo, Texas; Los Angeles, California; Austin, Texas;
Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; and Beaumont, Texas; and also on
findings found in the Report of Attorney General’s Working Group on the
Regulation of Sexually-Oriented Businesses, (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota),
the Council finds the following.
      (1)   Sexually-oriented businesses in the city lend themselves to
ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by
the operators of the establishments. Further, there is presently no mechanism
to make the owners of these establishments responsible for the activities that
occur on their premises.
      (2)   Certain employees of sexually-oriented businesses defined in this
chapter as adult theaters and cabarets engage in higher incidence of certain
types of sexually-oriented behavior at these businesses than employees of other
establishments.
      (3)   Sexual acts, including masturbation, oral and anal sex, occur at
sexually-oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semi-
private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos or live sex shows, as
defined under this chapter as adult bookstores, adult novelty shops, adult
video stores, adult motion picture theaters or adult arcades.
      (4)   Offering and providing such space encourages such activities, which
create unhealthy conditions.
      (5)   Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades and other
sexually-oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the
premises of such sexually-oriented businesses.
      (6)   At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities
occurring in sexually- oriented businesses, including, but not limited to,
syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodefiency virus infection (AIDS), genital
herpes, hepatitis B, Non A, Non B amebiasis, salmonella infections and shigella
infections.
      (7)   Since 1981 and to the present there has been an increasing
cumulative number of reported cases of AIDS caused by the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the United States: 600 in 1982, 2,200 in 1983,
4,600 in 1984, 8,555 in 1985 and 253,448 through 12-31-1992.
      (8)   The number of cases of early (less than one year) syphilis in the
United States reported annually has risen, with 33,613 cases reported in 1982
and 45,200 through November of 1990.
      (9)   The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported
annually remains at a high level, with over one-half million cases being
reported in 1990.
      (10)   The Surgeon General of the United States, in his or her report of
10-22-1986, has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be
transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to
infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her
newborn.
      (11)   According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection,
as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts.
      (12)   Sanitary conditions in some sexually-oriented businesses are
unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy and,
in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of
the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those
activities and maintain those facilities.
      (13)   Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found
in the areas of sexually- oriented businesses where persons view “adult”
oriented films.
      (14)   The findings noted in divisions (B)(1) through (B)(13) above raise
substantial governmental concerns.
      (15)   Sexually-oriented businesses have operational characteristics
which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial
governmental concerns.
      (16)   A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to
place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators
of the sexually-oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will
place a heretofore non-existent incentive on the operators to see that the
sexually-oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the health,
safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the
city. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is
the actual operator of the sexually-oriented business, fully in possession and
control of the premises and activities occurring therein.
      (17)   Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting
on premises with adult booths advances a substantial government interest in
curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult theaters.
      (18)   Requiring licensees of sexually-oriented businesses to keep
information regarding current employees and certain past employees will help
reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the
identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from
working in such establishments.
      (19)   The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately
responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually-
oriented businesses, where such information is substantially related to the
significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in
preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases.
      (20)   It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable
diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees
who may engage in the conduct which this subchapter is designed to prevent or
who are likely to be witnesses to such activity.
      (21)   The fact that an applicant for an adult use license has been
convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption that the
applicant is likely to engage in that conduct in contravention of this
subchapter.
      (22)   The barring of such individuals from the management of adult uses
for a period of years serves as a deterrent to and prevents conduct which leads
to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases.
      (23)   The general welfare, health and safety of the citizens of the city
will be promoted by the enactment of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.136 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin-operated, slug-operated or for any form of consideration, or
electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture
machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image-producing
devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at
any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or
characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE.
      (1)   A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal purposes,
offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the
following:
         (a)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion picture, video cassettes or video reproductions,
slides or other visual representations which are characterized by the depiction
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
         (b)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use
in connection with specified sexual activities.
      (2)   A commercial establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offer for sale or rental of material depicting
or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and
still be categorized as ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO
STORE. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial
establishments from being categorized as an ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY
STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE so long as one of its principal business purposes is
the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials which
are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:
      (1)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude;
      (2)   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
      (3)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and
has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the
availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions.
   ADULT MOTEL. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
      (1)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way
which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic
reproductions;
      (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less
than ten hours; or
      (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room
for a period of time that is less than ten hours.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where, for any form
of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar
photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity
or semi-nude, or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
   EMPLOYEE. A person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually-
oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis, whether or not
the person is designated an employee, independent contractor, agent or
otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other
compensation by the operator of said business. EMPLOYEE does not include a
person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or
equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
   ESCORT. A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
   ESCORT AGENCY. A person or business association who furnishes, offers to
furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Any of the following:
      (1)   The opening or commencement of any sexually-oriented business as a
new business;
      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually-
oriented business, to any sexually-oriented business;
      (3)   The additions of any sexually-oriented business to any other
existing sexually-oriented business; or
      (4)   The relocation of any sexually-oriented business.
   LICENSEE. A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually-oriented
business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on
the application for a license; and, in the case of an employee, a person in
whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in a sexually-
oriented business.
   NUDE MODEL STUDIO.
      (1)   Any place where a person who appears semi-nude, in a state of
nudity, or who displays specified anatomical areas and is provided to be
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly
depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
      (2)   NUDE MODEL STUDIO shall not include a proprietary school licensed
by the state or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or
in part by public taxation; a private college or university which maintains and
operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college,
junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a
structure:
         (a)   That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and
no other advertising that indicates a nude or semi-nude person is available for
viewing;
         (b)   Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll
at least three days in advance of the class; and/or
         (c)   Where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the
premises at any one time.
   NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a
fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully
opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male
genitals in a discernible turgid state.
   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association
or other legal entity.
   SEMI-NUDE or IN A SEMI-NUDE CONDITION. The showing of the female breast
below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point or
the showing of the male or female rear of the body which lies between two
imaginary lines running parallel to the ground when a person is standing, the
first or top of such line drawn at the top of the cleavage of the nates and
second or bottom line drawn at the lowest visible point of the cleavage or the
lowest point of the curvature of the fleshy protuberance, whichever is lower,
and between two imaginary lines on each side of the body, which lines are
perpendicular to the ground and to the horizontal lines described above, and
which perpendicular lines are drawn through the point at which each nate meets
the outer side of each leg. This definition shall include the entire lower
portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the
cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt,
leotard, bathing suit or other wearing apparel; provided, the areola is not
exposed in whole or in part.
   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of
its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
      (1)   Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex; or
      (2)   Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude.
   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture
theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio or sexual encounter
center.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
      (1)   The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered; or
      (2)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.
   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY. Any of the following offenses:
      (1)   Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of
obscenity; sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual
performance by a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public
lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; engaging in organized
criminal activity; sexual assault; molestation of a child; gambling; or
distribution of a controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those
described above under the criminal or penal code of other states or countries;
      (2)   For which:
         (a)   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is
the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
         (b)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the
later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
         (c)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor
offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month
period.
      (3)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect
on the disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the
applicant.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Any of the following:
      (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;
      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or
      (3)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in divisions (1) and (2) above.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS. Any of the
following:
      (1)   The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest
in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device
which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing
the ownership or control.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.137 CLASSIFICATION.
   Sexually-oriented businesses are classified as follows:
   (A)   Adult arcades;
   (B)   Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores or adult video stores;
   (C)   Adult cabarets;
   (D)   Adult motels;
   (E)   Adult motion picture theaters;
   (F)   Adult theaters;
   (G)   Escort agencies;
   (H)   Nude model studios; and
   (I)   Sexual encounter centers.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.138 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful:
      (1)   For any person to operate a sexually-oriented business without a
valid sexually-oriented business license issued by the city pursuant to this
chapter;
      (2)   For any person who operates a sexually-oriented business who is not
licensed as a sexually- oriented business employee by the city pursuant to this
chapter; and
      (3)   For any person to obtain employment with a sexually-oriented
business without having secured a sexually-oriented business employee license
pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the
city.
   (C)   All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter. The application may request and the applicant shall provide such
information (including fingerprints) as to enable the city to determine whether
the applicant meets the qualifications established in this chapter.
   (D)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business is an
individual, the person must sign the application for a license as applicant.
   (E)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business is
other than an individual who has a 20% or greater interest in the business must
sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be
qualified under §
157.139 of this chapter and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a
license is granted.
   (F)   The completed application for a sexually-oriented business license
shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the
following documents:
      (1)   If the applicant is:
         (a)   An individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name
and any aliases and submit proof that he or she is 18 years of age;
         (b)   A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name,
and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited,
and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any; and
         (c)   A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name,
the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good
standing under the laws of its state of incorporation, the names and capacity
of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, and the name of the
registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service
of process.
      (2)   If the applicant intends to operate the sexually-oriented business
under a name other than that of the applicant; he or she must state:
         (a)   The sexually-oriented business’s fictitious name and submit the
required registration documents;
         (b)   Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant,
has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter
and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place and
jurisdiction of each;
         (c)   Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant,
has had a previous license under this chapter or other similar sexually-
oriented business ordinances from another city or county denied, suspended or
revoked, including the name and location of the sexually-oriented business for
which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of
denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or a person
residing with the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer,
director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is licensed under this
chapter whose license has been previously been denied, suspended or revoked,
including the name and location of the sexually-oriented business for which the
permit was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial,
suspension or revocation;
         (d)   Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant
holds any other licenses under this chapter or other similar sexually-oriented
business ordinance from another city or county and, if so, the names and
locations of such other licensed businesses;
         (e)   The single classification of license for which the applicant is
filing;
         (f)   The location of the proposed sexually-oriented business,
including a legal description of the property, street address and telephone
number(s), if any;
         (g)   The applicant’s mailing address and residential address;
         (h)   A recent photograph of the applicant(s);
         (i)   The applicant’s driver’s permit number, Social Security number
and/or his or her state or federally issued tax identification number;
         (j)   A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch
or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches;
         (k)   A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within
30 days prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting the
property lines and the structures containing any existing sexually-oriented
businesses within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified; the property
lines of any established religious institution/synagogue, school or public park
or recreation area within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified. For
purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or established if
it is in existence at the time an application is submitted; and
         (l)   If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business,
other than an adult motel, which shall exhibit on the premises, in a viewing
room or booth of less than 150 square feet if floor space, films, video
cassettes, other video reproductions or live entertainment which depict
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then the applicant
shall comply with the application requirements set forth in this section.
   (G)   Before any applicant may be issued a sexually-oriented business
employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be provided by the
city the following information:
      (1)   The applicant’s name or any other name (including “stage” names) or
aliases used by the individual;
      (2)   Age, date and place of birth;
      (3)   Height, weight, hair and eye color;
      (4)   Present residence address and telephone number;
      (5)   Present business address and telephone number;
      (6)   Date, issuing state and number of driver’s permit or other
identification card information;
      (7)   Social Security number; and
      (8)   Proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age.
   (H)   Attached to the application form for a sexually-oriented business
employee license, as provided above, shall be the following:
      (1)   A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant’s
face, and the applicant’s fingerprints on a form provided by the Police
Department. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the
applicant;
      (2)   A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the
five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application,
including whether such applicant previously operated or is seeking to operate,
in this or any other county, city, state or country has ever had a license,
permit or authorization to do business denied, revoked or suspended, or had any
professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked or suspended. In
the event of any such denial, revocation or suspension, state the name, the
name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction and describe in full the reason for
the denial, revocation or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation
or suspension shall be attached to the application; and
      (3)   A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified
criminal activity as defined in this chapter and, if so, the specified criminal
activity involved, and the date, place and jurisdiction of each.
   (I)   No alcoholic beverages may be served or allowed on the premises of a
sexually-oriented business.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.139 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Upon the filing of said application for a sexually-oriented business
employee license, the city shall issue a temporary license to said applicant.
The application shall then be referred to the appropriate city staff for an
investigation to be made on such information as is contained on the
application. The application process shall be completed within 30 days from the
date the completed application is filed. After the investigation, the city
shall issue a license, unless it is determined by a preponderance of the
evidence that one or more of the following findings is true:
      (1)   The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably
necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or
request for information on the application form;
      (2)   The applicant is under the age of 18 years;
      (3)   The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity,
as defined in this chapter;
      (4)   The sexually-oriented business employee license is to be used for
employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or
regulation, or prohibited by particular provisions of this subchapter; or
      (5)   The applicant has had a sexually-oriented business employee license
revoked by the city within two years of the date of the current application. If
the sexually-oriented business employee license is denied, the temporary
license previously issued is immediately deemed null and void. Denial,
suspension or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this division (A)(5)
shall be subject to appeal as set forth in §
157.144 of this chapter.
   (B)   A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual
renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the city
that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified criminal activity as
defined in this subchapter or committed any act during the existence of the
previous license, which would be grounds to deny the initial license
application. The renewal of the license shall be subject to the payment of the
fee as set forth in §
157.140 of this chapter:
      (1)   An applicant is under 18 years of age;
      (2)   An applicant or a person with whom applicant is residing is overdue
in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or
imposed upon him or her in relation to any business;
      (3)   An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary
for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form;
      (4)   An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has
been denied a license by the city to operate a sexually-oriented business
within the preceding 12 months or whose license to operate a sexually-oriented
business has been revoked within the preceding 12 months;
      (5)   An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has
been convicted of a specified criminal activity defined in this chapter;
      (6)   The premises to be used for the sexually-oriented business have not
been approved by the Health Department, Fire Department and the Building
Official as being in compliance with the applicable laws and ordinances;
      (7)   The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid; and
      (8)   An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is
not in compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   The license, if granted shall state on its face the name of the person
or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the
sexually-oriented business and the classification for which the license is
issued pursuant to division (A) above. All licenses shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually-oriented business so
that they may be easily read at any time.
   (D)   The Health Department, Fire Department and the Building Official shall
complete their certification that the premises is in compliance or not in
compliance within 20 days of receipt of the application by the city.
   (E)   A sexually-oriented business license shall issue for only one
classification as found in §
157.137 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.140 FEES.
   (A)   Every application for a sexually-oriented business license (whether
for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied
by a non-refundable application and investigation fee.
   (B)   In addition to the application and investigation fee, every sexually-
oriented business that is granted a license (new or renewal) shall pay to the
city an annual non-refundable license fee within 30 days of license issuance or
renewal.
   (C)   All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the City
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer.
   (D)   All fees are established by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.141 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the Police
Department, Health Department, Fire Department, Zoning Department or other city
departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually-oriented business
for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied
or open for business.
   (B)   A person who operates a sexually-oriented business or his or her agent
or employee commits a misdemeanor if he or she refuses to permit such lawful
inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for business.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.142 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may
be renewed only by making application as provided in §
157.138 of this chapter. Application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days
before the expiration date and, when made less than 30 days before the
expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected.
   (B)   When the city denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be
issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to
denial, the city finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has
been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90
days have elapsed since the date denial became final.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.143 SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   The city shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if it
determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has:
   (A)   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter;
   (B)   Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually-oriented business
premises as authorized by this chapter; or
   (C)   Knowing permitted gambling by any person on the sexually-oriented
business premises.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.144 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The city shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in §
157.143 of this chapter occurs and the license has been suspended within the
preceding 12 months.
   (B)   The city shall revoke a license if it determines that:
      (1)   A licensee gives false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process;
      (2)   A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of
controlled substances on the premises;
      (3)   A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
      (4)   A licensee knowingly operated the sexually-oriented business during
a period of time when the licensee’s license was suspended;
      (5)   Except in the case of an adult motel, a licensee has knowingly
allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or
other sex act to occur in or on the licensed premises; or
      (6)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city, county or state
for any taxes or fees past due.
   (C)   When the city revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one
year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually-oriented license for one
year from the date the revocation became effective. If, subsequent to
revocation, the city finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected
or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have
elapsed since the date the revocation became effective.
   (D)   After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an
application, or suspension or revocation of any license, the applicant or
licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in any
court of competent jurisdiction. The administrative action shall be promptly
reviewed by the court.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.145 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a
licensee operate a sexually- oriented business under the authority of a license
at any place other than the address designated in the application.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.146 LOCATIONS.
   (A)   A person commits a misdemeanor if that person operates or causes to be
operated a sexually- oriented business in any zoning district other than
industrial as defined and described in this chapter.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be
operated a sexually-oriented business within 300 feet of:
      (1)   A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used
primarily for religious worship and related religious activities;
      (2)   A public or private educational facility including, but not limited
to, child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens,
elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools,
middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools,
continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges and
universities; school includes the school grounds, but does not include the
facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a
school;
      (3)   A boundary of a residential district as defined in this chapter; a
public park or recreational area which has been designated for park or
recreational activities including, but not limited to, a park, playground,
nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis
courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness areas or other similar public land
within the city which is under the control, operation or management of the city
park and recreation authorities;
      (4)   The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined
in this chapter;
      (5)   An entertainment business which is oriented primarily towards
children or family entertainment; or
      (6)   A licensed premises, licensed pursuant to the alcoholic beverage
control regulations of the state.
   (C)   A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes or permits the
operation, establishment, substantial enlargement or transfer of ownership or
control of a sexually-oriented business within 1,000 feet of another sexually-
oriented business.
   (D)   A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes or permits the
operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one sexually-oriented
business in the same building, structure or portion thereof, or the increase of
floor area of any sexually-oriented business in any building, structure or
portion thereof containing another sexually-oriented business.
   (E)   For the purpose of division (B) above, measurement shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects, from
the nearest portion of the building or structure used as the part of the
premises where a sexually-oriented business is conducted, to the nearest
property line of the premises of a use listed in division (B) above. Presence
of a city, county or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant
for purposes of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this
section.
   (F)   For purposes of division (C) above, the distance between any two
sexually-oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without
regard to the intervening structures or objects or political boundaries, from
the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.147 ADULT MOTELS.
   (A)   Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or a similar
commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a
period of time that is less than ten hours creates a refutable presumption that
the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this chapter.
   (B)   A person commits a misdemeanor if, as the person in control of a
sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that does
not have a sexually-oriented license, he or she rents or subrents a sleeping
room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, he or
she rents or subrents the same sleeping room again.
   (C)   For purposes of division (B) above, the terms RENT or SUBRENT mean the
act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.148 SEXUALLY-EXPLICIT FILMS, VIDEOS OR LIVE ENTERTAINMENT IN VIEWING
ROOMS.
   (A)   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually-oriented
business other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing
room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, live
entertainment or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following
requirements.
      (1)   Upon application for a sexually-oriented license, the application
shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof
specifying the location of one or more manager’s stations and the location of
all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in
which patrons will not be permitted. A manager’s station may not exceed 32
square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which
the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professional prepared
diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or architect’s blueprint shall not be
required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some
designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with
marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all
areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six
inches. The city may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if
the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that
the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
      (2)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
      (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s
station may be made without the prior approval of the city.
      (4)   It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at
least one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager’s station
at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
      (5)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding
restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the
premises has two or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of
the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for
any purpose from at least one of the manager’s stations. The view required in
this division (A)(5) must be by direct line of sight from the manager’s
station. It shall be the duty of the licensees to ensure that the view area
specified in this division (A)(5) remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains,
partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials and, at all
times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises
which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in
the application filed pursuant to division (A)(1) above.
      (6)   No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any
time.
      (7)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle as measured at the
floor level. It shall be the duty of the licensees to ensure that the
illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present in the premises.
      (8)   No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between
viewing rooms or booths.
      (9)   No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind
between viewing booths or rooms.
      (10)   The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect
the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes
exist.
      (11)   The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to
be non-porous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
      (12)   The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in
viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by, non-porous,
easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous
material shall be used within 48 inches of the floor.
   (B)   A person having a duty under divisions (A)(1) through (A)(12) above
commits a misdemeanor if he or she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.149 ESCORT AGENCIES.
   (A)   An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18
years.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or agrees
to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years.
(Ord. passed\ 12-17-2014) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.150 NUDE MODEL STUDIOS.
   (A)   A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18
years.
   (B)   (1)   A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if the
person appears semi-nude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a
nude model studio.
      (2)   It is a defense to prosecution under this division (B) if the
person 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or visible to any
other person.
   (C)   A person commits an offense if the person appears in a state of
nudity, or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area
of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-
way.
   (D)   A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa or mattress
in any room on the premises; except that, a sofa may be placed in a reception
room open to the public.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.151 PUBLIC NUDITY.
   (A)   It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly and
intentionally, in a sexually-oriented business, appears in a state of nudity or
depicts specified sexual activities.
   (B)   It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly or intentionally
in a sexually-oriented business appears in a semi-nude condition unless the
person is an employee who, while semi-nude, shall be at least ten feet from any
patron or customer and on a stage at least two feet from the floor.
   (C)   It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while semi-nude in a
sexually-oriented business, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron or
customer or for any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity to any
employee, while said employee is semi-nude in a sexually-oriented business.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.152 CHILDREN PROHIBITED.
   A person commits a misdemeanor if the person knowingly allows a person under
the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually-oriented business.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.153 EXEMPTIONS.
   It is a defense to prosecution under §
157.151 of this chapter that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in
a modeling class operated:
   (A)   By a proprietary school, licensed by the state; a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
   (B)   By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
   (C)   In a structure:
      (1)   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no
other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing;
      (2)   Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at
least three days in advance of the class; and
      (3)   Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one
time.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 157.165 ENFORCEMENT OFFICER; DUTIES.
   The Zoning Administrator or other designated officials, as named by the City
Council, shall enforce this chapter and, in addition thereto and furtherance of
said authority, shall:
   (A)   Determine that all building permits comply with the terms of this
chapter;
   (B)   Conduct inspections of buildings and use of land to determine
compliance with the terms of this chapter;
   (C)   Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including, but
not limited to, all maps amendments and special uses of variances, appeals and
applications thereof;
   (D)   Receive, file and forward all applications for appeals, variances,
special uses, conditional uses or other matters to the designated official
bodies;
   (E)   Institute in the name of the city any appropriate actions or
proceedings against a violator as provided by law;
   (F)   Serve as an ex-officio and non-voting member of the Park/Planning
Commission; and
   (G)   Ensure compliance with all state statutes related to land use and
zoning, including M.S. § 15.99, commonly referred to as “The 60-Day Rule”, as
it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.166 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (A)   The Park/Planning Commission shall act as the Board of Zoning Appeals
and shall determine, in harmony with the general purpose of this chapter and
the comprehensive guide plan, all appeals made as to the interpretation of the
text of this chapter or any determination by the Zoning Administrator or other
designated officer as to the location of the boundary of a zoning district as
shown on the zoning map.
   (B)   At any time within 90 days after the decision of the Zoning
Administrator or other designated official of the city under the provisions of
this chapter, except in connection with persecution for violations thereof, the
applicant or the person or officers of the city affected thereby may appeal to
the Park/Planning Commission by filing a written notice stating the action
appealed from and stating the specific grounds upon which the appeal is made.
   (C)   The Park/Planning Commission, acting as the Board of Zoning Appeals,
may conduct such hearings as it may deem advisable and shall prescribe what
notice, if any, shall be given of such hearing.
   (D)   The City Council may review and revise any decision of the Board of
Zoning Appeals. In reviewing such decisions, the Council shall set a date for
the hearing thereon, not earlier than seven days and no later than 30 days
after the decision is made by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (E)   Notice of the hearing before the Council shall be mailed to all
applicants. In all cases involving determination of district boundary lines, or
interpretation of the text of this chapter, ten days’ published notice shall be
given in the official newspaper.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.167 VARIANCES.
   (A)   The City Council may grant variances from strict application of the
provisions of this chapter and impose conditions and safeguards in the variance
so granted in cases where there are practical difficulties or particular
hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the regulations of
this chapter.
   (B)   Application requirements, public hearing and notice requirements and
review processes shall be the same as for amendments and rezoning amendments (§
157.168 of this chapter).
   (C)   In considering applications for variances under this chapter, the City
Council shall consider the advice and recommendations of the Park/Planning
Commission.
   (D)   Variances shall only be permitted:
      (1)   When they are in harmony with the general purposes and intent of
the chapter; and
      (2)   When the variances are consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
   (E)   (1)   Variances may be granted when the applicant for the variance
establishes that there are practical difficulties in complying with this
chapter.
      (2)   Practical difficulties, as used in connection with the granting of
a variance, means that:
         (a)   The property owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable
manner not permitted by this chapter;
         (b)   The plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to
the property not created by the landowner; and
         (c)   The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character
of the locality. Economic considerations alone do not constitute practical
difficulties. Practical difficulties include, but are not limited to,
inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems.
   (F)   Variances shall be granted for earth sheltered construction as defined
in M.S. § 216C.06, Subd. 14, as it may be amended from time to time, when in
harmony with this chapter. The Board of Appeals and Adjustments may not permit
as a variance any use that is not allowed under this chapter for property in
the zone where the affected person’s land is located. The Board may permit as a
variance the temporary use of a one-family dwelling as a two-family dwelling.
The Board may impose conditions in the granting of variances. A condition must
be directly related to and must bear a rough proportionality to the impact
created by the variance.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.168 AMENDMENTS; REZONING AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   This chapter may be amended by majority vote of all of the members of
the City Council; however, if the proposed rezoning changes property, all or
part of which has an existing classification of residential, to either
commercial or industrial, a two-thirds majority vote of all members is
required.
   (B)   Proceedings for amendment this chapter shall be initiated by any of
the following:
      (1)   A petition of the owner or owners of the actual property, the
zoning of which is proposed to be changed;
      (2)   A recommendation of the Park/Planning Commission; and
      (3)   By action of the City Council.
   (C)   All applications for amendments which are initiated by the petition of
the owners of property shall be filed in the city office and shall be
accompanied by 12 copies of site plans and/or graphics containing the following
information and folded where necessary to the size of eight and one-half inches
by 11 inches:
      (1)   A generalized location map showing the location of the proposed
site in relation to the city;
      (2)   A scaled plot plan, with north indicated, of the proposed site
showing all dimensions;
      (3)   All types of proposed uses;
      (4)   Location of all buildings and structures on the proposed site,
including trash enclosures;
      (5)   Where required, elevation drawings or illustrations indicating the
architectural treatment of all proposed buildings and structures, including
trash enclosures;
      (6)   Any plan for the modification of standards set by this chapter or
any other provision of city ordinances;
      (7)   Location and size of all required parking spaces and a summary of
the total number of parking spaces shown thereon;
      (8)   Where required, a landscaping plan including the location, size and
type of all proposed planting materials;
      (9)   Where required, the design, placement and size of all proposed
signs;
      (10)   Where required, a grading and drainage plan for the site;
      (11)   A legal description of the property to be rezoned;
      (12)   Names and addresses of property owners within 350 feet of subject
property; and
      (13)   Any additional information as needed by the city in order to carry
out appropriate review.
   (D)   Where applicable, the site plan will be reviewed by the Fire Chief,
City Engineer, City Planner and City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer and
forwarded to the Park/Planning Commission and City Council for final approval.
Such review shall be completed within 20 working days of the receipt by the
city of the application. Recommendations and comments from the Fire Chief,
Engineer, Planner and City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall be forwarded to
the Park/Planning Commission and City Council.
   (E)   The Park/Planning Commission shall consider applications for
amendments to this chapter and rezoning amendments only at their regular
meetings, although this requirement shall not prevent the Park/Planning
Commission from considering an amendment to this chapter at a special meeting
upon unanimous vote of all Park/Planning Commissioners present when the time
and date of said meeting is determined.
   (F)   Within 60 days after the date of receipt of the amendment application
by the city office, the Park/Planning Commission shall make a written report to
the Council stating its findings and recommendations on the application.
   (G)   The City Council shall hold a public hearing within 30 days after
receipt of the report and recommendation from the Park/Planning Commission. If
the Park/Planning Commission fails to make a report within 60 days after
receipt of the application, the Council shall hold a public hearing within 30
days after expiration of said 60-day period.
   (H)   The City Council shall not give less than ten days’, nor more than 30
days’, notice of time and place of such hearing which shall be published in the
designated legal newspaper, and such notice shall contain a description of the
amendment or a description of the land proposed be rezoned.
   (I)   At least ten days before the hearing, the City Administrator/Clerk/
Treasurer shall mail notice to the owner and to each of the property owners
within 350 feet of the outside boundaries of the land proposed to be rezoned.
Failure to mail the notice or failure of the property owners to receive the
notice shall not invalidate the proceedings.
   (J)   The City Council shall act upon the application within 45 days after
receiving the recommendation of the Park/Planning Commission.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.169 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.
   (A)   (1)   Unless carefully controlled and monitored, some uses have the
potential to have a deleterious effect on adjacent properties and the community
as a whole. They must therefore meet and maintain a higher standard of quality
to ensure land use and environmental compatibility.
      (2)   Uses possessing unique and potentially detrimental characteristics
may be authorized in certain zoning districts by issuance of a CUP where
certain conditions are met.
   (B)   Application requirements, public hearing and notice requirements, and
review processes shall be the same as for ordinance amendments and rezoning
amendments (§
157.168 of this chapter).
   (C)   The CUP shall be issued on the affirmative vote of a majority of the
entire City Council.
   (D)   A CUP shall remain in effect as long as the agreed upon conditions are
observed. A CUP shall be issued for a particular use and not a person or firm.
   (E)   A violation of any condition set forth in a CUP shall be a violation
of this chapter and automatically terminates the conditional use permit.
   (F)   A CUP shall become void one year after being granted by the City
Council if substantial construction has not been completed. Upon reapplication,
the City Council, after a recommendation from the Park/Planning Commission, may
extend the permit for such period as it deems appropriate.
   (G)   Upon complaint of potential violations of any CUP, the City
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall document and forward said complaints to the
Park/Planning Commission for review. The Park/Planning Commission shall forward
a recommendation to the City Council for appropriate action of violation, if
any.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.170 SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURE.
   (A)   This review is intended to supplement the review and administrative
procedures which are carried out under other provisions of this chapter. The
site plan review process is intended to help ensure that newly developed
properties or redeveloped properties are compatible with adjacent development
and that safety, traffic, overcrowding and environmental problems are minimized
to the extent possible.
   (B)   In order to further promote the safe and efficient use of land and to
further enhance the value of property in the city, the City Council deems it
advisable to establish site plan review criteria for any change in use and for
any construction for which a building permit is required, except for
construction of detached, single-family residential structures or structures
accessory thereto. Exception shall also be given for construction of the
interior of structures (that don’t result in a change in use or seating
requirements) and/or repair and maintenance in all zoning districts.
   (C)   As a condition to issuance of a building permit, with exceptions noted
in division (A) above, any applicant for such permit shall be required to
submit to the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer a site plan which must contain
the following information:
      (1)   Twelve 24-inch by 36-inch copies and an eight and one-half-inch by
11-inch transparency, drawn to scale and dimensioned, with north arrow;
      (2)   Complete legal description, address, small scale site location;
      (3)   Site plan drawn at appropriate engineering scale with setbacks
noted showing all items listed below;
      (4)   Lot dimensions and all existing buildings and structures;
      (5)   Yards and spaces between buildings and property lines;
      (6)   Buildings, walls and fences: location, height, materials and
building elevations;
      (7)   Off-street parking: locations, layout, dimensions, circulation,
landscaped areas, total number of stalls, surface proposed with cross-section,
elevation, curb and gutter;
      (8)   Access: pedestrian, vehicular, service; points of ingress and
egress;
      (9)   Signs: proposed location, size, height, detail if known;
      (10)   Loading areas: location, dimensions, number of spaces, internal
circulation;
      (11)   Lighting; location, height, design, detail;
      (12)   Street dedications and improvements, if necessary;
      (13)   Landscaping: with a schedule of the plantings showing quantities,
botanical and common names, sizes, root type; also size and location of
existing trees;
      (14)   Outdoor storage activities, where permitted in the district; type,
location, height of screening devices;
      (15)   Conceptual grading and drainage plan for the site, prepared by a
certified engineer, showing the proposed finished floor elevation of each
building, street elevation, two-foot contours, surface water drainage and
retention calculations, surface water management plan;
      (16)   Waste disposal facilities;
      (17)   Easements and location of utilities servicing development; and
      (18)   Statement of use, including type of business with number of
employees by shift.
   (D)   (1)   The site plan will be reviewed by the Fire Chief, City Engineer,
City Planner and City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer and forwarded to the Park/
Planning Commission and City Council for final approval. Such review shall be
completed within 20 working days of the receipt by the city of the application.
      (2)   Recommendations and comments from the Fire Chief, Engineer, Planner
and City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall be forwarded to the Park/Planning
Commission and City Council.
   (E)   (1)   If, during the review process, it is determined that the
application does not contain sufficient information to enable the review staff
to properly discharge its responsibilities, the review staff may request
additional information from the applicant.
      (2)   In that event, the 20-day review period shall be suspended pending
the receipt of all information requested by the review staff.
   (F)   No building permit shall be issued until site plan approval has been
granted by the City Council. The City Council shall approve or disapprove the
site plan by action taken by a majority of the members present at any meeting
at which a quorum is present.
   (G)   If the City Council does not approve a site plan, the applicant may
appeal the decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
§ 157.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $700 and/or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days for each offense. Each day that
the violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   In the event of a violation or a threatened violation of this
chapter, the Council, or any member thereof, or the enforcing officer of this
code, in addition to other remedies, may institute appropriate actions or
proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such violations or
threatened violations and it is the duty of the attorney to institute such
action.
      (3)   Any taxpayer may institute mandamus proceedings in District Court
to compel specific performance by the proper official or officials of any duty
required by this chapter.
   (B)   Anyone violating any of the provisions of §§
157.035 through
157.043 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Appropriate actions
and proceedings may be taken by law or in equity to prevent any violation of
these regulations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages, to
restrain, correct or abate a violation, to prevent illegal occupancy of a
building structure or premises and these remedies shall be in addition to the
misdemeanor penalties described above.
   (C)   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually-oriented
business without a valid license or in violation of §
157.146 of this chapter is subject to a suit for injunction as well as
prosecution for criminal violations. Such violations shall be punishable as a
misdemeanor. Each day a sexually-oriented business so operates is a separate
offense or violation.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2014)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ZONINGS AND REZONINGS
TABLE I: ZONINGS AND REZONINGS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
55            5-11-2000   PUD zoning for Donnay’s Parkland Estates
59            12-14-2000  PUD zoning for Wildwood Meadows
66            12-12-2002  Rezoning properties on Main Street, Highway 7 and
                          Tower Street
76A           6-16-2004   Rezoning certain property to be platted as Pauly Farm
81            5-18-2005   Amendment to Ord. 66; rezoning properties on Main
                          Street, Highway 7 and Tower Street
R. 2011-25    10-5-2011   Denying a rezoning request for 8549 Kennedy Memorial
                          Drive
66A           11-7-2012   Amendment to Ord. 66; rezoning properties on Main
                          Street and Highway 7
116           12-17-2014  Rezoning numerous lots is Sections 29, 30, 31 and 32,
                          Township 117, Range 24
1             3-4-2015    Rezoning certain land in Section 29, Township 117,
                          Range 24
2019-2        8-7-2019    Rezoning 4195 Steiner Street from General Industrial
                          (I) to Highway Commercial Business District (B-2)
                         
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Minnesota Statutes
References to 1994 Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES
M.S. Cites Code Section
M.S. Cites              Code Section
                        33.01,
Ch. 12                  33.08 ,
                        111.16
12.25                   33.04
14.57 to 14.69          110.05
15.99                   157.165
84.872                  71.06
89.51 et seq.           92.02,
                        94.50
103A.201 et seq.        153.01
103C.331, Subd. 19      153.06
Ch. 103F                154.01
103G.245                154.44
103G.291                51.16
144.382, Subd. 4        51.16
144.414                 95.03
144.4167                95.06
144.4167, Subd. 4       95.06
Ch. 152                 133.01
152.02                  133.01,
                        133.02
152.027, Subd. 4        133.99
152.092                 151.08
158.10                  111.18
168B.01 through 168B.10 34.02
168B.011, Subd. 3       92.16
Ch. 169                 34.02,
                        70.01
169.01                  92.15,
                        157.073
169.69                  70.01
169.693                 70.01
169.999                 10.98
169A.03                 71.07
216C.06, Subd. 14       157.167
Ch. 216D                93.05
216D.01-09              93.05,
                        93.17
237.162                 93.02,
                        93.10
237.163                 93.10
237.163, Subd. 2(b)     93.01
237.163, Subd. 6        93.22
Ch. 278                 111.18,
                        111.21
297F.01, Subd. 3        95.02
299F.50                 151.28
299F.51                 151.28
299F.51, Subd. 5        151.28
326B.082                150.04
326B.101 to 326B.194    150.01
326B.121                150.02,
                        150.03
326B.133, Subd. 1 and 2 150.01
326B.148                150.03
Ch. 329                 113.03
340A et seq.            111.18,
                        111.43
340A.403                111.21
340A.404, Subd. 4       111.52
340A.404, Subd. 5       111.41
340A.404, Subd. 12      111.52
340A.409                111.44
340A.411                111.21
340A.504                111.22
340A.505, Subd. 3       111.51
340A.508, Subd. 3       111.26
                        114.01,
Ch. 342                 114.02,
                        114.05,
                        157.003
342.01                  114.02
342.01, Subd. 16        157.003
342.01, Subd. 19        157.003
342.01, Subd. 20        157.003
342.01, Subd. 41        157.003
342.01, Subd. 42        157.003
342.01, Subd. 50        157.003
342.13                  114.01
342.22                  114.01,
                        114.03
342.31, Subd. 1         157.003
342.33, Subd. 1         157.003
342.45                  157.003
344.02, Subd. 1(a)-(d)  154.09
364.03, Subd. 2         112.07
364.03, Subd. 3         112.07
412.151                 51.16
412.601 - 412.751       51.16
429.061                 34.04,
                        92.20
                        34.04,
429.101                 92.20,
                        92.37,
                        152.04
435.193 through 435.195 34.15
437.02                  113.03
444.075 et seq.         54.05,
                        54.06
461.12                  95.99
Ch. 462                 93.15,
                        154.01
463.17                  92.19
471.59                  153.06
504B.205                151.08
504B.205, Subd. 2       151.11
504B.445, Subd. 4(2)    34.04
504B.445, Subd. 4(5)    34.04
518B.01, Subd. 2(a)     151.08
518B 01, Subd. 2(b)     151.08
606.01                  151.31
Ch. 609                 130.01,
                        151.08
609.50                  151.08
609.53                  151.08
609.66, Subd.1a         151.08
609.67                  151.08
609.72                  151.08
609.74                  151.08
609.745                 151.08
617.292, Subd. 3        111.01
624.713                 151.08
624.7131                132.18
626.862                 10.20
629.34                  130.03
631.48                  10.99
                        
 
REFERENCES TO 1994 CODE
1994 Code 2017 Code
1994 Code 2017 Code
1-2       31.01
1-3       34.01
1-4       34.02
1-6       34.04
2-1       90.01
2-2       90.02
2-3       90.03
2-4       90.04,
          90.99
2-6       90.06
3-1       32.15
3-4       32.01
3-5       32.02
5-1       30.01
5-2       30.02
5-3       30.03
5-4       30.04
5-5       30.05
5-6       30.06
5-7       30.07
5-8       30.08
5-9       30.09
5-10      30.10
5-11      30.11
5-12      30.12
6-1.1     94.01
6-1.2     94.02
6-1.3     94.02
6-1.4     94.02
6-1.5     94.03
6-1.6     94.99
6-1.7     94.04
6-1.8     94.02
6-2.1     94.15
6-2.2     94.16
6-2.3     94.17
6-2.4     94.18
6-2.5     94.19
6-3.1     94.30
6-3.2     94.31
6-3.3     94.32
6-3.4     94.33
6-3.5     94.34
6-3.6     94.50—
          94.56
6-3.7     94.35
7-1.1     51.01
7-1.2     51.02
7-1.3     51.03
7-1.4     51.04
7-1.5     51.05
7-1.6     51.06
7-1.7     51.07
7-1.8     51.08
7-1.10    51.10
7-1.11    51.10
7-1.12    51.11
7-1.13    51.12
7-1.14    51.12
7-1.15    51.13,
          51.99
7-2.1     52.01
7-2.5     52.02
7-2.6     52.03
7-2.7     52.04
7-2.8     52.05
7-2.9     52.06
7-2.10    52.07
7-4       110.20
7-5       92.04
7-6       92.04
7-7.1     55.01
7-7.2     55.02
7-7.3     55.03
7-7.4     55.04
8-1.1     110.01
8-1.2     110.02
8-1.3     110.03
8-1.4     110.04
8-1.5     110.05
8-1.6     110.06
8-1.7     110.07
8-1.8     110.08
8-2.6     111.15—
          111.25
8-2.7     111.40—
          111.50
8-3.1     110.21
8-3.2     110.21
8-3.3     110.21
8-3.4     110.21
9-1.1     132.01
9-1.2     132.02
9-1.3     132.03
9-2.1     132.15
9-2.2     132.16
9-2.3     132.17
9-2.4     132.18
9-2.5     132.19,
          132.99
9-2.6     132.20
9-2.7     132.99
9-3.1     133.01
9-3.2     133.02
9-3.3     133.03
9-3.4     133.04
9-3.5     133.05
9-3.6     133.06
9-3.7     133.07
9-3.8     133.08
9-3.9     133.09
9-3.11    133.99
9-4.1     130.01
9-4.3     130.02
9-4.4     130.15
9-4.5     130.16
9-4.6     130.17
9-4.7     130.16
9-4.8     130.18
9-4.9     130.19
9-5.1     70.35
9-5.2     70.04
9-5.3     70.01
9-5.4     70.02
9-5.5     70.03
9-5.6     70.20
9-5.7     70.05,
          70.21
9-5.8     70.06
9-6.1     71.01
9-6.2     71.02
9-6.3     71.03
9-6.4     71.04
9-6.5     71.05
9-6.6     71.06
9-6.7     71.07
9-6.8     71.08
9-6.9     71.09
9-6.10    71.10
9-6.11    71.07
9-7.1     130.03
9-7.2     130.03
9-8.1     130.01
9-8.2     130.99
10-1      92.01
10-2      92.02
10-4      92.03
12-1      152.01
12-2      152.02
12-3      152.03
12-4      152.04
12-5      152.05
12-6      152.06
12-7      152.07
13-1.1    156.01
13-1.2    156.02
13-1.3    156.15—
          156.18
13-1.4    156.19
13-1.5    156.20
13-1.6    156.21
13-1.7    156.35—
          156.40
13-1.8    156.41
13-1.9    156.55
13-1.10   156.56
13-1.11   156.57
          
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
2011-25  10-5-2011   TSO Table I
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
–      - -         50.01
4        1-12-1995   111.41,
                     111.49
6        2-9-1995    51.02,
                     52.04
7        3-23-1995   34.03
11       9-28-1995   32.15
13       1-11-1996   153.01—
                     153.06
15       6-13-1996   51.14
16       6-13-1996   52.04
                     90.03,
22       4-24-1997   90.04,
                     90.06
23       5-8-1997    32.15
26       7-24-1997   111.01
28       11-13-1997  152.04
29       11-13-1997  55.04
30       11-25-1997  55.03
33       4-23-1998   33.01—
                     33.09
35       4-23-1998   92.03
40       12-10-1998  110.21
48       9-23-1999   110.21
55       5-11-2000   TSO Table I
59       12-14-2000  TSO Table I
63       11-21-2001  51.09
66       12-12-2002  TSO Table I
70       6-18-2003   111.22
72       10-15-2003  34.15—
                     34.19
76A      6-16-2004   TSO Table I
78       11-17-2004  52.20—
                     52.33
79       12-15-2004  54.01—
                     54.09
                     92.35—
80       5-4-2005    92.37,
                     92.99
81       5-18-2005   TSO Table I
85       10-5-2005   30.12
93       8-1-2007    150.01—
                     150.04
94       8-15-2007   51.15
95       8-15-2007   130.01
96       8-15-2007   51.14
                     51.02,
100      11-9-2007   51.14,
                     52.04,
                     54.06
                     51.02,
101      11-14-2007  51.14,
                     52.04,
                     54.06
102      11-21-2007  150.02
78A      2-20-2008   52.22
                     111.41,
105A     2-20-2008   111.43,
                     111.44,
                     111.53
94A      5-7-2008    51.15
                     92.15—
107      6-4-2008    92.20,
                     92.99
73A      6-3-2009    70.35
109      10-7-2009   111.02
                     110.05,
110      10-21-2009  111.16,
                     111.26,
                     111.51
                     70.01,
111      12-2-2009   70.22,
                     70.99
                     151.01—
82B      2-16-2011   151.12,
                     151.99
                     151.25—
83C      2-16-2011   151.31,
                     151.99
114      5-4-2011    112.01—
                     112.14
80A      7-6-2011    92.36
110A     4-18-2012   111.16
                     111.25,
110B     10-3-2012   111.26,
                     111.51
66A      11-7-2012   TSO Table I
                     51.02,
101A     12-5-2012   51.14,
                     52.04,
                     54.06
                     91.01—
115      3-20-2013   91.04,
                     91.99
                     51.02,
101B     3-5-2014    51.14,
                     52.04,
                     54.06
110C     10-1-2014   111.52
                     155.01—
                     155.06,
                     156.01,
                     156.02,
                     156.15—
                     156.21,
                     156.35—
                     156.41,
                     156.55—
                     156.57,
                     157.001—
                     157.003,
                     157.015—
                     157.023,
–      12-17-2014  157.035—
                     157.043,
                     157.055—
                     157.058,
                     157.070—
                     157.072,
                     157.085—
                     157.089,
                     157.100—
                     157.119,
                     157.135—
                     157.153,
                     157.165—
                     157.170,
                     157.999
116      12-17-2014  TSO Table I
1        3-4-2015    TSO Table I
28A      3-18-2015   152.04
2        4-1-2015    157.100
3        8-5-2015    155.04
                     53.01—
79A      10-21-2015  53.20,
                     53.99
                     157.003,
                     157.016—
4        4-27-2016   157.018,
                     157.058,
                     157.102
                     154.01—
                     154.12,
                     154.25,
77A      10-5-2016   154.26,
                     154.40—
                     154.45,
                     154.99
–      5-3-2017    Adopting Ordinance
1        9-5-2018    51.16
2018-2   12-19-2018  157.100
                     71.01,
2018-3   12-19-2018  71.02,
                     71.06,
                     71.10
2019-01  4-17-2019   157.073
2019-01A 7-3-2019    157.073
2019-2   8-7-2019    TSO Table I
2019-03  9-18-2019   152.04
2019-04  11-20-2019  32.15
                     95.01—
2019-05  12-18-2019  95.11,
                     95.99
2020-01  6-3-2020    111.16
2021-01  6-2-2021    157.023
2022-02  10-19-2022  91.03,
                     91.04
2022-03  12-7-2022   92.04
                     53.02,
2022-04  12-7-2022   53.07,
                     53.13
2023-01  12-6-2023   32.15
2025-01  9-21-2022   30.12
                     157.003,
2025-01  7-2-2025    157.100,
                     157.102
                     95.99,
2025-03  9-3-2025    114.01—
                     114.06,
                     114.99
                     157.003,
2025-04  9-3-2025    157.023,
                     157.056
                    
 
